Will the minister confirm whether the Scottish Government has plans for how to attract more students into the engineering sector? The lack of skills has been highlighted as a major concern for the development of smart grids, a development that would benefit Orkney greatly.

Quite apart from the embassies and consulates, does the cabinet secretary recognise the work that is done in the 110 international offices of the British Council to promote Scotland’s interests overseas? That work would not be guaranteed to continue in an independent Scotland. Is that not another good reason for staying in the UK?

I thought that we were all meant to have our telephones switched off. I congratulate Maureen Watt on securing time for the motion and raising an extremely important issue that really needs to be debated. As we are all aware, the situation in Tibet has, for a long time, been very unstable. Recent increases in self-immolations, and subsequent actions taken by the Chinese authorities, mark a further decline in the region, which is highly unfortunate. I echo the words of Hugo Swire, Minister of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, in calling for unrestricted access for international media, diplomats, help organisations and charities to Tibet. Transparency in Tibet, and access for the surrounding world, could have a cooling-down effect on both sides, which might de-escalate the situation and prevent further tragic loss of life. Reports point out that the majority of recent self-immolations are the result of everyday oppression of the right of Tibetans to practise their religion and of severe restrictions on the use of the Tibetan language. As the Tibetan people are a minority group in China, with a distinct language, cultural heritage and religion, they are, by international law and conventions, protected against discrimination and allowed to practise their religion. That is clearly set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Vienna declaration. With respect, it is deeply regrettable that the Chinese authorities seem to be ignoring even the most basic human rights of the Tibetan people. With China’s recent election to the United Nations Human Rights Council, I sincerely hope to see a changed approach from the Chinese authorities towards the Tibetans. Furthermore, I strongly believe that the respect of universal human rights will lay an important cornerstone in the stability and harmony of the region—something that Tibet and its people deserve. China’s rise to being one of the great powerhouses of our age is truly remarkable. However, history has shown time and again that without social progress, economic growth and the consolidation of that growth will not be sustainable. By respecting the human rights of not only Tibetans but all the ethnicities within its vast borders, China will remain an economic powerhouse. That is surely in China’s own interest, but it could also help to stabilise the whole region, which, without doubt, would be in the interests of us all. The suffering of the Tibetan people must come to an end. Mighty China should ensure that all its citizens have the rights they deserve. Both sides should refrain from violence and extreme forms of protesting, so that any further loss of life can be avoided. I am convinced that if the Tibetans, with their age-old culture, and the Chinese work together as equals, great things will be achieved. By allowing the Tibetans to practise their own religion and live in accordance with their culture, the region will stabilise and harmony will replace chaos and oppression.

I refer members to my agricultural interests in the register of members’ interests. I am pleased to close the debate for the Scottish Conservatives. I agree with those who have spoken about the importance of the two consultations that are under way, and I encourage farming and crofting constituents to take part. If they disagree with the rough grazing region payment options that the NFU suggests, they should suggest alternatives. I am very aware that there are strongly held views about the available options and that there is anxiety in the farming sector—particularly in the beef sector, as Jim Hume explained, and among the genuine hill livestock farmers—about the future. I started farming in Argyllshire on severely disadvantaged land in the 1970s. We had the hill livestock compensatory allowance then, which was a headage payment, so we did not have to worry about slipper farmers. That made me aware of the importance of the thread of agriculture through many ancillary industries, such as livestock markets, livestock haulage and the feed and fertiliser businesses. The regular sheep and cattle sales at local markets throughout the Highlands and Islands play a huge part in inhabitants’ social life. It is sad that that important element has diminished as farming has become more difficult.

Absolutely—I agree with that. Such areas are the seedcorn for the rest of the industry. The subsidy element is vital, but farmers would also like less bureaucracy, fewer complicated compliance penalties and a more can-do attitude, which used to exist among Government agricultural departments. They used to be helpful to farmers, but they are now sometimes feared by those who work the land. The amount of paperwork that is required is making farming less productive and less profitable than it could be. Fewer people and—more important—fewer young people are therefore being employed in farming. When a storm occurs in a rural area with single-track roads and trees block the roads or drains and culverts are blocked, it is always farmers who come out with their tractors to clear the blockage. If the farmers were not there, they would be sadly missed. SNP members have—predictably—used much of their time in the debate to attack the UK Government, but they have conveniently ignored the feeling that the Scottish Government appears to have been outmanoeuvred—or, should I say, outlobbied—in negotiations by the Welsh, the Northern Irish and the English NFU. SNP members and the cabinet secretary might be better employed in engaging with the UK Government in its review of allocations. That is something that the NFUS is keen to do. The immediate priority is, of course, for the Scottish Government to come forward with the best possible new scheme. Much concern has been voiced to me by farmers in my region, the Highlands and Islands, especially by hill sheep producers, including representatives of the National Sheep Association and the Blackface Sheep Breeders Association. As the NFUS said in its letter to the cabinet secretary on Monday this week: “the core implementation programme for CAP, as outlined in the Scottish Government’s current consultation, fails to provide a viable support framework for a significant part of Scottish farming. If unchanged, these proposals will exert a downward pressure on production across a number of key sectors”. There has been significant criticism of a decision to have only two payment regions in Scotland. A single rough grazing region, based on a flat rate of euros per hectare, would inevitably penalise the more intensively stocked hills, which in turn would accelerate de-stocking. It is about numbers. I have talked about the need to retain sheep and cattle on our hills on many occasions in the Parliament and I emphasise that. The farming of sheep and cattle in our hills is fundamental to retaining the population and underpinning the economies of remote rural and island communities, which are often fragile. We all accept that splitting the rough grazing region into two or more regions on objective criteria might be difficult, but getting that aspect of the reform right is vital and is more important than having a simple system, as our amendment makes clear. The NFUS briefing gives the example of the Orkney beef and sheep family farm with 100 cows and 130 sheep, which currently receives support payments of around €60,000 on 110 hectares of land, inclusive of the beef calf scheme, but which, under the Government’s proposals, would receive about €32,000, inclusive of the beef calf scheme. That is an indication of the scale of the challenge that some producers will face. Some people will say that Orkney is fertile compared with Shetland or the Western Isles, which are all in my region. That is true, but much of Orkney’s economy depends on agriculture and the islands’ reputation for high-quality livestock is second to none, as anyone who cares to visit the annual Orkney show will see for themselves. Agriculture on Orkney is sustainable, but it will not be if it is drawn down to the levels that I have just outlined. On areas that are seriously disadvantaged, it is vital that the rough grazing figure is high enough to restore traditional hill farming to a healthy state. Over the past three decades, employment in Highland agriculture has declined because the outputs have consistently outweighed the inputs, despite subsidies. The new CAP must offer and be seen to offer a chance to reverse that. Rob Gibson talked about the public good that comes from rocks. He probably meant peatlands, which have been much discussed in the Parliament and are a carbon sink, so they produce a lot of public good. I hope that measures in CAP pillar 2 will acknowledge that and offer opportunities to restore peatlands. That might help areas such as Sutherland, Wester Ross and Argyllshire. Alex Fergusson was absolutely right to say that farmers need clarity and certainty about the new support regime. Only then can plans be made for the future. The cabinet secretary, God bless him— Members: Hear, hear. The cabinet secretary must ensure that final decisions are made as quickly as possible after the consultations close. We support calls from the NFUS for appropriate transitional measures, which are available to the Scottish Government.

I am just about to, Presiding Officer. As the NFUS said, to ignore a more managed approach up to 2019 “would be an abdication of responsibility.” I support the amendment in the name of my esteemed and respected colleague Alex Fergusson.

On the subject of fine Scottish foods, does the cabinet secretary agree that venison is one of the finest Scottish foods, and can he clarify the position of deer farmers in Scotland vis-à-vis subsidy?

I, too, congratulate Angus MacDonald on securing the debate, and I am pleased to welcome the news that the Scots pine—Pinus sylvestris—is to be Scotland’s national tree. In previous centuries, this species was known as the Scots fir, but we all know it today as the Scots pine. As a McGrigor, I point out that the Scots pine tree is the plant badge of the clan Gregor and when the wearing of tartan was outlawed after the 1745 Jacobite rebellion, Gregor clansmen wore their clan’s plant badge as an act of defiance and identification. However, it was perhaps done more to protest about the loss of their clan name, which had been taken away in the early 1600s, not by a Westminster Parliament but by a Scottish one. The clan is still awaiting an apology for that. Like other members, I acknowledge the efforts of those in Scotland who have campaigned for us to have a national tree and I thank the Forestry Commission for carrying out the public consultation. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I am delighted that the Scots pine has been chosen, as that iconic and instantly recognisable Scottish tree is a key part of the biodiversity of my region, which of course contains the vast majority of the remaining Caledonian forest, notably in Abernethy, Glenn Affric and Rothiemurchus. That habitat sustains some of the most important plant, animal and bird species, including wildcats, capercaillie, black game and the Scottish crossbill. The huge, aged granny trees are especially important to capercaillie. Patricia Ferguson was absolutely right to stress the importance of the Scots pines, but the granny trees are particularly important to the capercaillie and for that reason they should never be cut down. The decline in capercaillie and black game in areas where they were once prolific must be a great cause of concern to Scottish Natural Heritage and the RSPB. As its species champion, I also highlight that the pine forests provide a home for the very rare narrow-headed ant. It is estimated that around 17,000 hectares of Scots pine forest remains compared with the 1.5 million hectares that existed 6,000 years ago. My region hosts the oldest Scots pine ever scientifically dated in Scotland, in Glenloyne in Inverness-shire. In the late 1990s, scientists from the Forestry Commission’s forest research agency estimated it to be about 550 years old. However, Scots pines have been dated at over 700 years old in both Sweden and Norway. The motion refers to our “commitment to woodlands, biodiversity and reforestation”. I support all that. The harvesting and replanting of trees remains a very important industry in my region and sustains many jobs in rural communities, as do tourism and eco-tourism. There is concern in the Scottish timber industry about not enough trees being planted to ensure a sustainable timber industry in the future. I and others mentioned that at a recent meeting of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. I am keen to see the planting of a diverse range of trees in Scotland, including our native species. Though huge plantations of Sitka spruce may be commercial, they are certainly not that bonny to look at or that good for wildlife, because their canopy does not allow enough light to penetrate and therefore they produce a denuded forest floor; whereas a grove of Scots pine makes a grand site and also has an accessible forest floor that is much richer in other plants and therefore a far superior habitat for wildlife of all sorts. We have only got to look at Loch Tulla and at the top of Loch Lomond to see how beautiful the Scots pine trees are. I conclude by expressing the hope that the decision to have a national tree and for that tree to be the Scots pine will increase awareness and understanding of Scotland’s trees and forests and the vital part that they play as part of our heritage, culture, economy and natural environment.

Will the minister declare whether the Scottish Government is using economic instruments to incentivise the reduction of air pollution? If it is not, will it consider doing that? Has the minister considered different options for how the general public can also be involved in the reduction of air pollution?

Despite what the cabinet secretary has just said, does he not agree that the proposed review of the allocation deal is a real opportunity? Will he work on a cross-party basis to meet the UK Government on that review?

I, too, congratulate John Finnie on securing the debate. I am so glad that we are having a debate about Oxfam because it is such a wonderful organisation, and all the people who volunteer to work for it are wonderful as well. I am pleased to join John Finnie and other colleagues in paying tribute to Oxfam’s work and specifically in welcoming its lift lives for good campaign, which many of us will have seen highlighted on television in the past few weeks in very effective advertisements. I commend all my constituents in the Highlands and Islands who donate to Oxfam financially, or through giving second-hand goods, or by volunteering in our Oxfam shops. I do not know whether the Oxfam shop appreciates all the pairs of trousers that I give it, but I certainly donate goods myself. I was delighted to learn, because Oban is my local town, that its excellent Oxfam shop is, as John Finnie mentioned, in the top 10 performing Oxfam shops in Scotland. The shop took in £88,943 in sales in the period from April to September last year. The Oban shop has a particularly good second-hand books section, where many bargains can be picked up. The Oxfam briefing for the debate emphasises that the lift lives for good campaign aims to show how smart aid works, and to highlight practical examples of Oxfam’s project work. Jackie Baillie mentioned the setting up of dairy co-operatives in Sri Lanka through cows being provided to families, as well as training. There are seed-growing co-operatives in Nepal, and former swamps in Liberia are being converted into rice paddies. Susana Edwards, a Liberian farmer in one of the very poorest regions of Liberia, has been helped by Oxfam. She said: “It’s better to have your own farm than to have to buy rice. When they empower you and you begin to work, you get a lot of food; through the food you get money, which means the children can get to school.” It is important for all charities working internationally with people who are in poverty to demonstrate to the public here the tangible impacts of their work on people and communities, so I am pleased that Oxfam, through lift lives for good, is doing that in a very clear and impressive manner. Enabling some of the world’s poorest people to grow the food that they need to feed themselves and their families is a very big part of the work that Oxfam is doing, and it will be increasingly important as we go forward—not least as some studies suggest that climate change might increase the number of people who are at risk of hunger by up to 20 per cent by 2050. I am pleased that John Finnie’s motion notes that the UK Government is match funding all money that is raised from Oxfam shops during this campaign period. That is to be warmly welcomed. The UK Government’s commitment to international aid and development has been impressive. In particular, I mention the significant investment in international climate finance, specifically to help developing countries to pursue low-carbon growth and to adapt to the impacts of climate change. There is also our response to the humanitarian crisis that continues to ravage so many people in Syria. The UK has committed more than £600 million to help those who are affected by that conflict—the UK’s largest-ever response to a humanitarian crisis. I conclude by again thanking Oxfam for its work. I encourage constituents from across the Highlands and Islands, and everywhere else, to consider supporting the lift lives for good campaign, which I wish every success in the period ahead.

To aid the management of wild fisheries—particularly on the west coast, where runs have declined—and in the light of the news that recent sea-lice figures on some west coast farms are nine to 10 times higher than they should be—

Will the minister reconsider the decision not to monitor fish farms individually for sea lice?

The minister knows that I have supported more local decision making for some Scottish islands. I have flagged up with him concerns from constituents that Argyll and Bute Council might miss out on the devolution of powers that it appears will be devolved to Orkney and Shetland in future. Will he provide further assurances on the matter? How will islands such as Islay, Jura and Mull benefit?

Given Scotland’s expertise in training offshore workers, what is the Government doing to support training companies to attract international clients?

I thank the minister for his usual magnanimity in allowing me an intervention. I wish to put down a marker in this debate. A substantial number of my constituents in the Highlands and Islands have expressed to me their concerns that sections that are designed to protect teachers, parents, ministers, foster parents, registrars and public sector workers who hold what I could call traditional views will not be strong enough and that they might be open to legal challenge, including at European level. What specific guarantees can the minister give that legal safeguards will be watertight? My constituents are very anxious for that reassurance. Can the minister give it to them?

How is the Government targeting its fuel poverty measures on the most hard-to-reach groups such as the very elderly who live alone in remote rural areas?

Will the cabinet secretary join me in paying tribute to the individual Scots aid workers who have already flown out to the Philippines and who have the support and best wishes of all in the chamber?

Can the cabinet secretary guarantee that the new Scottish rural development programme will be up and running on time? Can he set out what measures he envisages might be in the new SRDP that will benefit crofters in particular, given concerns that the previous options were impractical and did not cater adequately for small producers, who need the subsidy most of all? Assuming that the Scottish Government can take responsibility for any challenge that comes from Europe in relation to increasing coupled payments to 10 per cent, how does the cabinet secretary envisage that being split between the beef and sheep sectors?

I am pleased to close today’s debate for the Scottish Conservatives. I, too, thank those organisations that have provided briefings for today, and those who took part in the various consultations. I commend the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, ably led by my friend Murdo Fraser, on a thorough stage 1 report. I also welcome the work undertaken by the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee as secondary committee in relation to part 2 of the bill. There have been some good speeches from across the chamber and a good deal of consensus. Gavin Brown has set out the Scottish Conservative position. I therefore want to pick up on some of the issues that have emerged during the debate. There has been general agreement that the Scottish Government’s five principles of better regulation, namely that the bill should be transparent, accountable, proportionate, consistent and targeted where needed, are sensible and appropriate. There has also been recognition of the need to ensure that, while regulation should protect Scotland’s built and natural environments, which are key assets for our country that are vital for our economy and wellbeing, it should do so without placing undue burdens on business and should help to support economic growth. We all recognise that this is a balancing act—and a challenging one. The volume, type and cost of regulation is a big issue for businesses throughout Scotland, especially small and medium-sized enterprises, including many SMEs in my region of the Highlands and Islands, which often raise the matter with me. Last year, the Federation of Small Businesses said that around 30 per cent of its members cited regulation as the biggest barrier to growth, with 62 per cent of its members reporting that the costs of complying with regulation have increased over the past four years. The Confederation of British Industry Scotland stated: “Red tape is a significant and avoidable constraint on business investment and growth”. Policy makers need to address that issue. Regarding part 2 of the bill, I welcome the proposals to update the role of SEPA as our environmental regulator and I welcome the fact that SEPA’s objectives will include helping to achieve sustainable economic growth—we all need growth. I was pleased to note that, in its submission to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, SEPA stated that it is committed to continue “Engaging much more with business” and “Ensuring that environmental regulation is not unnecessarily burdensome on businesses”, which I must say has often been the case in the past. CBI Scotland has been positive about the progress that SEPA has made in those regards, and I hope that that can continue. On part 3 of the bill, I welcome the proposal in section 40 for a single appeals system for offshore marine energy projects. On section 41, I note that the linking of planning fees to performance was one of the most frequently answered of all the consultation questions. We support the Government’s aim of seeking to eliminate undue delay in the planning system and we support the linking of planning fees to performance, as that should incentivise planning authorities. We are aware of concerns about how planning authority performance will be measured and we look forward to seeing the Scottish Government’s guidance on that. We also agree with representatives from the business sector that they should be able to expect an improvement in performance from increases in planning fees. In conclusion, the Scottish Conservatives support the consolidation and streamlining of regulation at every level, wherever that is possible. The Minister for the Environment and Climate Change will know that my crofting constituents—many of whom I visited last weekend on Skye—would dearly love to see that applied to some of the legislation that engulfs their sector, although some of those issues are being considered by the crofting law group’s sump. We want regulation that is concise, precise, easy to understand and transparent. We look forward to the bill helping to achieve that aim and we look to ministers to improve the bill further at stages 2 and 3.

What support is available for small-scale food and drink producers in Scotland who wish to begin exporting to the European Union and elsewhere?

Will the minister confirm how the Scottish Government is promoting long-term investments against climate change among Scottish businesses? What will he do to ensure that Scottish businesses can implement the five recommendations presented by the carbon disclosure project?

Will the minister encourage Scottish consumers to buy only Scottish and European Union-caught mackerel products and boycott Icelandic and Faroese-caught products, given those countries’ unilateral and unsustainable pillaging of mackerel stocks?

I refer members to my agricultural interests in the register of members’ interests. In an excellent speech, Alex Fergusson set out our approach to the reform package and I want to pick up on some of those themes and other themes that are of particular relevance to farmers and crofters—especially those in my Highlands and Islands region. In what I thought was also an excellent speech, Dennis Robertson talked about outcomes and people, and I agree that that is what the subject is all about. Crofters and farmers all over Scotland are holding their breath and crossing their fingers and, as a Highlands and Islands MSP, I must emphasise the need to regenerate hill farming in the remote areas. Lately, masses of jargon have emanated from Europe but—I am sad to say—one cannot feed cattle and sheep on it. More of the money should, as the EU intends, go uphill. I note, however, that EU payments used to be called the hill livestock compensatory allowance, but the fact is that the current payments are dreadfully inadequate to tackling the fall in livestock numbers in the Highlands and Islands, which leads to a fall in the number of farming families and therefore to depopulation. An Argyll farming constituent pointed out to me that there used to be a solid week of cattle sales in Oban in October; now the sales take place on one day and are often over by early afternoon. The same is true of the sheep sector. Despite last year’s improvement in prices, the sector is still very vulnerable because many people think that the job is just not worth the effort. Although the subsidies seem to be very big, they get used up very quickly on repairing buildings, on maintaining fencing, on drainage and on fertilisers. Of course, they cannot be targeted because the monies would then be classed as production subsidies. Unlike in the late 1960s and 1970s, when farmers got a 90 per cent grant for drainage, 70 per cent for spreading lime on the hills and 50 per cent for fencing, a good mixed farm can take in £350 per acre while a Highland hill farm is lucky to take in £35. In addition, the hill farm has to buy in most of its winter feed and usually has to outwinter its ewe lambs away from home, which costs at least £15 per head. Although expensive, it is necessary for quality stock in the future. Moreover, hill farmers with hefted breeding stocks are forced to keep their young breeding stock all year round for replacements; they cannot simply buy and sell them as a commodity. Therefore, I ask the minister to consider seriously the addition of ewe lambs for breeding stock to the number that is used to calculate stocking density, because they are, for a hill farm, just as much part of the picture as breeding ewes. With the current desire for rural areas to support the public good, there is no doubt that a well-managed hill farm produces tremendous biodiversity and access to the public for walking and other sports and recreation—a point that Mike MacKenzie made exceptionally well. When I started having an interest in farming in the Highlands in the late 1970s, the primary industries of agriculture, forestry and fisheries provided very significant employment. Unfortunately, that is no longer the case. I would like that situation to be reversed and, apparently, that is the EU’s intention; we are told that it is. Most family farms now no longer employ a shepherd or a cattleman, and most of the villages that were built for forestry workers no longer house them. More than 100 families were employed on Lochaweside, where I live, in connection with the Forestry Commission. That has gone. Despite the EU subsidies, employment in the primary industries of farming, forestry and fisheries has fallen. I accept the reality of the move to an area-based system of direct payment, but I very much agree with the comments of the NFU Scotland that how Scotland is mapped will be crucial. The effects of the three-region and two-region models should be assessed. Accurate mapping is of particular importance to those who farm in our hills, glens and islands, where small areas of productive land must be captured by the mapping system in order to ensure that payments adequately reflect those areas. I am insistent that the system should deliver more money up the hill, where the seedcorn of the sheep industry is bred, and where agricultural employment should be much higher, as it used to be. I am very much aware of the concerns of some producers in my region, including Orkney beef producers, those with breeding hill flocks and farmers of the more productive areas on islands including Islay, some of whom voiced their concerns to me when I met them last week. They fear that they will be losers in the new area-based system. Their anxieties should be addressed. If we have an area-based system, the move must not be so dramatic or fast as to throw current farming systems into chaos or insolvency. Farmers need time to adapt to the new system. The option to couple payments in order to sustain vulnerable sectors will become an extremely important feature of the support. As the NFUS has suggested, targeting payments at active livestock units reduces the possible flattening of area payments. However, the area payments in the hills must be big enough to stop the current decline in livestock numbers; otherwise, the current depopulation, which is particularly evident in Argyll and Bute, will just continue. On rural development funding, the challenge for the Government is to have a system that does not take so much money from pillar 1 that the whole farming sector is put at a competitive disadvantage compared with other nations. We are clear that LFASS must remain the first priority in the new SRDP. It should bring in new entrants who were excluded by the 2009 base year. I am told that the old LFASS will remain until 2017, before it becomes the ANC scheme. The payment is a sheet anchor for farmers in disadvantaged areas. Please let it remain so. Other SRDP funds that are available must be channelled into rural development measures that are accessible and practical, and which underpin our crofters and farmers. Too many of them in the past have simply been put off applying by the complexity, labour or anticipated time that is required, or they believe that the options are not appropriate for smaller-scale producers. As my friend John Scott said recently at the cross-party group on rural policy, Scottish food and drink has never been more popular, but we need to keep producing the basic ingredients. Rob Gibson made that point very well. If we are going to take Scotland’s food and drink forward, the sector must be sustainable. Further consultations of stakeholders will take place this autumn. The point was made strongly to Government officials at last week’s cross-party group—including by the NFUS’s regional manager for Argyll and the islands, Lucy Sumsion—

I am just finishing. As was pointed out, stakeholders need early notice of such meetings so that views can be gathered and passed on to Government. As with the last—

Does the minister agree that reducing the amount of energy that is wasted in Scottish homes through poor insulation is a key aim? What additional efforts are planned by the Scottish Government to tackle that?

The minister will know that the UK Government has committed £400 million to help those who are affected by the Syrian conflict, which is the UK’s largest ever response to a humanitarian crisis. How is the Scottish Government working with the UK Government to ensure the best possible co-ordination of effort?

I congratulate David Stewart on securing the debate and I welcome constituents from the Dunoon-Gourock ferry action group to Parliament. They are to be commended for their efforts to highlight genuine and strongly felt local concerns, and for continuing to press the Scottish Government. A member of the group said to me today, “The town of Dunoon is dying, and it’ll die quicker without a regular town centre ferry service.” No one should forget that Dunoon is a gateway to the Highlands and to the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park. I note from the motion that the DGFAG was formed in 2011, although I know that the strength of feeling goes back much further than that, including to a packed meeting—one of many—in the Queen’s hall in Dunoon during the first session of Parliament, when Labour’s own Sarah Boyack was Minister for Transport. She talked then about an integrated transport policy that included ferry, rail and road. Ferries have quite rightly always been a hot potato in Dunoon. A new Forth road bridge is being built with public money—well done—but there is no chance of that on the Clyde, so adequate and reliable ferries are the next best option. The Scottish National Party promised that we would have them. I was there; I vividly remember the run up to the 2007 Scottish Parliament elections, when the then SNP candidate and subsequent constituency MSP for Argyll and Bute, Jim Mather—a very fine man—promised that there would be two new vehicle ferries on the town centre to town centre Gourock-Dunoon route. Local people know only too well that that promise was not fulfilled, as excuse after excuse was made and not even a rowing boat appeared. Instead, since July 2011, the service has been reduced to the Argyll Ferries passenger-only vessel. As David Stewart said, local residents and visitors have understandably been angry and dismayed at the performance of Argyll Ferries, especially in bad weather, and the suitability of the vessels remains a big concern. The most recent figures that I obtained this week through a written answer demonstrate how poor performance is compared to Caledonian MacBrayne services. I know those other services very well because I use them often. Given that the Argyll Ferries contract is due to continue until June 2017, achievement of reliability on the route must be the key and immediate priority. Also, because the Argyll Ferries services are subsidised by the taxpayer, ministers ultimately have a duty to ensure their reliability, which is the very least that local commuters and visitors deserve. The 32 per cent cancellation rate of Argyll Ferries sailings in March this year was simply not acceptable. CalMac’s record elsewhere is so good, so we must assume that Argyll Ferries’ poor record is due to the wrong type of vessel being used. I understand the desire to be connected directly to Gourock railway station, although arrangements in the stations could also be improved. I also understand that the Government said that the vehicle service that has been taken away could be profitable. Despite being let down by successive Scottish Governments over the town centre to town centre service, the residents of Dunoon and Cowal have, thankfully, been well served for the past 40 years by the alternative Western Ferries passenger and vehicle service, which is frequent, reliable and affordable. Its fares are cheaper than those on the subsidised service, but it receives not one penny of subsidy from the taxpayer. I am delighted that Western Ferries will soon have two brand new British-built vessels on the route—the MV Sound of Seil and the MV Sound of Soay—which will further increase Western Ferries’ capacity and already exemplary reliability record. That demonstrates the company’s commitment to the communities that it serves. Before the removal of the subsidised vehicle-service town centre route in 2011, Western Ferries was carrying the majority of vehicles between Gourock and the Cowal peninsula. There is a good connecting bus service from Dunoon to Glasgow via Western Ferries, but it does not go to the railhead. I recognise that the DGFAG is continuing to campaign for a reinstated vehicle and passenger service on the town centre route. I note that the Scottish Government’s feasibility study has suggested that a vehicle and state-subsidised passenger service on the town centre route could be feasible, although many ferry industry operators remain sceptical about that. It is therefore for the Scottish Government to set out in detail on what basis such a ferry service could be feasible, and how it would comply with EU regulations on competition. If the vehicle service made a profit, that would satisfy the EU. How much of the extra capital funding that is allocated for ferries in 2015-16 is specifically for the Dunoon-Gourock route? I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say on that subject.

I am sure that there were a lot of warnings that the Ali Cat was not going to be a good enough vessel, so why was it progressed with?

How quickly does the minister envisage the roll-out of further projects in the Pentland Firth site taking place? Does he believe that there is now potential for exporting this home-grown technology to other parts of the world?

How do ministers ensure that the needs of fishermen are fully considered when MPAs are proposed?

The figures suggest that, in percentage terms, household heating emissions were the same in 2010 as they were in 1998. What is the minister’s response to that and will he redouble efforts to boost home insulation throughout the country?

Did Fiona McLeod also visit a number of the distilleries on Speyside?

I am pleased to close today’s debate on Scotland’s historic environment for the Scottish Conservatives. There have been some good speeches from across the chamber and many members have talked passionately about the historic environment in their areas. The minister mentioned John Bellany’s funeral. Scotland has lost an artist of extraordinary talent and a man of great character and humour. Many will mourn his passing, but his art is already part of our heritage. I am delighted that Liz Smith referred to yesterday’s 500th anniversary of the battle of Flodden. The battle was a critical event in Scottish history, but it is sometimes neglected. I attended the moving service for Flodden at St Giles cathedral with my mother, whose ancestor Sir William Edmonstone of Duntreath was one of the Scottish knights who were killed defending James IV in the battle. The address that Alistair Moffat gave about Flodden was the best that I have ever heard on the subject. The speech by Malcolm MacGregor, the head of the Standing Council of Scottish Chiefs at the reception at the Signet library that followed the service at St Giles was most informative and a tribute to the clan element of Scottish historic tourism. In the battle, 10,000 Scots fell, as well as the thousands of Englishmen who gave their lives—all brave men who sacrificed everything. It was good to remember them on the day. The money that was raised by the event went to two soldiers charities. However, I was surprised that there appeared to be no Scottish Government ministers present to mark the occasion and to hear the splendid addresses.

I understand that a letter about the event was sent to Alex Salmond in 2011, but that will probably come out. Liz Smith set out our general position on the historic environment strategy for Scotland and on the merger of Historic Scotland and the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland. We generally support moves to streamline Government agencies and bodies and to minimise administration and bureaucracy. I sat on the committee that Fiona McLeod mentioned and which considered the governance of the National Trust for Scotland. The committee did exactly that—minimise administration and bureaucracy—following the excellent inquiry by the Parliament’s previous Presiding Officer, George Reid. However, the important and specialist services that are provided by the RCAHMS must be preserved and nurtured when it becomes part of the larger Historic Scotland. A number of members have rightly raised concerns about how that might be done and about other issues related to how the merger will affect both organisations, including rebranding. As we have heard, some of those concerns were voiced during this summer’s consultation. I, too, thank the organisations and individuals that took part in the consultation and I encourage them to continue to give their views as the legislative process continues. I look forward to the cabinet secretary responding further to some of the issues in her closing speech. All members who have spoken have recognised the critical importance of Scotland’s historic environment for our culture, for the way in which Scotland is perceived around the world and as a significant driver of our economy and source of employment. That is especially so in my region of the Highlands and Islands, where hundreds of thousands of tourists flock to see the wonderful and diverse attractions, which range from the blackhouse at Arnol on the Isle of Lewis and the neolithic settlement of Skara Brae in Orkney to the iconic castles of Dunrobin, Dunvegan, Eilean Donan, Mey, Cawdor and Inveraray, to name but a few. I live relatively near Inveraray castle, which is distinguished as one of the best examples of Gothic revivalist architecture in the world. The castle, combined with the beautiful planned village of Inveraray, which was designed by Robert Adam, is an integral part of the Argyll and Bute economy. This weekend, the best of the west festival takes place at the castle, and I strongly encourage people to attend that excellent event. Attracting high-spending foreign visitors, traditionally from North America and continental Europe, but increasingly from the BRIC countries—Brazil, Russia, India and China—is fundamental to the future of our tourism sector. That is why I am so pleased that Liz Smith’s amendment refers to the international dimension and to attracting visitors from abroad. For those who want something different, a few miles down the road from Inveraray lies the fascinating crofting museum of Auchindrain, which portrays life in the blackhouses and the crafts that were used in those days, such as weaving. Rob Gibson mentioned Scotland’s gardens, such as Inverewe, which is superb. I add to that list Crarae and Arduaine gardens in Argyll, both of which are run by the National Trust and are quite spectacular. The debate has focused quite a bit on Historic Scotland and RCAHMS. I join others in congratulating all those who work for Historic Scotland on their highly impressive visitor numbers this year. In preparing for today’s debate, I got in contact with a former chair of the Historic Houses Association Scotland, who emphasised the need to achieve a balance between maximising visitor numbers and maintaining the brand at the high end. She also made the valid point that individually owned and independently maintained historic properties, some of which are, after all, the jewels in the crown of architectural and historic tourism, must be able to compete on a level playing field with properties run by Historic Scotland and that the approach to permissions, grant aid, marketing assistance and the like must be on a par with the approach and benefits that the Historic Scotland properties might enjoy now and in the future. She also recommended a collaborative working approach across the historic environment and tourism sectors, which I certainly agree with. Our historic heritage is colourful, romantic and inspiring. Every castle and historic house has its legends, stories and memories, which fascinate the visitor to Scotland. Everybody loves an exciting story and Scotland is full of them. Yesterday’s excellent service commemorating the fallen at Flodden, both English and Scots, reminded me of the importance of our heritage. Seeing the clan chiefs and many others bedecked in their different tartans made me realise once again that our Scottish historic heritage is unusually powerful and spectacular.

Am I? Thank you, Presiding Officer. When I took forward my member’s bill to create a public register of Scottish tartans, which this Parliament was good and sensible enough to pass, I became aware of the importance of tartan not just to history but to businesses in the present day. I realised how lucky Scotland is to have such an emblem, which distinguishes it from other countries. If one sees someone in Timbuktu wearing tartan, one thinks of Scotland. I realise now that tartan is just one aspect of Scottish historic heritage, which is so powerful.

I congratulate Graeme Pearson on securing today’s debate and I also pay tribute to his work as convener of the parliamentary cross-party group on China, of which I am happy to be a member. The CPG is a very good forum for raising some of the issues that we are discussing today. Like Graeme Pearson and others, I am very positive about increasing trade and educational links between Scotland and China, and I recognise the significant potential economic benefits for Scotland through increased exports, especially in food and drink products such as whisky and salmon, and additional tourism income, both of which are so important to my region of the Highlands and Islands. China’s rapidly growing professional classes offer the same kind of opportunities that American markets and visitors offered Scotland in past decades. I commend the staff of businesses such as Marine Harvest Scotland, whose processing factory in Fort William I visited earlier this year on behalf of the European and External Relations Committee as part of the China plan inquiry. Marine Harvest has greatly increased exports of its fresh farmed salmon to China. Lorries travel directly from Fort William to Heathrow. Recently, the fish farm sector has been troubled by amoebic gill disease, which harmed Marine Harvest’s exports last year, but it remains an example of good innovation in the export market to China. The European and External Relations Committee inquiry into the Scottish Government’s China plan was widely welcomed and its report on the subject is very useful. The first recommendation was: “The Committee would welcome a response from SDI on how it could make progress in supporting business to business partnerships between Scottish and Chinese companies” Humza Yousaf, the minister who is with us in the chamber, said that he agreed that there should be support in business-to-business partnerships and pointed out that SDI had set up a new office in Shenzhen and increased its staff by 30 per cent. That is all very good, but the question about SDI would not have been raised in the first place if things had been going at 100 per cent, so I hope that that has improved. The committee secured a positive media profile for the inquiry. Evaluation demonstrated that media coverage reached in excess of 750,000 people, which is a great many. The committee will soon consider the Scottish Government’s response to the report. When we were taking evidence, it was important to hear from businesspeople who had direct experience of working in the Chinese market, including those in asset management, a sector in which Scotland has a strong international reputation. I was particularly struck by the evidence given by Angus Tulloch, who is a leading Scottish financier. Mr Tulloch emphasised the requirement for businesses to find the right partner in China. That relationship building must be viewed as a long-term process and the value of speaking in the language of the country with which trading is desired cannot be overstated. We in the chamber would all agree on that point, and I would support additional efforts to increase the learning of Mandarin Chinese in Scotland’s schools, colleges and universities. Increasing the availability of the teaching of Mandarin is key to that ambition being realised. The European and External Relations Committee inquiry into the teaching of modern languages in Scotland, which my committee has been doing lately, should help to highlight and improve Scottish children’s learning of Mandarin. Many businesses highlighted the major difficulty of obtaining visas for Chinese businesspeople, and that must be looked into by the relevant departments to prevent good ideas from being wasted through red tape and technicalities. We are also positive about the concept of direct flights to China. We recognise that business leaders have argued that a direct air link is of crucial importance to the Chinese view of Scotland. It could encourage more Chinese firms to recognise the possibilities of using Scotland as a European headquarters. It could also provide a real boost to tourism, although business leaders have suggested that such a link would have to be low cost, and low cost enough to rival the available routes for business travel to Europe. Today’s debate is very important. I am sure that the Parliament will debate our links with China with increasing frequency in the future. I look forward to the minister’s response to today’s debate and to the European and External Relations Committee’s further consideration of the Scottish Government’s China plan.

I am encouraged by what the minister has said, but the second recommendation in the European and External Relations Committee’s report on the China plan points out: “there is a lack of awareness of the existence of the Plan itself and the support available from the Scottish Government among some of the stakeholders.” Will the minister comment on that?

I take the minister’s point that Scotland’s targets were built on the assumption of a greater contribution from Europe, which is slow in coming. Nevertheless, the minister will be aware that Stop Climate Chaos Scotland has said that it is “very disappointed that the second climate change target in a row has been missed”. Does the minister understand the concern that the draft RPP2 does not focus enough on the specific policy changes that will be required to reduce emissions, particularly in transport? Is he confident that those changes will be embedded in the final report and that he has the support of all his ministerial colleagues for achieving future targets? I welcome the minister’s comments on peatland restoration. What action is he taking to ensure that significant peatland restoration measures, which are currently limited in scope and extent, are achieved in the new Scotland rural development programme? I also welcome the fact that some progress has been made on more homes having energy efficient ratings, but we still have a significant way to go, as the existing homes alliance Scotland has pointed out. Does he agree that an increased use of the green council tax discount could help to achieve further progress in the area? Will he do all that he can within the Government to promote awareness and uptake of the scheme?

I am pleased to close the debate for the Scottish Conservatives, and I hope that the bill will bring closure to this subject—although I somehow doubt it. I thank the members and clerking team of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee for their work on the bill against a very tight timetable. As we have said consistently since this unfortunate issue arose, we will support the passing of the bill at stage 3 today, as it is appropriate that action is taken swiftly to remedy the legal limbo in which owner-occupier crofters who wish to decroft have found themselves, through no fault of their own. I am pleased that the Crofting Commission has indicated that it will process the outstanding applications to decroft as quickly as possible and that it will be able to prioritise cases if particular deadlines face the individual crofters concerned. Although we accept that the bill provides the necessary clarity to remedy the specific issue regarding owner-occupier crofters, a big theme of the stage 1 debate and the committee’s report—and indeed of today’s debate—has been the concerns about a significant number of other apparent issues and anomalies arising from the 2010 act. Some of those concerns were voiced by members of the cross-party group on crofting, which I convened last Wednesday evening in the Parliament. They include concerns about the decrofting of a croft where there are multiple owners, the position of owner-occupiers who are not owner-occupier crofters and whether the first purchase of a tenanted croft triggers registration. Brian Inkster told our cross-party group that members of the crofting law group will be gathering and discussing the issues in the months ahead, in advance of the group’s annual conference in September. I welcome that, and I encourage the minister and his officials to engage constructively with the crofting law group, which has a significant amount of legal expertise, as the Government moves forward and seeks to address the issues. I wish to raise a specific concern in relation to the 2010 act that was highlighted at our cross-party group meeting. It relates to crofters who register their crofts having to place an advert to that effect in a local newspaper, which can cost up to £100. Derek Flyn, chairman of the SCF, told the committee: “If every crofter who has a croft—there are 18,000 crofts—has to pay £100 to explain that he has his croft in the register, crofting is paying £1.8 million to advertise the fact that the crofts are being put on the register. For what purpose?”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 15 May 2013; c 2201.] That is a lot of money. Will the minister comment on that and say whether he might consider that issue? Concern was also expressed about which body in Scotland will actively support the development of new crofts. Crofting development, as opposed to crofting community development, is not within Highlands and Islands Enterprise’s remit, for example. We were told that by Neil Ross of HIE at the cross-party group on Wednesday. There must be clarification about which body promotes crofting, and especially new crofts. We support the bill, but we want ministers to look carefully at and respond to the many issues that have arisen during its consideration. Crofters deserve clarity from their legislators, and we want to have a legal underpinning for the sector that is robust and understandable so that we can focus properly on the policies that we can adopt to sustain the crofting sector and encourage it to develop in the years ahead.

Does the minister share my welcome for the work that the UK Government is doing through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, in seeking to build new schools in the Gaza strip to expand access to education for 24,000 pupils?

I refer members to the reference to hydro in my entry in the register of members’ interests. I am pleased to take part in the debate. As an MSP for the Highlands and Islands, I recognise the contribution that hydro power has made over the past 70 years in meeting the energy needs of communities in my region, and indeed across Scotland, since the Hydro-Electric Development (Scotland) Act 1943. Tom Johnston was indeed a far-sighted Secretary of State for Scotland, with his vision of a light in every glen, and I hope that he is mentioned on the VisitScotland website. He certainly should be. It is a pleasure for a Conservative to be able to praise a Labour politician, probably because the opportunity arises so seldom, but the fact that Johnston was appointed by Winston Churchill makes it even better.

It was not the Scottish National Party. Near Inverary, in Glen Aray, there is a house called electric cottage, which was the first to receive electricity in the 1950s after the Shira dam was built. It is amazing to think that that glen, which is only 60 miles from Glasgow, did not get electricity until the 1950s. Hydro now produces 12 per cent of Scotland’s needs, and it could be much more than that. Mary told us all about the monks with their 18kW scheme from the River Tarff—

I beg your pardon, Presiding Officer. Mary Scanlon mentioned the monks, and I pay tribute to all those who were involved in the pioneering large-scale hydro developments in the Highlands over the past 70 years. Scotland led the world with those developments, and people came from across the planet to view our engineering prowess. That was, of course, before we discovered oil and renewables got put on the back-burner. The hydro dams that were built in the 1960s at places such as Laggan, Shira and Cruachan are remarkable and, indeed, beautiful structures, although there was much opposition to them at the time, on the ground that they would spoil the view. Now, hydro power is a long-established part of the community. I live in Loch Aweside in Argyll, near the Cruachan power station, which is located within Ben Cruachan itself. When it was built, that was the largest pumped-storage scheme in Europe. In his younger days, the Labour MSP Dr Richard Simpson was a driller on the Cruachan scheme and, I believe, a good one, too—there I go, praising Labour again; I do not know what is happening today. I encourage any colleague who happens to be in Argyll over the summer to visit the hollow mountain visitor centre at Loch Awe, which is a fantastic and interesting attraction. Scottish Conservatives are positive about the part that the development of new hydro schemes—in particular, micro and small-scale schemes—can play in meeting Scotland’s energy needs, providing a reliable source of energy and meeting renewable targets. New technology has multiplied the amount of electricity that can be generated from relatively small burns with a steep drop. We are also conscious that there is potential for expanding or improving the efficiency of the existing facilities, especially the run-of-river facilities, which might be a bit old-fashioned. The most modern plants can achieve energy conversion rates topping 90 per cent, and we would strongly support community ownership of micro and small-scale hydro projects, where that is appropriate. A report for the Scottish Government that was published in January 2010 suggested that a combined potential capacity of 1,204MW could be achieved from more than 7,000 small hydro schemes. Almost all of those had a capacity of less than 5MW, and 3,008 of the total were identified as being in the Highland region. That report, unlike previous reports, took account of micro-hydro schemes under 100kW. The Scottish Government suggests that a 100kW scheme operating with an average annual output would generate enough electricity to power more than 50 homes every year. The report also identified the potential for hundreds of new jobs to be created from those developments. Many of the schemes are on Forestry Commission Scotland land. I know that it has delegated some of its renewable assets to partners, and we would encourage it to continue to develop more schemes on its publicly owned land. We are aware of the significant challenges that can face those who wish to harness the power of micro and small-scale hydro schemes. Those are set out in Scottish Renewables’ very useful briefing for today’s debate, and include feed-in tariff digression and grid connection delays. Improving grid connection is of fundamental importance and, of course, affects other types of renewables. Scottish Renewables is correct to argue that network operators must continue to make the case for strategic investment in grid upgrades. Recently, I spoke to a potential developer on Loch Tay who had been promised—and had paid for—a grid connection in 2013, which was then moved to 2015. He has now heard rumours that it will not be in place until 2017. Building even small schemes can cost millions. How can those small developers budget if the goalposts on grid capacity are constantly moved? Frankly, that is not good enough. Hydro power is a highly acceptable form of renewable energy, which, once installed, can go on producing for 50 years or even as long as 100 years. It contributes directly to Scottish gross domestic product, unlike imported sources of power, which reduce GDP. If that uplift to GDP is to be nurtured, the infrastructure must be put in place to carry it. It is a good long-term investment for the country. If that does not happen, the policy is only half-hearted, and it is extremely unfair to those who are prepared to take the risk of investing. Problems lie not only with power lines but with sub-stations, but investment in those is crucial if we are to keep the renewable river running. I would like the minister to tell us what is being done at the moment to speed up the process. He mentioned an investment of £7 billion.

Mary Scanlon made an important point about the protection of fisheries and freshwater mussels, which I agree with. We have gained a lot of experience over the past few years from the existing hydro schemes. Surely, we can use that experience to ensure that the same mistakes do not occur again.

The cabinet secretary makes the welcome comment that, unlike the situation with a judicial review, the independent adjudicator will be easily accessible to the communities affected by the proposal. That will be welcomed in communities in Argyll and Bute, the Western Isles and other parts of the Highlands and Islands. How will communities be able to engage with the adjudicator?

I thank the cabinet secretary for an early copy of his statement. I agree that a door has opened to better times through the reform. I have two points. First, will the cabinet secretary give more detail on how the new discards policy will work in practice at Scottish landing ports? In English ports, Government officials have already helped to plan how to use discards and previously unwanted fish. What provisions has he organised for Scottish ports? Secondly, on nephrops, which the cabinet secretary mentioned, will he guarantee that he will make it a personal priority to persuade the Commission that there should be an exemption from the effort limits in the cod recovery plan for inshore prawn vessels that can document a minimal bycatch of cod? That would make a huge difference to our artisanal prawn fishermen on the west coast.

I am pleased to close the stage 1 debate for the Scottish Conservatives. I thank the members and the clerking team of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee for producing a thorough and extremely useful stage 1 report in such a short timeframe. Thanks should also go to Tom Edwards of the Scottish Parliament information centre for his excellent briefing; he never lets us down. Not long ago, I attended a meeting of crofting lawyers in the Signet library, at which an eminent lawyer assured the brethren there that there would be much work for them in crofting law for the foreseeable future. I am beginning to understand why he said that. Someone once memorably described crofting as a small island surrounded by a sea of legislation. Here we are adding another piece of legislation to the swell of that great ocean. I suppose that it would be fair to call the bill a wee burn rather than a big river; nonetheless, it is necessary. Like the committee, I regret that, because of a lack of clarity and a number of omissions in the existing legislation, the Crofting Commission decided that there was no legal basis for it to make determinations on applications by owner-occupier crofters to decroft. As we have heard from other members from the Highlands and Islands, that has caused considerable difficulties for a number of our constituents across the crofting counties. Therefore, it is right that the Government determined to introduce legislation to remedy that state of affairs as swiftly as possible, and it is appropriate and sensible that that should apply retrospectively to all those who have previously made applications or who have applications that are pending but on hold as a result of the legal concerns. We have had consensus in the debate that the bill, which is on the specific issue of decrofting, is definitely required. However, I share the concerns of other members and of the committee that there is a considerable body of legal opinion that this short bill is too complex and that it might need amendment to avoid further difficulties in legal interpretation in the future. I am not a lawyer or a legal expert so, like the committee, I can only urge ministers to take on board and address the concerns that have been expressed by eminent figures such as Sir Crispin Agnew QC and Brian Inkster. Ministers should, if required, lodge amendments to the bill at stage 2 so that we do not find ourselves having to enact yet another amendment bill in a few months or years. We must try to avoid that at all costs. I note the committee’s reference to the significant number of outstanding crofting issues that many people believe require to be addressed. Some of them are separate from the specific decrofting issue that the Government is addressing in the bill and some are more connected with it. They include detailed concerns about the legal definition of an owner-occupier crofter and about the legal position of decrofting when a croft has been divided and there are multiple owners—I raised that issue with the minister in the chamber at the end of March. I agree with the committee’s recommendation that ministers should identify how they intend to address those issues and that they should set out how they will proceed. Like other members, I welcome the minister’s commitment to establish a group to consider how those issues might best be addressed. More generally, the committee’s report reflects the widespread concern among crofters and their representatives about the complexity of crofting law. I share that concern, which has been brought up again and again at the cross-party group on crofting, which I convene. The consolidation of crofting legislation remains a sore. It is a constant agenda item, at the request of CPG members. At each meeting, we raise the matter and talk about it. The minister told me earlier this year in response to a written question: “The Scottish Government will consider the consolidation of crofting legislation after it is satisfied that all the provisions of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 are working as intended.”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 4 March 2013; S4W-12989.] Can he confirm that that remains the case—that it means consideration of consolidation when the provisions of the 2010 act and those of what will shortly be the crofting (amendment) (Scotland) act 2013 are working as intended? For that matter, when will we know whether those provisions are working as intended? Who will judge that? There could be considerable arguments between people in different townships over what is and is not working. The minister will have to consider that. His answer says that he will do something, but he might not be in a position to know what is and is not working.

As I have said before, there appear to be a few people with smiles on their faces, and they are not particularly the crofters—which leaves the lawyers, I suppose. As I pledged to the minister in response to his statement on decrofting on 28 March, the Scottish Conservatives will support the bill, as we recognise the urgent need for legal clarity that will allow owner-occupier crofters to enjoy the same rights as croft tenants. We look to the Scottish Government, working closely with crofting law experts, to do everything possible at subsequent stages to ensure that the bill has no unintended consequences. We want ministers to address the other issues that the committee identified—especially those that badly need attention. Crofters and the crofting communities have many other challenges to overcome, especially this year, with the rigours of a bad winter and the increases in animal feed prices. At the very least, they deserve clarity from their legislators. When I look back, my experience of crofters has always been good. Fifteen years ago, I canvassed many crofters across the Western Isles when I was a candidate there, and I found that, whatever their politics might have been, they were very welcoming. However, their dogs were sometimes not as welcoming. I once entered a kitchen that revealed a Mary Celeste situation. There was an uneaten breakfast on the table and the news was on the radio. I realised that the house was empty but, before I could exit, growls from the door revealed two enormous sheepdogs, which would not let me out until the owners arrived an hour later. Another time, I went to canvass a crofter who was feeding his sheep in a field. He shouted at me that I would not have his vote until I went back to Westminster and got John Major to do something about the sea eagles. I know that we have mentioned sea eagles a lot. Crofters face many issues, which are practical. The lives that we live here do not involve going out at 6 in the morning and feeding cattle and sheep in muck, rain, wind and other difficult things. It is up to those of us who sit in the comfortable chairs to give crofters at least the legislation that they deserve.

I inform the member that I once gave a surgery in Portree at which a crofter arrived with a bundle of papers, which he threw down on the table in front of me, saying, “That’s the story.” I looked at the paper on the top of the bundle and it said, “Secretary of State for Scotland, 1948”.

The minister was referring to my earlier comments. The point that I made was that his response on bringing forward a consolidation of crofting acts included the minister wanting to see everything working as intended. How will he know when everything is working as intended?

The report highlights the decline in seabird species such as the Arctic skua nesting in Scotland. What specific action can ministers take on seabirds?

I refer to my agricultural interests as noted in the register of members’ interests. I am pleased to close today’s debate for the Scottish Conservatives, and I thank those organisations that have provided briefings, including Community Land Scotland, NFU Scotland and Scottish Land & Estates. As Alex Fergusson said, the Scottish Conservatives were pleased that the LRRG decided not to examine land tenancy issues. It is appropriate that those issues are being considered by the tenant farming forum, as other members have said, and we look forward to the outcome of the forum’s deliberations being made available in the near future. As Alex Fergusson’s amendment makes clear, we are positive about the benefits that can arise from community ownership, and we can be proud of our record on the matter in government, not least the passage of the Transfer of Crofting Estates (Scotland) Act 1997. A transfer of ownership of the Keoldale estate in my region—next door to Cape Wrath—from the Scottish ministers to the local sheep club is going ahead as we speak. The estate, which covers an area of 30,000 acres, is being transferred for approximately £250,000. At less than £10 an acre, the transfer is probably a good deal for the sheep club, and it is down to Conservative legislation. We strongly believe—and we will always uphold the belief—that community ownership must be achieved through the willingness of both the buyer and the seller. That is fundamental. The idea of forcing people against their wish is not acceptable, and we are concerned that the necessity of having a willing seller landowner as part of any community involvement—

I do not have time. That necessity is not addressed in the interim report, and we wonder why that is the case. We urge the LRRG to consider that key issue as it continues its work. Some parts of the interim report can be commended. For example, the need to continue to develop effective community engagement is correct, as is the need to define the outcomes that a community wants to achieve and the need for effective community planning. There is some recognition in the report that there are numerous ways in which the community can have a greater say in the use of land without necessarily owning it. There are many existing examples of good practice, and I trust that the LRRG will identify them as part of its phase 2 work. More generally, all of us should recognise that, in the vast majority of cases, owners of private land and property already deliver tangible economic, social and environmental benefits to local people, including communities in our remote rural and island areas. As the Scottish Land & Estates briefing validly points out, it is not correct to view private land ownership as an inhibitor of rural development. A recent survey revealed that just over a quarter of Scottish Land & Estates members will together invest £250 million over the next two years, which will sustain and create thousands of jobs across rural Scotland. In conclusion, we await with interest the results of phase 2 of the LRRG, including its recommendations on how community ownership might be expanded in urban areas. We are happy to support practical moves that will encourage greater community ownership, management and use of the land, but the basic principle about the willingness of both seller and buyer must be respected. I support the amendment in the name of Alex Fergusson.

The minister will be aware of the extent of the concern in the crofting counties. Will he pledge to meet the Scottish Crofting Foundation and the NFU Scotland on the subject?

Like others, I begin by thanking the clerking team, ably led by Joanna Hardy, and my colleagues on the committee, who were well served under the convenership of Fiona McLeod. I also extend my thanks to the witnesses who appeared before us and whose wise counsel guided our thinking. Lastly, I wish to thank my friend Alex Fergusson MSP for speaking on my behalf at stage 1. The bill can perhaps be described as a technical piece of legislation whose aim is to tidy up existing and somewhat archaic governance in the National Trust for Scotland, and it should be uncontentious in its nature. However, that does not detract from the very serious necessity of bringing it forward, following adverse publicity and the resignation of the chairman three years ago—a time when the trust was engulfed in financial crisis, with 65 redundancies and the closure of several of its loss-making properties. I therefore pay great tribute to Sir George Reid for his intensive and far-reaching inquiry, which resulted in the “Fit for Purpose” report. Sir George’s two-year examination of how the trust was run rightly highlighted what he described in his inimitable way as its “byzantine” governance and pointed to a lack of strategic direction and an inability to deal with problems. He also told the committee that he was enthused by the positive attitude to change in response to his findings. Reform was inevitable, which was reflected in the views of the trust’s members, who voted overwhelmingly in favour of change at their annual general meeting in 2010, which saw the trust streamlined, replacing two boards with one. The trust has been able to implement the Reid recommendations within the National Trust for Scotland Order 1935, which avoided the necessity of primary legislation. It is no surprise that the management of the trust was so chaotic, when one considers that the number of trustees was nearly 90. Thankfully, the number has now been reduced to 15. The Blakenham review of the National Trust in England, Wales and Northern Ireland in 2003 concluded that the decision-making framework was overly complex and led to a lack of clarity and to duplication of staff effort. I am sure that the Reid review group must have studied that review closely in coming up with its own recommendations. One of the key comments made by Sir Kenneth Calman was that the bill will remove the responsibility of the honorary president and honorary vice-presidents to attend board meetings, thus ending potential conflicts of interest—a move commended by the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator, for seeking to create greater clarity. The possibility of having up to four co-opted members was kept, which is sensible in order to provide specialised expertise. The trust would like to keep those co-opted members for more than a year if necessary. The 1935 order at present provides for the governing council to include various representatives of public or scientific bodies. Recommendation 3 of the Reid review was that there be no representative members of the council. The rationale for that recommendation was that there are now more appropriate mechanisms for ensuring co-ordination, expert advice and policy development at a national level. That was endorsed by OSCR, which referred to and welcomed the recommendations at page 19 of its guidance. The other most striking, if not obvious, recommendation that is contained in the bill relates to the establishment by the trust of a five-year plan, which is eminently sensible, as is the suggestion—to which Patricia Ferguson referred—that an audit of assets should take place. I was also interested in the organisation adopting a rather snappier title than the somewhat cumbersome “National Trust for Scotland for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty”, which, after all, was a throwback to the 1930s. I said at the outset that this private bill is technical in its nature but necessary in its content, and I have no hesitation in commending it to the chamber. I end by agreeing with Patricia Ferguson that everyone should visit St Kilda. I have done so twice, and it is one of the great wonders of the world; so is the inn there, which is known as the Puff inn.

I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests, in relation to fisheries. There is widespread recognition of the importance of aquaculture and wild fisheries to Scotland’s economy. In my region, the Highlands and Islands, fish farming helps to underpin many communities. The fact that farmed Scottish salmon has the much-coveted label rouge demonstrates its excellence. At the same time—as the minister stressed—Scotland, with its lochs and rivers, is a world-famous location for wild fishing. As part of the European and External Relations Committee’s inquiry into the China plan, I recently visited the Marine Harvest processing factory at Fort William, which is a significant employer in Lochaber. I had not visited a salmon processing factory for several years, and the improvement in the quality of the fish over that time was plain to see. All Marine Harvest’s fish are processed in one factory, picked up by lorry, taken to Heathrow and flown out, which means that they can be in China in a very short time. The potential for growth in the Chinese market is great. The labelling on the boxes gives total traceability—it is possible to tell not only what cage on which site the fish came from, but which individual packed the box. Given that there is no lack of transparency on that side of aquaculture, it is disappointing that, despite lobbying from many sides, the Scottish Government decided not to accept the well-thought-out amendments of my friend Alex Fergusson that proposed that sea lice data should be published on a farm-by-farm basis, as happens in Norway, Chile and Ireland. I invite the minister to explain why that lack of transparency does not exist in other fish farming countries. A big theme in the stage 1 debate and the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s scrutiny of the bill and its report was the need for the wild fish and the fish farming sectors to work together more constructively. The bill represented an opportunity to improve working methods and public relations. People in the aquaculture industry to whom I spoke were not alarmed by the request for greater transparency, so why is the Scottish Government so intransigent on sea lice? That will leave the wild fish industry disappointed. Indeed, the Salmon & Trout Association is calling the bill a missed opportunity to protect and conserve Scotland’s wild fish heritage. Can the minister say something to relieve those concerns? The disappointment stems from the Government’s failure to accept amendments at stage 2—and further amendments from Claudia Beamish at stage 3—that would have increased the amount of publicly available information on sea lice. Will the minister at least instruct Marine Scotland to analyse Scotland-wide sea lice data at a farm management area level on a quarterly basis, so that it can assess the performance on sea lice management and test the SSPO reporting system? I think that all of us recognise that we want and need to achieve the sustainable coexistence of the wild fish and fish farming industries. That is what I have argued for throughout my time in the Parliament. We know that that can best be achieved when both sectors trust each other. It remains to be seen whether the bill will help us to make progress towards that aim, but ministers need to continue to strive to address the concerns of wild fishery interests, particularly in the west and north-west, where genuine concerns still exist about the decline in wild fish numbers and the reasons behind it. The Scottish Conservatives will continue to speak up on such issues, while supporting the sustainable growth of our aquaculture producers.

Does the minister believe that the planting of trees in and around cities can help to mitigate the levels of some pollutants?

I think that everyone would agree that the pearl mussel—or Margaritifera margaritifera, as it is called—has a wonderful champion in Mary Scanlon; I would not want to be anyone who interfered with it. I think that she is the first MSP species champion to have secured a debate on their species, for which she is to be commended. I will take the opportunity to namecheck the two species that I am championing: the narrow-headed ant, as has been mentioned, and the marsh fritillary butterfly. I thank RSPB Scotland and Scottish Environment LINK for their briefing material. In conducting my research for the debate, I found it fascinating to learn more about the biology of the species, as well as its long history in Scotland, to which Mary Scanlon referred. With a lifespan of 100 years or more, the pearl mussel is one of the longest-living invertebrates in existence. One specimen that was found in Estonia was 134 years old and, according to the verbal briefing that we received today, it is possible that there are freshwater mussels in Russia that are more than 200 years old. We should think about aII the history that has passed them by, let alone the water. The fact that an adult mussel can filter 50 litres of water a day—which is an amazing volume, given its size—is extremely important for water quality. In the past, pearl mussels were fished in Scottish rivers. Some of the pearl fishermen were clever enough to use reversible callipers to open a mussel, check if there was a pearl inside, extract it and close the mussel without causing significant damage, but those people were experts whose families had followed that hunter-gatherer way of life for generations and who wanted to make their livelihoods sustainable. Modern day illegal chancers and cowboys who use penknives just leave a trail of death and destruction, and what has been there for hundreds of years can be destroyed in minutes through sheer ignorance and greed. As we have heard, despite the fact that pearl mussels now enjoy full legal protection, there are real concerns about the population numbers of what is a critically endangered species. Indeed, according to some estimates, it is in the top 400 most endangered species on the planet. Threats come from not only the aforementioned illegal pearl fishing but habitat degradation or destruction, pollution and climate change. The declining population of wild salmon and trout in some areas, which is an issue that I have raised many times before, is also important as pearl mussels spend the earlier part of their life cycle developing harmlessly in the gills of salmon and trout. Those are the spats or future seedcorn, and the salmon and trout are the taxis that take them to their future living quarters. Isn’t nature wonderful? The decline in salmon and trout stocks is a particular concern on the west and north-west coasts of the Highlands and Islands and it is essential that the reasons for those declines are more fully investigated, especially as east and north coast runs appear to be faring much better. The protection and enhancement of our pearl mussel stocks are another reason for better understanding and responding to the declines in salmon and trout numbers; after all, if we have no salmon and trout in our rivers, we will have no pearl mussels either. It is all the same ecosystem. As for the suggestion that the public tackle the very serious destruction of pearl mussels as others search for the rare pearls that are found in only 1 per cent of them, they and all of us in this Parliament must send out the very clear message now that such activity is illegal and totally unacceptable. If people see suspicious activity or, say, shells lying about on riverbanks, they should not hesitate to contact their local police station and ask for the wildlife crime officer. Today’s debate is welcome, and I am pleased that it has helped to raise awareness of the very real threat to the future of this species. If Scotland and other developed countries are to persuade less enlightened nations of the need to conserve their endangered species, we must preserve—and be seen to be preserving—the rare species that we are lucky enough to have on our doorstep. [Interruption.] Thank you very much, Presiding Officer, and I apologise for my phone going off.

Under the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010, crofters were told that they would have to pay around £90 or £100 for registration. It now transpires that they are being charged anywhere between £250 and £400 for global positioning system surveys, which is taking the cost nearer to £500. Will the minister comment on that, and can he offer any help to crofters?

The RSPB states that one of the key problems for the survival of golden eagles is the lack of live prey that is available to the species. Does the minister agree that a healthy supply of food species in golden eagle areas, such as rabbits and mountain hares, is a factor in the maintenance of healthy numbers of golden eagles? Is he, through the appropriate agencies, doing something about the decline of those species in some areas?

I congratulate Kezia Dugdale on securing the debate and I commend her motion, which I hope all members can support. I also commend the one billion rising campaign, which has done good work to raise awareness of the appalling global scale of violence against women. We heard from Kezia Dugdale about the truly shocking extent of rape and abuse of women around our world. It is impressive that the one billion rising campaign has reached 207 countries, where people have come together to protest about the suffering of women, and I am pleased that the one billion rising website emphasises that it wants men as well as women to become involved in the campaign, and states: “Violence against women and girls is not only a woman's issue; it's a human issue. When we say everyone should join the campaign we mean EVERYONE.” I am also encouraged by the actions of the United Kingdom Government in supporting women abroad. The Foreign Office, through its preventing sexual violence initiative, is pushing for greater international action and is helping countries to improve their efforts to tackle those crimes and support survivors. A team of experts now works on evidence gathering, investigations, prosecutions and the proper care of victims and witnesses in conflict situations. In 2011, the Department for International Development published its strategic vision of how the UK’s international aid could best be used to have a transformative impact. In answer to a question from Stella Creasy, the Labour MP for Walthamstow, the Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Mr Hugo Swire said: “This Government will stop at nothing in trying to stamp out violence of any sort against women, wherever it takes place. Unfortunately, there is too much violence against women even in our own country. The Under-Secretary of State for International Development ... (Lynne Featherstone) is taking forward an international campaign to end violence against women, and will represent the UK at the UN Commission on the Status of Women, which will focus on the elimination and prevention of all forms of violence against women and girls. I would also say to the hon. Member for Walthamstow (Stella Creasy) that we are using Britain’s presidency of the G8 to run a year-long campaign, led by the Foreign Secretary, on preventing sexual violence in armed conflicts.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 22 January 2013; Vol 557, c 149.] Recently, many of us saw the extensive coverage of the visit by the Foreign Secretary, William Hague, and Angelina Jolie, the special envoy for the United Nations Human Rights Council—and great actress—to the Democratic Republic of Congo as part of their battle against use of rape as a weapon of war. That, too, was very important with regard to awareness raising. The UK Government subsequently committed an extra £10 million to tackling sexual violence and harm to women in war zones, which has been widely welcomed. Today’s debate is timely and welcome. I hope that all of us in Parliament and the Scottish Government can unite to send out a message loud and clear that violence against women in any form, on any part of our planet, is completely unacceptable.

I thank the minister for early sight of his statement. I pledge Scottish Conservative support in principle to enable the proposed bill to go through the appropriate stages as quickly as possible in order to remedy the unfortunate situation that has, as the minister suggested, caused uncertainty and worry to a number of crofting constituents. Will the legislation clarify the legal position on decrofting a croft that has been divided? The Crofting Commission say that people who own part of a croft cannot decroft in that part without the concurrence of the neighbours who own the remainder of what was the original croft. I apologise for that complicated question. Has consideration been given to an interim measure that will allow applications to be progressed up to the point of issue but without a decrofting direction being issued until the required solution is in place? What is the minister’s response to owner-occupier crofters who face financial loss because of the predicament in which they find themselves?

I congratulate the engineers and the emergency services, the many volunteers on the ground and local councillors who have done so much to help those in distress in Campbeltown and Kintyre, particularly. Can the minister assure me that everything is being done for the surrounding communities, especially those in Machrihanish, Southend and the Mull of Kintyre, because many there are still without power? Does the minister agree that this emergency has highlighted the importance of Campbeltown hospital, where the Beinn Ghuilean ward has had to be reopened to accommodate people in need?

I am pleased to close the debate for the Scottish Conservatives. I thank the members and clerking team of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee for producing the thorough and useful report that we have debated today. Thanks should also go to the external organisations that have provided us with briefings for the debate, including the RSPB, Stop Climate Chaos Scotland and the existing homes alliance. As we have heard from members across the chamber, there remains support for the Government’s targets but real concern about the failure to achieve the annual emissions reduction target for 2010 and about whether Scotland will be able to achieve future targets. The committee’s report rightly sets out how difficult fulfilling future commitments will be and the need for measures to be implemented across all policy areas. The concern that RPP2 lacked detail has also been a theme of the debate, as has the belief that a developed nation such as Scotland must be seen internationally to achieve its targets. The Scottish Conservatives have consistently supported practical policies and incentives that will encourage consumers to make decisions that will help to reduce emissions. That remains our approach. That is why we championed the concept of a green council tax discount and are disappointed at the low take-up of the option so far. On 12 November, the Scottish Government invited local authorities to consider how greater uptake could be encouraged, and I would be grateful if the minister would update us on that subject. What can the Scottish Government do to help, or persuade, councils to promote the measure? Homes represent one quarter of Scotland’s emissions, and the existing homes alliance is right to highlight the need to transform Scotland’s existing housing stock. It says: “The homes and community sector is well-placed to make a significant contribution to reaching Scotland’s climate change targets if given the right tools—sufficient investment for incentives combined with regulating for standards.” Tackling heat loss from our homes must remain a huge priority. A number of members talked about the importance of Scotland’s peatlands. I emphasise that, too. As I have said many times in the Parliament, Scotland’s peatlands are a world-class resource that act as a significant carbon sink, storing 10 times more carbon than all the trees in the UK. Like the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, the Conservatives are positive about moves that would enable peatland restoration to be promoted but have sympathy with the experts who have warned that, although the funding of £1.7 million for 2012 to 2015 is welcome, it would need to be expanded if it is to lead to a significant area of peatland being restored. Ministers need to consider that as we go forward. We also urge ministers to work with the private sector to develop innovative ways of allowing peatland restoration to be undertaken as part of corporate social responsibility programmes. I commend the good work and effective partnership working that have taken place for the peatland restoration at RSPB Scotland’s Forsinard reserve in Caithness in my region. Others can learn from what has been achieved there. I note that the committee received evidence suggesting that the waste and resource use section of the RPP2 was overly focused on waste and did not consider wider aspects of resource use. Where local authorities are concerned, I sympathise with an antipathy towards directives that talk about targets for recycling if the markets are not in place for the material. Market should be identified to make targets achievable. The slogan should be “No targets without markets.” Turning to agriculture, I note in paragraph 173 that “the policies in the draft RPP2 relate principally to the Scottish Government‘s Farming for a Better Climate (FFBC) programme.” That is more than just a pipe dream. I am sure that arable farmers in Perthshire and central Scotland who experienced the wettest summer on record last year, and now those in Kintyre and Arran who are experiencing the worst winter weather for 50 years would agree that farming for a better climate is an admirable aim. In his comments to the committee, Professor Smith made an interesting point when he called for a thriving Scottish agricultural sector to be as low carbon as possible but pointed out that reductions in activity or output in Scotland were not the sensible way to achieve the targets because that activity and output would simply be taken up in another part of the globe. The Scottish Conservatives look to ministers to provide greater clarity and detail on their policy as we go forward. We encourage them to prioritise practical options that act as incentives for consumers and businesses.

Will Claudia Beamish take an intervention?

Will the minister give way on that point?

What can the Scottish Government do to ensure that turbines for hydro and wind power are manufactured in Scotland instead of imported?

I congratulate Angus MacDonald on securing the debate. I declare an interest: I, too, was a young farmer once. My other agricultural interests are in the register of members’ interests. I warmly congratulate the SAYFC on its 75th anniversary. I also praise the organisations that support the SAYFC, including the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland, The Scottish Farmer, the Royal Scottish Agricultural Benevolent Institution, CKD Galbraith LLP, British Wool and the Cameron Travel Scholarship Trust. As young Angus MacDonald has set out effectively, young farmers clubs across Scotland are an extremely important part of rural life and offer an excellent opportunity for young farmers and those who are not young farmers but are interested in the sector to meet others, learn new skills and share experiences. The SAYFC represents more than 3,000 members, including next-generation farmers, food producers and young rural citizens. Young farmers clubs engage in a wide range of activities, including stock judging, lamb and cattle dressing, sheep shearing, curling, football, shinty, tug-of-war, charity fundraising and performing arts. Those activities help our young people to develop important interpersonal and team-building skills, as well as expertise that can be used in agricultural work. I commend the work by young farmers clubs to coach debating. I know that my north-eastern colleague, Alex Johnstone, honed some of his fine debating skills in his young farmers club as a young man. I am also told that he held the club record for consuming the most pints in one sitting. In my native Argyll and Bute, we have good young farmers clubs in Bute and Campbeltown, and I am delighted that a new Tiree group has started. I was also pleased to learn of the friends of young farmers initiative that aims to keep past members in touch with club activities and to raise funds for club development. I, too, wish the SAYFC every success in raising £100,000 for its anniversary legacy fund. Angus MacDonald mentioned the fears of young farmers, including about the price of fuel. I hope that they will be happy that the Chancellor of the Exchequer has again cancelled the 3p increase in fuel duty that was due in September. Yesterday, when I attended the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee deliberations on the agricultural rent review, I asked a witness how more young farmers could be brought into the tenanted sector and what hurdles they faced. Andrew Hamilton, of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors Scotland, specifically mentioned measures in the CAP review that could address the major problem of lack of capital for new farming entrants. Those measures should be followed up. As a farmer, I know that if my sheep have no lambs, I will have soon have no sheep. We need more young farmers to ensure a vibrant, new farming industry. All members in the chamber support Government action to encourage and support new entrants to farming. Young farmers clubs have an important role to play in nurturing the ambitions of those who want to join our farming sector. We encourage ministers to do all that they can to work with the SAYFC to encourage young entrants, including among those who are not from traditional farming backgrounds. We wish the SAYFC and its members every success, and we look forward to celebrating many future anniversaries. The association continues to be an important and positive element of Scottish rural life.

On new entrants, is the cabinet secretary working on a solution to the lack of a reserve to deal with new farms’ lack of entitlement to single farm payments?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this afternoon’s debate. I find myself in agreement with much of the motion in the name of Neil Findlay, but not all of it. The October 2012 BBC “Inside Out” programme that alleged the fabrication of police reports on the Orgreave miners’ strike, alongside the findings of the Hillsborough independent panel, are concerning and should be taken very seriously. They paint a worrying picture of the actions of South Yorkshire Police some time ago. It is right that that English police force has referred itself to the Independent Police Complaints Commission for investigation. The findings of the Hillsborough independent panel were truly shocking. I welcomed the Home Secretary’s announcement shortly afterwards of a new inquiry, which will be led by former Durham chief constable, Jon Stoddart. Hillsborough was a tragedy, in which 96 Liverpool fans died because of overcrowding and poor crowd management, and we now know that some of the police reports were fabricated. I hope that lessons will be learned from the forthcoming inquiry and that the families of those who died get the information and the justice that they deserve. However, part of my difficulty with the motion is that Hillsborough was very different to what happened at Orgreave and that, if I may be forgiven for stating the obvious, neither event took place in Scotland. Orgreave was an illegal strike involving crowds of picketers, some of whom attacked and caused injury to police officers. That is a very different situation to a group of peaceful football fans being injured and killed through no fault of their own. Additionally, there were no miscarriages of justice at Orgreave for the very simple reason that the cases of all those accused of rioting were dropped. Although South Yorkshire Police agreed to pay compensation to some miners, it is important to note that no officers were disciplined for misconduct and no charges against the police were ever proven in court.

Hold on a minute. The allegations that were made at the time and those that were broadcast during the October 2012 BBC “Inside Out” programme remain allegations that have yet to be independently proven. Those points are not made to detract from the seriousness of the claims. However, we should note the important differences between the events. Most important, there is little or no evidence that miscarriages of justice or police misconduct occurred north of the border. Is Neil Findlay saying that allegations of police misconduct in South Yorkshire automatically mean that Scottish police forces have behaved inappropriately?

If there has been injustice, I agree that we need to find that out. However, the simple fact that convictions occurred in Scotland, many for breach of the peace, does not in itself point towards miscarriages of justice; the miners’ strikes were so political in nature does not mean that those who acted unacceptably and were convicted in a court of law should have their convictions quashed. Does Labour want inquiries to be carried out for every single strike that took place in 1984 and 1985, regardless of the lack of evidence suggesting miscarriages of justice? One of the main grievances of those who were convicted was their subsequent loss of employment. However, that is a matter for employment law and does not relate to the original criminal conviction. In many cases, those who lost their jobs subsequently received unfair dismissal awards.

I note that Neil Findlay appears to have toned down his language in the motion, and that he “wonders whether there is a need for concern” rather than demanding a full independent and comprehensive review. I agree.

Personally, I welcome the response that was reported last week of a test case being lodged with the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission, which can look into whether miscarriages of justice have taken place. Does the member think that that is a good idea?

In relation to the promotion of Scottish venison and putting it on a level playing field, can the cabinet secretary clarify the position on single farm payments for Scottish deer farmers?

Today’s—[Interruption.] My microphone is not working either. Today’s debate is indeed timely. We have had recognition of the crucial economic importance of Scotland’s food and drink sector, which is a very big part of Scotland’s exports. I agree with the sentiments that have been expressed and believe that the sector can become an even more important part of our economy as we go forward. I congratulate the cabinet secretary on his efforts for the food and drink sector. In the Highlands and Islands, we have wonderful examples of genuinely world-class food producers, from famous names such as Walkers of Aberlour and Baxters of Speyside, as well as the Scotch whisky industry. We have fin-fish and shellfish producers, and producers of delicious cheeses and game products. There are also all the individual farmers and crofters who produce beef, lamb, mutton and pork. In addition, our sea fishermen harvest some of the best white fish available. The high quality of food in some of our hotels, restaurants and cafes is also a big attraction to visitors from the rest of the UK and abroad. I highlight the fish restaurants and cafes of Oban in Argyll, which have improved out of all recognition in recent years. Graeme Dey talked about Arbroath smokies, and I agree with him that they are delicious. Has he tasted Loch Fyne kippers? Maureen Watt talked about those. My grandmother always told me that the best sausages came from Newmarket, and now I think I know why. Other members have discussed the recent scandal over horsemeat in food products, and I believe that the focus on that issue can help our farmers and crofters, who adhere to traceability systems that are among the best in the world—they are not perfect, but they are trying hard. We should pay tribute to our farmers and crofters for the efforts that they have made in that regard over recent years, and Scottish consumers should have full confidence in Scottish meat products. The media must also report issues relating to our food in as responsible a way as possible. I do not think that they have been very good at that lately. Last week’s study suggesting that processed meats might lead to increased mortality probably alarmed many Scots who enjoy bacon and sausages. The study also found that small amounts of meat—even processed meat—have real health benefits. We should all be aiming for a balanced diet—surely that is the key. A little of what you fancy does you good. We support initiatives to increase the profile and availability of local food, which we believe could benefit our primary producers. The Scottish Crofting Federation’s crofting charter highlights crofters’ belief in the need for a strong local food economy with public procurement opportunities for local producers, which Tavish Scott rightly highlighted. The promotion and encouragement of niche and high-end branding and marketing—for example, for produce from rare and native breeds—are very important. NFU Scotland’s what’s on your plate? campaign has been running for more than three years and is to be commended as well. There are lots of other food initiatives. Food from Argyll does a fantastic job in promoting some of Argyll’s best produce, including the very tasty Argyll lamb stovies that are found at major events such as Rockness, Belladrum’s Tartan Heart festival and T in the Park—they are very modern. In addition, the Highlands and Islands food and drink awards, which are now in their ninth year, are a positive way of showcasing examples of best practice within the sector. We have heard much—quite rightly—about the high quality of Scotland’s lamb, mutton, pork and beef, but I would like to highlight our wonderful venison, which comes from wild and farmed deer sources. It contains less than 2 per cent fat, which is less than skinless chicken does, it is a good source of healthy protein, it is high in iron, and it contains vitamins B6 and B12, potassium, phosphorus, riboflavin and niacin. [Interruption.] My colleague Alex Johnstone says that it also tastes quite good. I encourage local authorities to consider using venison. Stewart Stevenson painted a glowing picture of the diet of his youth and the benefits of his father’s country medical practice, which I thought was wonderful. Unfortunately, NHS 24 is not quite the same. In conclusion, Presiding Officer—I am getting there a bit soon—we recognise the tremendous achievements of Scotland’s vibrant food and drink sector and the potential for it to play a big part in growing Scotland’s economy in the future. We look to the Government to work constructively with the industry and to secure the best possible deal for our farmers and crofters and the key primary producers in the current CAP reform process. I wish the Government every bit of luck with that.

As convener of our Parliament’s cross-party group on crofting—a job that I inherited from the true crofters’ champion, John Farquhar Munro—I am delighted that the deputy convener, Jean Urquhart, has secured today’s debate, and I am happy to participate in it. It is important that we all continue to highlight the importance of crofting at every possible opportunity. The Scottish Crofting Federation does an excellent job of that, and I also pay tribute to Pam Rodway and her crofting connections team for the good work that it does with young people to educate them about country ways in an enjoyable and informative way. Jean Urquhart's motion is to be commended. She is entirely right to highlight the importance of crofters producing high quality, high health status animals for farmers elsewhere in Scotland. That was one of the main reasons why I was proud to stand 100 per cent behind our crofters in the two successful campaigns that we have fought since 1999 to preserve the bull hire scheme. Earlier this afternoon, we debated food policy, and it is clear that the crofting sector has a key role to play in the provision of high quality food in this country, and that it can benefit from what will be an increased demand for local food and traceable produce. Although there is genuine political support for crofting across the political parties, crofters want Government to do more to assist them through practical commonsense measures, including support for crofting housing and new entrants. The croft house grants scheme was not kept up with, but should be recognised as an efficient way of providing affordable housing in rural Scotland, as it was in the past. The current reform of the CAP is crucial to the future of the sector and we need to ensure that the specific needs of crofters are protected in the reform. I remain concerned and alarmed at the decline of crofting as demonstrated through continuing reductions in livestock, cropping and the communal management of common grazings. Securing a much better Scotland rural development programme including—of course—the successor to the less-favoured areas support scheme element, is vital to halting and reversing decline.

I do not really have time to talk about that this evening, but it is something that we must investigate. We have to get the best possible deal for our crofters and farmers. Pillar 1 payments offer our marginal areas appropriate levels of support, which is important. It is vital that the SRDP successor offers user-friendly options that crofters—including common-grazings managers and small-unit managers—are able to apply for and that offer practical benefits. There is consensus that the current SRDP simply has not provided those for small producers. I have written to the Government a great deal on the matter. The very small total of approved application cases since the start of the SRDP, land managers options and rural priorities compared with the potential number of smallholding applicants demonstrates that clearly. Too many people are put off applying by the complexity of the forms and the labour or anticipated time that is required, or they believe that the options are not appropriate for smaller-scale producers. We are therefore not making the most of the European funds that can be drawn down for crofting. A shortage of time prevents me, I think—

—from covering many of the other issues, but I wish to mention the recent controversy over the Raasay crofters’ traditional shooting and fishing rights.

It is absolutely disgraceful that the crofters who held the let were not offered it in front of anyone else. Why was it taken from them in the first place? As I am not allowed to go any further, I will stop—other than to congratulate Jean Urquhart on securing the debate.

I do not wish to be discourteous, but if the member thinks that the minister handled the situation well, what would have happened if he had handled it badly?

Does the minister agree that the land that he is talking about—the poor land on which crofters farm—is greatly disadvantaged by the fact that it is entirely measured by past productivity, and that some of the things that the land can now produce, such as public good, should also be taken into consideration when looking at the value of the land for the purpose of drawing down payments for areas of natural constraint and other European awards?

I refer members to my fisheries entry in the register of members’ interests. During my time as an MSP, I have spoken in numerous aquaculture debates and my consistent theme has been the need to see the sustainable co-existence of the aquaculture sector and the wild fisheries sector. That remains my position, and I am very glad to say that it seems also to be the strong view of the committee, whose report—as Claudia Beamish quoted—rightly states: “As important as this legislation is, perhaps of equal significance for Scotland in the long-term, is improving the current relationship between the wild and farmed fishing sectors”. On that point, I am encouraged that there seems to be more positive dialogue between Alan Wells of the ASFB and Scott Landsburgh of the SSPO. One cannot blame either of them for supporting their own sector, but the key is surely sensible compromise based on scientific and circumstantial evidence. Both fisheries sectors need to be profitable to help the Scottish economy. As I have said before, a prosperous salmon farming industry will be much better equipped to care for environmental issues than an industry that is hanging on by its fingertips. In that context, we must remember that the salmon farming industry has been afflicted not only by sea lice but more recently by amoebic gill disease. The £10 million that is being spent on treatment of that new salmon plague is part of the £26 million that is spent annually on fish treatments within the industry. I am disturbed by news that Slice is no longer working as well as it did as a sea lice preventative, but I am encouraged by the cultivation of ballan wrasse for use as a cleaning fish, which acts as a non-chemical agent for the industry. As a member of the European and External Relations Committee, this morning I visited Scottish Sea Farms, which was a very enlightening and worth-while experience. Scottish Sea Farms placed emphasis on the need for a national strategy for aquaculture, so I ask the minister to take that on board. The company also talked about the need for a link between production and processors, which does not seem to exist to a great extent at the moment. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I am hugely aware that both farmed fish and wild fisheries businesses are crucial. Aquaculture is a very big part of Scotland’s growing food exports, and wild salmon and sea trout fishing attract substantial tourism income to our communities, with spin-offs for hotels and shops. Having recently spoken to the SSPO, I understand that its ambition is for growth of some 4 per cent per annum. That was confirmed this morning by the Scottish Salmon Company, which said that 4 per cent is on the optimistic side. That is hardly the same as the Scottish Government’s call for a 50 per cent increase in production as soon as possible. I feel that that assertion has caused a great deal of angst among the wild fish interests, who perceive that sudden growth of that nature might have an extremely adverse effect on wild fisheries. A sea loch can only take so much biomass, which is understood well. Will the minister comment on that? The committee called for improved publication of sea lice data, which was mentioned by Alex Fergusson, Graeme Pearson and Graeme Dey. It saw no reason why new transparency measures should not be based on the Irish model or applied farm by farm. Who would disagree with that level of transparency in principle? However, the SSPO has pointed out to me that the matter is complex. It considers that such a policy could hurt individual farms that have reached the testing threshold too often. In other words, people and markets could lose confidence in the product of an individual farm, and the SSPO is therefore trying to protect its members. The SSPO has devised a new sea lice reporting system—which it says is more transparent than any other in the world—which will cover more than 30 areas of Scotland’s west coast and report every quarter. The SSPO compares that with Norway’s system, which tests only nine areas. However, in Norway, the figures for individual farms can be accessed by the public, which is the case in Ireland, too. I have sympathy with the SSPO’s point about individual farmers, but I fail to see why transparency on sea lice burdens should be such a bad thing in Scotland when it is commonplace elsewhere. What is there to hide? According to the SSPO’s principle, a farm that was not burdened by sea lice might find itself tarred with the same brush as one that was burdened by sea lice if it happened to be in the same reporting area. The SSPO’s policy is a double-edged sword. We will see what ensues at stage 2 in the debate on the issue. However, it is important to get the best compromise for all the sectors because, although the past may be important and can be learned from, what is crucial is the future, and the dogma of the past must be put aside. The committee rightly highlights the undesirable impact of escapes of farmed fish. It is vital to have instant reporting on when and where escapes happen. Whatever the technological advances in sea-cage design, the incredible combined power of wind and water will make some escapes inevitable, so mitigation measures are essential. In that regard, I am glad that the committee praised the good work of Marine Harvest in its training of fish farm workers, which is key, as Claudia Beamish suggested. The possible establishment of onshore sites is an interesting development that will doubtless catch on, if successful. I press for more research and development on other species—especially halibut, which do not host sea lice and could be farmed more widely in Scotland. Will the minister explain why there are virtually no salmon farms on the east coast? The SSPO requested that I ask that question. On wild fisheries, the committee is correct to report that we need more data on why east and north coast rivers have increased runs, but most west coast rivers suffer declines. What has happened to the grilse run on the west coast in the past two years? How do we bring back sea trout fishing to the glory days of the past in places such as Loch Maree and Loch Na Sealga in that outstandingly pretty part of Scotland? On the subject of district salmon fishery boards, the Conservatives support the principles behind the good governance requirements, but we agree with the committee that some of the smaller boards do not have the resources to cope with all the proposed requirements. However, those smaller boards have important local knowledge, which is a vital component of good management. There have been good speeches in the debate—Alex Fergusson’s speech warmed the cockles of my heart. I am sure that Lord Foulkes would have had trouble pronouncing illegal cockling, too. We agree with the committee that the bill is a starting point. We look forward to improving the bill at stage 2 so that it is of genuine benefit to the wild fish and the farmed fish sectors.

Bruce Crawford was perfectly right to say that there are very few fish farms on the east coast. I think that I said that there are virtually no fish farms there, but I am prepared to accept that I am probably wrong about that. There is also a smolt farm in Loch Shin, which eventually pours into east coast waters. I think that the SSPO’s question was that, if it is being asked to expand, there is the whole coast of Scotland, so why should everything be put on the west coast?

I thank the European and External Relations Committee clerks for their excellent work in producing the report, which sets out the Scottish Parliament’s priorities for the European Union for 2013. The report brings together the combined interests of our committee and the Parliament’s other committees, the main areas of importance that they have expressed and their assessment of the European Commission’s work programme. I pay particular tribute to the Parliament’s European officer, Dr Ian Duncan, for his work for the committee, and particularly his analysis of the Commission’s work programme on areas of specific devolved relevance and importance to Scotland. One key element of the report is the engagement with our subject committees through the appointment of specific EU reporters for each committee. A wide range of subjects were considered for scrutiny, and in the time that is available to me I will mention a few of them. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee proposes focusing on the proposed environmental, climate and energy assessment framework to enable safe and secure unconventional hydrocarbon extraction, which is sometimes known as fracking. There is a need to respond to the fears and rumours that surround the process and to establish a safe and level playing field across the EU on the production of that energy source. As too many deaths are still attributed to smoking—the figure is estimated to be about 24 per cent of all deaths in Scotland—I was interested to learn of the Health and Sport Committee’s suggestion on raising awareness of tobacco-related mortality. I look forward to that issue coming back before the European and External Relations Committee. As a representative for the Highlands and Islands, the work that the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee has undertaken on the availability of broadband if of particular interest to me, as that is a huge issue in my vast rural region. I therefore welcome the fact that the committee submitted its report on the matter to the European Commission. Ultra-fast broadband networks will, I hope, help to achieve the digital agenda objective of delivering very fast connections to half of European households by 2020. I am, however, concerned that the cut in the EU budget—which incidentally was backed by the Scottish National Party at Westminster—might result in an 86 per cent cut in the telecommunications budget from what was originally proposed. I am concerned that that could affect the roll-out of broadband in remote rural areas. I have already discussed the issue with David Lidington, the Minister of State for Europe, to seek clarification on what it will mean. On top of the cuts to the telecoms budget are the cuts in the structural funds budget. We need to know what those will mean for Scotland. I understand that, as we speak, the Deputy First Minister is in Brussels lobbying for a fairer share of structural funds for Scotland, and I look forward to hearing what she has to say when she comes back. The Justice Committee examined the proposal to ensure that special attention is given to suspected or accused persons who cannot understand or follow the meaning of criminal proceedings because of their age or mental or physical condition. That will tie in neatly with Lord Carloway’s recommendations on vulnerable suspects, which formed part of his review of criminal law and practice in Scotland. Obviously, the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee deals with some of the areas in which the EU has the biggest impact in Scotland, and it dedicated a considerable amount of time to exploring its proposals of interest. Of particular relevance to Scotland is the never-ending reform of the CAP and the CFP, but other issues include climate change, animal health law, waste policy and air pollution. I note that the committee referred to the “Brussels Bulletin”, which is an invaluable tool in helping members to keep up to date with all EU matters. Once again, I congratulate Ian Duncan on its production. On fisheries, I note that the disaster of the mackerel affair with Iceland, which might affect our pelagic fishermen in Scotland, was last discussed in committee by the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee in November 2010. Why is that not a major priority now? The EU sanctions have not yet been put in place and the Faroes now wish to extend their catches enormously in the mackerel and Atlantic herring stocks. That should surely be a priority for our rural affairs committee, as it affects the sustainability of our Scottish pelagic fishing fleet. I call on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee to put that issue high on its future agenda. This is a thorough report that clearly demonstrates the role that our committees can play in European matters. I look forward to their further engagement with the European and External Relations Committee and the forthcoming further report, which will be published in the autumn. The European and External Relations Committee is grateful for the input of the other committees and now knows what their priorities are with regard to EU issues. It will audit the performance of the other committees in achieving their goals on those priorities. We look forward to further reports on progress in the autumn.

Does the minister agree that Scotland already benefits from the expertise that the United Kingdom has built up over many decades in delivering aid to developing countries?

I, too, congratulate Chic Brodie on his very good motion and wish the friends of Seafield house campaign every success for the future in its very worthy cause. The Scottish Conservatives are very supportive of our historic houses and buildings. We recognise their vital place in preserving Scotland’s rich history and culture, and we acknowledge the key part that they play in Scotland’s world-class tourism offering and in attracting numerous visitors to Scotland from elsewhere in the United Kingdom and indeed all over the world. That is particularly true in my Highlands and Islands region, where many jobs, often in remote communities, are sustained by castles and stately homes that are open to the public. In that respect, it was wonderful to see Inverary castle feature so prominently in the “Downton Abbey” Christmas special. I hope that the programme will give the area a big boost and attract extra visitors to a very special town where the local people and businesses depend on the castle. Well over a third of our international visitors cite our heritage and culture as the principal reason for coming to Scotland. Blair castle is a must for visitors to Perthshire, and the same can be said of Glamis castle and Scone palace. Last night, we met members of the Historic Houses Association Scotland at an event sponsored by Graeme Dey. I pay warm tribute to those who are involved in that association for their excellent work. I read with great interest their extremely good, commonsense response to the Scottish Government’s land reform review group. HHA Scotland members provide paid employment to around 2,000 people, and around 2,000 more are in employment as a consequence of the letting of business space by the owners. Its members also offer a wide range of educational activities for young people. There are more than 60 educational programmes, and the fact that the bulk of Scotland’s built heritage is in independent ownership means that, in most instances, that work does not cost the taxpayer anything. We are aware of the significant challenges that the managers of historic properties face in preserving them and making them economically viable. Graeme Pearson highlighted that issue. It is a sad fact that, since 1945, more than 200 of Scotland’s great houses have been demolished and are thus gone for ever. Central Government and its agencies, local government and the charitable sector must continue to work together and develop ever more innovative solutions that allow us to preserve and, indeed, enhance what we have. Alcohol licensing for historic houses could be applied in a more proportionate way. Perhaps the Government might look at that issue. HHA Scotland is also asking the Scottish Government to promote a low-cost, consistent approach to tourism signs across Scotland to stimulate the local tourism sector. Another point that should be remembered is that ancient historic buildings are not necessarily suited to some modern draught exclusion and energy efficiency remedies. For example, double glazing would spoil the look of many historic buildings. Broad-brush measures do not necessarily work; individual solutions must be sought and thought about. Equally, perhaps fire safety authorities might look more carefully at large historic properties in order to find systems that are affordable and which allow the buildings to continue to accommodate habitation. Obviously, human safety is paramount, but buildings without people are like bodies without souls. Not all our historic heritage is about castles and fortified houses. There are very fine examples of architecture in our small towns, such as the wee picture house in Campbeltown, the Rothesay pavilion in Bute and the old burgh hall in Dunoon. I apologise to Ayrshire people for mentioning some things in Argyll. When I travel abroad and meet would-be visitors to Scotland, as I sometimes do, they invariably ask about our built heritage and our exciting, if sometimes bloody, history. Many people abroad go to sleep dreaming of coming to Scotland to see the wonderful treasures, buildings and chattels that we have. We in Scotland must not let them down.

Does the cabinet secretary share the concern of some in the farming industry that the scandal will deter some consumers from eating any meat, even though Scottish pork, lamb and beef are world class, safe, healthy and 100 per cent traceable? Will he consider what extra support he might give to Quality Meat Scotland if meat sales in Scotland show any decline?

Will ministers ensure that they continue to consult hauliers, including livestock hauliers, so that the specific needs of the sector are factored into any agreement?

I am pleased to close today’s debate for the Scottish Conservatives. We recognise that in these challenging economic times the cost of living is a big issue for families across Scotland, not least because of the increasing energy bills that so many of us face. I agree with the comments of Kezia Dugdale and many others on the dangers of payday lenders and loan sharks. I was slightly surprised to hear her chiding John Mason for agreeing with two points that she had made. I thought that the point of debate was to try to get the opposition to agree with you. Anyway, I think that she should be pleased with him. There was criticism of the actions of the UK Government from Chic Brodie, so I want to restate some hard facts for the record. In the most recent autumn statement, the UK Government demonstrated support for those on low and middle incomes by increasing the income tax personal allowance by £235 from April 2013, taking it to £9,440. That is further real progress towards the £10,000 target and it means that another 21,000 Scots will be taken out of tax altogether and that 2.2 million Scots will get a tax cut this April. After April, a Scot working full time on the minimum wage will see their income tax bill cut in half, compared with what they were paying under Labour.

I am horrified at the fact that they are likely to become homeless. Maybe that has something to do with the fact that very few homes have been built by the present Scottish Government.

We have got the lowest house-building numbers for about 20 years. The confidence rating that the UK Government enjoys on the international financial markets and its ability to borrow money at low levels has helped to keep UK interest rates at historically low levels, which has in turn meant lower mortgage rates and mortgage repayments for Scots, which is crucial to the cost of living for many families. Mortgage repayments are much lower than they would have been under Labour, which has no credible plans to get the public finances under control. The cost of fuel has been mentioned and remains a huge issue, especially in my region, the Highlands and Islands. Again, in the autumn statement, the UK Government cancelled the 3.02p per litre fuel duty increase that was planned for 1 January 2013. That means that fuel duty will have been frozen for nearly two and a half years and is 10p lower than it would have been under Labour. In addition, the fuel discount scheme pilot in the Western Isles, Orkney and Shetland has cut the price of a litre of diesel or petrol by 5p for consumers in those island communities. Of course, the situation has not been helped for islanders and hauliers by the Scottish Government taking the road equivalent tariff away from commercial vehicles. That will increase the cost of living for everybody in those areas and has made things difficult for the hauliers that people rely on across the Highlands and Islands. This morning, the Local Government and Regeneration Committee heard from Sir Robert Black, the former Auditor General for Scotland, on the subject of the value of preventative spending, which, if directed wisely, can cut costs in the future, leaving more money for other budgets. Clear thinking on preventative spending is key to saving money in the future. Reducing waste in Government and local government is a good way of reducing the cost of living for everyone else. Helping to grow the economy and create more jobs and economic opportunities is another key way in which the Scottish Government can help our constituents with the cost of living. However, taking substantial sums away from our colleges, removing significant amounts from the housing budget and increasing taxes on business are wrong choices. I again call on the Scottish ministers to make better use of the economic tools that they have and to work with the UK Government to do all that they can to get the economy moving and help to increase our constituents’ incomes so that they can make more ends meet. I support the amendment in the name of Alex Johnstone.

What action are ministers taking to promote the green council tax discount that was suggested by the Scottish Conservatives, whereby people who can demonstrate that their homes are insulated to a high standard will get a discount on their council tax? What is the minister doing to increase take-up of the Scottish Government’s universal home insulation scheme? More widely, what action will the Government take to act on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s recommendation that there should be a one-stop shop approach and a hotline for all the energy efficiency schemes that are available? The minister mentioned supporting the uptake of low-carbon vehicles and electric cars. In addition to that, what support is the Scottish Government giving to hydrogen fuel technology? Lastly, can the minister assure the Parliament that none of his suggested measures will have an adverse effect on Scottish business?

I see that the Western Isles may expect its link by 2015. Does the minister agree that it is unacceptable that the Orkney upgrade will not be ready until 2018 at the earliest?

I am pleased to close for the Scottish Conservatives, and I thank all those organisations that provided briefings for the debate. There are a number of issues that I want to pick up on. Many members have rightly highlighted the importance of Scotland’s biodiversity to tourism and, in particular, wildlife tourism. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I strongly concur with them. Scotland’s landscape and history are key attractions for visitors from within the UK and abroad, but our biodiversity enriches the visitor experience in numerous leisure activities and attracts additional income from bird watching—my colleague Alex Fergusson mentioned seabirds—and natural history study. I add that the sustainable management of our biodiversity maintains the many jobs in remote rural areas that are associated with sea fisheries, freshwater fishing, sea trout, sea angling and country sports, all of which are very important to my region. That is the theme on which developed nations such as Scotland and the UK must lead. They must lead by example in setting and meeting biodiversity targets. That thread has run through the debate, as has concern that the 2010 targets have not been met internationally and that renewed policy effort across the globe will be required to meet the revised 2020 targets and the Aichi targets. As with tackling climate change, if developed nations such as ours are to persuade less developed nations of the necessity of preventing the loss of biodiversity in their countries, we must be seen to be meeting our own targets and protecting our own biodiversity. As Scottish Environment LINK suggests in its briefing, “Continuing to lose biodiversity is not an option in a sustainable Scotland.” We must ensure that our habitats, particularly those in our protected sites, are in a good condition. Biodiversity means making the most of what is around us without spoiling it for future generations, but it is worth bearing in mind that much of the biodiversity, especially in my area of the Highlands and Islands, exists because of the people who have made their livings there for centuries. They have produced it, and they must be allowed to continue to use the same crofting, fishing and farming methods that they have employed for centuries; if those methods are not working properly, they must be allowed to change them. Crofting, fishing and farming have delivered biodiversity in many areas. The trick is to use measures that improve that biodiversity at the same time as improving the lot of the people who live around it, and we should strive for sensible use to be made of European and Government funding to promote agri-environmental schemes that work in favour of biodiversity and the farmer or crofter. A prosperous rural economy will deliver far greater biodiversity than one that is hanging on by its fingernails. I totally agree with Stewart Stevenson’s encouragement of the use of land management options that are relevant. For example, planting crops such as oats can do wonders in sustaining wild bird populations. Rob Gibson talked about fisheries and the debate is all the more pertinent for me because I have just left committee room 5, where the chairman of the Clyde Fishermen’s Association, Kenny McNab, gave a fascinating and formidable presentation on the Firth of Clyde fisheries history for the past 50 years. I am glad that the fisheries minister, cabinet secretary Richard Lochhead, was there to hear that presentation, as well as many of the chief officers of Marine Scotland. The presentation gave an enormous insight into the practical reasons for rises and declines, which do not entirely concur with scientific reports or explanations. As a layman, I say only that those who write the reports on fisheries or on biodiversity should, by all means, use the best science available, but they should also talk to those who have gained practical knowledge during their working lives, because what becomes evident is the need for adaptability and flexibility—moving, for example, from harvesting one fish stock species to harvesting another. However, it seems that the present quota system inhibits that. We want any regulations to help, rather than inhibit, biodiversity. If the rules are not working, let us change them. I applaud Claudia Beamish for highlighting the sea trout in her speech. A revival of sea trout on Scotland’s west coast would indeed be welcome to a great many people. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I was encouraged that Scotland’s peatlands were given more emphasis by Fiona McLeod and in chapter 2 of the Scottish Government’s consultation. As I have argued many times, Scotland’s peatlands are a world-class resource that act as a significant carbon sink. They store 10 times more carbon than all the trees in the UK. We are positive about moves that would enable peatland restoration to be promoted within carbon markets and we will continue to encourage ministers to look at all options that can assist farmers, crofters and other land managers to preserve the peatlands that are in their charge—possibly as an agri-environmental option. Some years ago, I raised concerns in this Parliament about the possible spread in Scotland of sudden oak death, which kills a range of trees—strangely, not the oak tree—as well as shrubs. I urge ministers to remain aware of the threat. Since then, we have faced additional new threats to our forestry resource, such as ash dieback and other diseases, and parasites such as the green spruce aphid, which can cause much damage to Sitka spruce plantations. Tackling the scourge of non-native invasive species is extremely important, as is the debate about raptors, including reintroduced species that may in fact impact on key species of songbirds and ground-nesting birds as well as livestock. It is important that such issues should be taken into consideration and impact studies should be done before reintroductions are made. I agree with other members’ comments about efforts to preserve some of Scotland’s iconic native species such as the Scottish wildcat, which I am lucky enough to have seen two or three times in my life, and the red squirrel, which I am happy to say is on the increase in my part of Argyll. However, the disappearance of the green plover from many areas should be investigated and it is a shame that in many places, we have lost the magic sound of the peewit—in some cases, the curlew and the golden plover as well. Scientists should be able to tell us what has gone wrong so that it can be put right.

I was just going to say that Alison Johnstone mentioned brown hares and I like mountain hares as well as brown hares. The Scottish Conservatives are supportive of practical measures that will protect Scotland’s biodiversity.

I, too, congratulate Rhoda Grant on securing today’s debate. The Scottish Conservatives have consistently argued that our energy should come from as broad and diverse a range of sources as possible. We therefore believe that sustainable biomass has a role in Scotland, albeit one that will clearly be limited relative to other kinds of energy production and which will often be particularly successful at a smaller scale and at community level, where it is most appropriate for heat-only or combined power plants. Sustainable biomass also offers a potentially viable alternative option for many of the 30 per cent or so of Scottish households that are not connected to the mains gas grid, many of which are in our remoter regions. Although we can support electricity generation and heat production from sustainable biomass—and there are some good existing examples of that across Scotland, such as the mid-Argyll community pool in Lochgilphead, forestry housing at Whitegates, and many other examples across the Highlands and Islands—the schemes must be efficient, cost effective and, of course, compliant with all the relevant environmental regulations. Rhoda Grant is right to highlight the genuine concerns of the wood processing industry—especially in our own region, Highlands and Islands—about the possible impact of any substantial expansion in large-scale biomass. Experts have warned for some time that there is not enough indigenous wood fuel supply available to meet possible future demand in Scotland and that, if biomass supplies are limited, there is a risk of significant levels of imports. We must try to match wood supplies with demand for biomass products so that biomass can be truly sustainable. We should also bear in mind that biomass feedstock from Scotland could be used for biomass electricity production in England and Wales, especially if other generators decide to press ahead with existing proposals to develop or increase biomass use at coal-fired power stations in England and Wales. I am also very aware of the importance to many rural communities of the jobs that come from processing timber into solid wood products. Other members, including Rhoda Grant, have pointed out that wooden products act as a carbon store and their use, for example in the construction sector, can displace more carbon-intensive materials such as concrete and plastics. I read with interest Confor Scotland’s practical response to the ROC banding review consultation, which states that biomass “should complement not displace existing wood users”. I am also sympathetic to its view that local energy generation can provide more jobs than large-scale biomass power generation. I echo Angus MacDonald’s concerns about the possibility of diseases coming in with wood imports. Especially in the light of the recent past, we must be very careful about that. The key outcome that we should be aiming at is to achieve some biomass schemes that allow us to meet our energy needs and energy targets without hitting other parts of the wood-processing sector that are very important to our rural economies. That will be no easy feat. We look forward to the Scottish Government considering carefully and responding to the recent consultation on the renewables obligations banding review.

I have not pressed my button.

I pressed it in order to ask a supplementary question after question 1.

What funds are available for SMEs in relation to the commercialisation of academic and scientific research in Scotland?

To many people, it seems ridiculous that we are having a strike at all, given that there is no requirement for compulsory redundancies and all 36 employees who are involved have applied for voluntary redundancy. I feel that passengers and people in the islands will blame the minister for not having brought about a settlement. The minister talked about helping passengers to use other operators and about those who are booked on Aberdeen-Orkney-Shetland services. Can he give me some more details on that?

As we have heard, there are mixed views on what was achieved at the Doha talks. However, it was nice to hear the minister talk of an “effective UK delegation”, and I thank him for that. The UK Government described the outcome of the Doha talks as a “modest step forward”, with the main points of the deal focused on extending the Kyoto protocol and on compensation for poorer countries that are affected by climate change. The UK is to be commended for helping to forge agreement among other countries and for leading by example in making firm commitments of financial support to assist developing countries with the transition to low-carbon development and growth, and with adapting to climate change impacts that cannot be avoided. I acknowledge the Scottish Government’s commitment to climate justice. However, more progress will be required in order to secure continuation of international funding after 2015. Although most Governments remain optimistic that momentum has been maintained towards achieving a new legally binding agreement for 2020 after the Kyoto protocol has expired, further agreement will need to be reached on that. UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon announced in Doha that he would convene world leaders in 2014 to mobilise the political will that will be needed to ensure that deadlines are met. We know about the Scottish Government’s failure to meet its annual target for 2010. As WWF argues in its briefing, if the Scottish Government is to seek to set an example to other countries that aspire to low-carbon development, it must step up its efforts to implement our Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. That will involve cutting emissions from all sectors of the Scottish economy, but particularly from homes and transport, on which there is real concern because emissions are higher now than they were in 1990. Housing and transport emissions make up almost 40 per cent of our total emissions. Just how challenging cutting emissions is going to be was clearly demonstrated again this week when Scottish ministers dropped their target to reduce emissions from newly built residential properties by 30 per cent and replaced it with a 20 per cent reduction target. That is a clear example of how the ambition to reduce emissions can be tempered by the reality of challenging economic conditions, and it illustrates the challenges that all governments face in striking a balance between achieving aims such as making our buildings greener and increasing the burden that is placed on industries such as construction. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I once again flag up the importance of Scotland’s peatlands, which are of international significance. Healthy peatlands act as a sink for greenhouse gases. Ministers need to look continually at how they can help Scotland’s land managers to preserve those vital assets. We recognise the tough tests that lie ahead in building on some of the intentions that were agreed to at Doha. We are also aware of the challenges that the Scottish Government faces in reducing our own emissions, which is important if we are to influence other countries. I agree with Claudia Beamish’s point that it is the poorest and least complicit who face the greatest challenge, and it is important that those who are more fortunate help with that. I cannot remember who suggested walking children to school; I think that it was Claudia Beamish, again. That is okay in urban areas, but it is more difficult in the country. However, I note that the wearing of good Harris tweed that is woven in the islands provides me with heating that is most sustainable.

I am pleased to speak in the debate and I am delighted that the Scottish Government and party business managers retrieved the debate after it was displaced by the debate on Leveson. I found the cabinet secretary’s statement very helpful, so perhaps that was a blessing in disguise. It is right that we have the annual debate, as the outcome of each December’s EU fisheries negotiations remains vital to Scotland’s fishing communities and the jobs and livelihoods that depend on them. Many of those communities are on the North Sea coast and in the remote rural and island communities of the Highlands and Islands. We agree with the Scottish Government that the suggested 20 per cent reduction in North Sea cod in this year’s proposals is not acceptable. Scientific evidence shows that the North Sea cod stock is recovering well and that the biomass of the stock has doubled in the past five years. A further 20 per cent reduction in catching opportunity would lead inevitably to a significant increase in discards, which everybody is trying to avoid. It would also risk destroying the almost discard-free catch quota scheme, which is producing positive results. The Scottish fleet has shown itself to be one of the most responsible in Europe. Since I have been in this Parliament, it has done masses of work on enlarging the mesh size of the nets and experimenting with different types of cod end in the trawl nets. It has also installed escape panels in the nets. All those measures have helped to minimise discards and have assisted the cod recovery plan, but they are all measures that prevent the fleet from catching fish. I therefore put it to members that that is a real sacrifice in the name of conservation. In some instances, video cameras have even been installed to ensure that there is evidence of the right things happening. How many other European fleets have done as much as our Scottish fleet in the name of conservation? A rollover of this year’s total allowable cod catch is vital and will allow the stock to continue to recover sustainably with continued and realistic progress on discard reduction. We welcome the increase in quota for some key North Sea stocks such as haddock, but we have real concerns about the quota reductions in some important stocks off the west coast, including megrim, monkfish, whiting and hake. We also have concerns about the recommendation for a zero TAC of Rockall haddock. For those skippers who have traditionally fished the west coast white-fish stocks from Oban, Mallaig, Lochinver, Kinlochbervie and Scrabster—their number has drastically reduced compared even to 10 years ago—those proposals fly in the face of their practical experience, which is that the stocks of those species are in better shape now than they have been for 10 years. Given the Scottish fleet’s efforts on conservation over the past decade, which are among the best in Europe, and the severe overall reduction in boat numbers and in the effort of those fishermen who are left, we cannot afford to see yet more year-on-year TAC cuts. Total fishing effort in kilowatt days by Scottish white-fish vessels fell by more than two thirds—69 per cent—between 2001 and 2011. The EU fisheries deal must ensure a sustainable fishing industry, as well as sustainable stocks for those boats that are left. That is the purpose of my amendment. I want to make some points on behalf of my west coast prawn fishermen constituents further to my questioning of the cabinet secretary last week following his statement. They faced the possible closure of the west coast prawn fishery for six weeks from 21 December. Thankfully, it looks like a last-minute compromise deal has been reached that will avoid the crisis. However, that deal will completely close the fishery for two weeks, from 21 December to 7 January, after which it will then allow fishing on only four days a week. The fishermen are being done out of a lot of effort through no fault of their own. The cabinet secretary said last week that not even he could have predicted the lack of prawns in the North Sea this year, which caused the east coast vessels to migrate to the west coast prawn fishing grounds. The point is that, since May, the west coast prawn fishermen and their representatives have been warning him and Marine Scotland about the impact that that was having. In the nicest possible way, I ask why it has taken so long to settle what should not have been a difficult issue and to protect the artisanal fleet. Why should they have to put up with a compromise when I am led to believe that the cabinet secretary previously assured them that, if vessels had quota remaining, he would ensure that they would have days at seas to catch it? Will he guarantee that that problem will not be repeated next year? West coast fisherman and the fish processors who depend on their catch deserve better than a compromise. I will close by referring to the CFP reform proposals. What can the cabinet secretary do to ensure that the “where possible” proviso on the maximum sustainable yield is reinserted into the plan? Scotland’s mixed fishery means that it is simply not possible to achieve a maximum sustainable yield for all stocks at all times. The cabinet secretary must make the EU recognise that reality. How can ministers persuade their EU colleagues that discards are a complex issue and ensure that the regulation that is achieved is practical and deliverable? Should the real focus not be on ensuring that fishing mortality is at sustainable levels? My colleague Alex Fergusson will talk about the catch quota scheme and its success in reducing discards, but it must be borne in mind that only 26 boats in the demersal fleet are involved in what is a pilot scheme. That scheme has already had the unintended consequence of putting up the price of the leasing of cod quota for other boats and vessels.

I am just finishing, Presiding Officer. Will the cabinet secretary tell members how the pilot scheme will become an overall scheme? We wish the cabinet secretary every success. I move amendment S4M-05172.3, to insert at end: “; recognises the outstanding work that is being carried out by the Scottish fishing industry to preserve its longevity and the sustainability of fishing stocks; further recognises that the Scottish fleet has recently carried out an enormous amount of work with conservation measures such as experimental cod-ends, escape panels and net mesh sizes; encourages the Scottish Government to continue to work alongside the UK Government to promote the use of initiatives such as the catch quota trials and selectivity measures in technical net design and real-time closures, and believes that the use of such initiatives should avoid further penalties being imposed on Scottish fishermen at a time when they are already doing their utmost to conserve fish stocks in innovative and successful ways.”

I agree with Rob Gibson’s point, but trawler fishermen would put it to him that creels fish 24 hours a day and tend to pick up the prawns that he is talking about, which are the large female ones, whereas a trawler may go over a piece of the seabed when the prawns are not up and not catch anything.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that rather than have these annual gladiatorial battles every December, we need to adopt multi-annual plans for the key target fish? The council seems to be blocking all multi-annual plans based on the extraordinary argument about who does what under the terms of the Lisbon treaty. What can the cabinet secretary do about that?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Scotch beef and Scotch lamb share protected food name status, but it appears that Quality Meat Scotland spends much more money advertising Scotland’s wonderful beef than it does advertising Scotland’s equally wonderful lamb. Will the minister increase the funds that are spent on the promotion of lamb, while not decreasing the funds that are spent on the promotion of beef, to give a much-needed boost to Scottish sheep farmers?

I thank the minister for showing me his statement. I am glad that he will argue for a rollover of this year’s total allowable catch figure and will also push for a freeze on the annual reduction on days at sea. The cabinet secretary says that the west coast prawn fishers will be provided with options to stay active through to the end of this effort year. Bearing in mind the fact that the Scottish Government has known about that problem since May, can he give some specific details of those options? Does he recognise that Marine Scotland’s suggestion about the fishers using flexible grids fitted to each net is not acceptable on safety grounds and because of the unsuitability of such grids in the west coast sea areas? Also, is the cabinet secretary concerned that the “where possible” proviso for the maximum sustainable yield element of the reformed CFP has been dropped? Does he agree with the fishing industry representatives that an MSY for all stocks at the same time is simply unachievable and how will he ensure that we get practical legislation in that area?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. How will we explain to Scottish fishermen that we have abandoned the most important annual debate on fisheries in order to debate regulation of what fish suppers are wrapped in?

Will the minister give an update on the progress that the Crofting Commission is making on creating a simple and practical template form for grazings committees to use as part of their duty to report under the 2010 act?

I am pleased to close today’s debate for the Scottish Conservatives. There have been some good, amusing and interesting speeches from members across the chamber. I pay tribute to our former colleague, Dennis Canavan, who has consistently campaigned to raise the profile of St Andrew’s day. The Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs asked Annabel Goldie for a list of celebrations and I will come on to that a bit later. I once pointed out to the amazement of Dennis Canavan that Eton College—that unobtrusive school between Windsor and Slough in Buckinghamshire—which educated our Prime Minister and some lesser politicians has, for centuries, celebrated St Andrew’s day as a holiday. The reason it does that is to recognise the importance of Scotland and its people as part of the family of nations in the UK. The segment of Scottish boys at the college was usually larger than that from Ireland or Wales. On that day, the unique Eton wall game is played between the scholars and the oppidans, in which opposing scrums push a ball backwards and forwards along a brick wall, and a goal is scored perhaps every 20 years. It is similar to Orkney’s annual game between the uppies and doonies. There are plenty nil score draws of the sort mentioned by Roderick Campbell. However, the point is not the winning; it is the celebration and the continuity. A number of members, including Joan McAlpine, have talked eloquently about the history of St Andrew and the saltire. I want to enlarge on what she said, and remind members exactly how the saltire became our flag. Precisely 1,180 years ago, in the summer of 832 AD, King Angus the Second, leading a combined army of Picts and Scots, faced a greatly superior force of invading Northumbrian Angles at Athelstaneford in East Lothian, which is just 20 miles from the chamber. The village, which takes its name from the Anglian King, King Athelstan—who would be killed in action that day—is home to our national flag heritage centre. It is housed in a 16th century lectern doocot, built in the reign of King James VI, in whose person the crown of the Scots and the Angles would finally be joined not in battle, but in amity. Of course, that was followed by a political union, 104 years later, but it got things going in a united direction. The centre is at Athelstaneford because, on the morning of the engagement, as Joan McAlpine said, white clouds appeared in the blue sky overhead and united to form a tremendous X-shaped cross—a crux decussata—above the field of battle. I do not think that it was a UFO. The omen was taken by King Angus to be a sign of favour from St Andrew, the brother of St Peter, because it was in the form of the diagonal cross upon which the saint had been martyred at Patras in Greece. Our arms being victorious on that day, the king decreed that our national flag should be, in heraldic terms, a silver cross upon an azure field—that much beloved emblem of our nation. The Scottish Conservatives are, like members across the chamber, fully supportive of efforts to promote our world-class contemporary and traditional culture through Scotland’s winter festivals, which begin on Friday—on St Andrew’s day. We recognise that tourism and other businesses can need extra promotion during the winter months. That extra promotion is good and we want to see a continued focus on boosting winter tourism in Scotland. Like other members, I wish to highlight some of what is on offer in my own region, in my case the Highlands and Islands. The Highland wildlife park at Kingussie will be free to visit on St Andrew’s day, and children can enjoy free swimming at a range of Highland Council swimming pools as long as they are accompanied by an adult. Historic Scotland will have a St Andrew’s day ticket giveaway and entry to many Historic Scotland attractions across the country will be free over the weekend of 1 and 2 December. I hope that many of my constituents and visitors to the area can take advantage of those offers. I liked Margaret McDougall’s speech. She mentioned haggis, but since St Andrew was a fisherman it would surely be appropriate to celebrate his day with festivals of fish across Scotland. After all, we have scallops, herrings, prawns, mackerel, haddock—we have the best fish in the world but where are the festivals? We do not have many festivals. Funnily enough, Willie Coffey mentioned Santa Cruz and I have been to Santa Cruz during the week of the sardine festival, which it has every year. It is a tremendous event, bringing thousands of people there, and it is generally a great success. Scotland is such a beautiful place that it always sells its beauty, but the trick is to give people more excuses to come here to appreciate that—winter festivals are great for that. I am pleased to welcome this year’s focus on Scotland’s internationally renowned reputation for literature through book week Scotland—again, I hope that many of my constituents will take part in that. I am delighted that some of my young constituents in Shetland, who are primary school pupils, will be going to care homes for read-aloud sessions—they will read exciting stories to the elderly people in the homes. I commend Shetland Arts for co-ordinating that. The Campbeltown library is today hosting a Bookbug session, with songs, stories and rhymes for babies, toddlers and their parents, and a similar event is planned in Stornoway library tomorrow. I hope that book week Scotland will be a boost to the many small and independent publishers and book retailers in Scotland who face such intense pressure from huge competition online. Things are difficult for them. Scotland—particularly Edinburgh—has such a wonderful worldwide reputation for publishing, which goes back for centuries. In fact Audubon’s “Birds of America”, which was sold the other day for £8 million—I think that it is the most expensive book ever published—was published in Edinburgh. We should not forget things like that. Today’s debate has been, for the most part, useful and constructive. I support the amendment in the name of my colleague and friend Annabel Goldie, which rightly recognises that Scotland can enjoy the best of both worlds on St Andrew’s day as well as on every other day, celebrating the patron saint who helps to underpin our identity but doing so in the context of our partnership of nations, which is our United Kingdom.

Would the cabinet secretary perhaps refer to the extra ingredient as “the saltire X factor”?

I, too, congratulate Linda Fabiani on securing today’s debate. I have much sympathy with the humanitarian points that she and other members expressed. I put on record my party’s recognition of and thanks to the organisations that have been mentioned that give support to asylum seekers in Scotland. I am particularly aware of the good work of Positive Action in Housing, which is ably led by Robina Qureshi. I declare an interest in that I have personally donated to that organisation and taken part in demonstrations against early morning break-ins. However, asylum policy is obviously an extremely difficult issue that requires calm and serious consideration. We would all agree that many of those who come to Britain to seek asylum have been through terrifying experiences. However, the current position is that asylum seekers can apply for permission to work only if they have not received an initial decision on their claim within 12 months. That is in line with the current requirements of the European Union directive on the reception of asylum seekers. It is my understanding that the UK Government has no plans to reduce the time period to six months or to extend access to the labour market to all asylum seekers who have been refused asylum but who face a temporary barrier to their return. The UK Government fears that extending the permission-to-work policy in that way would risk abuse of the asylum system by economic migrants and would detract from the aim of encouraging those whose claim has failed to return home voluntarily. Through the asylum improvement project, the UK Government is focused on implementing new ways of speeding up the processing of applications while improving the quality of decision making. Overall, performance has improved recently. In particular, the Border Agency is making decisions more quickly and is consistently deciding more than 60 per cent of asylum cases within 30 days without sacrificing quality. As we are all aware from the media coverage this morning of the new report from the Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration, the Border Agency needs to make much greater progress. Nevertheless, we have seen a significant improvement compared with what was left to us by the previous Labour Government. Therefore, although I can agree with parts of Linda Fabiani’s motion and have enormous sympathy with the open your eyes to refugee destitution campaign, I am unable to sign up to the motion completely. I believe that the focus must be on securing an asylum system that is fair and measured and which, crucially, deals with cases in the shortest possible time so that some of the problems about which we have heard today are not suffered by asylum seekers waiting months for a decision to be made.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what assistance Historic Scotland provides to support and regenerate conservation areas. (S4O-01501)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the Robert Adam planned village of Inveraray in Argyll and Bute is a fantastic example of a thriving conservation area and a popular tourist destination? Is she aware of the need for about £3 million-worth of building repairs to the historic buildings of Inveraray, including the avenue arch and the courthouse? Will she join me in expressing the hope that Historic Scotland will respond positively to Argyll and Bute Council’s recent application for funding support to restore and maintain Inveraray’s built heritage under its conservation area regeneration scheme?

In light of the continual landslides and blockages on the A83 at the Rest and Be Thankful since 2007, with the problem recently exacerbated by heavy rain, when is the relief road due to be completed? On 19 July, in reply to my written question, the Minister for Transport and Veterans said: “The works are programmed to start in August and be completed by November 2012.”—[Official Report, Written Answers,19 July 2012; S4W-08320.] It is 20 November and there is no sign of completion. Will the minister apologise on behalf of the Government to the people and businesses in Argyll and Bute who are affected by the continual closures? Will he explain why the promise that was given has been broken and give us an update on progress towards completion of the relief road, so that we can keep a vital lifeline route open?

Does the Government think that farm support schemes should recognise and reflect the value and public good of peatlands on farms and crofts?

I am pleased to open for the Scottish Conservatives in the debate. I, too, congratulate Humza Yousaf on his new ministerial role and the Government on its choice of subject for the debate. I thank the organisations that have provided useful briefings for the debate, including Oxfam Scotland. My colleague Murdo Fraser will reflect on his experience of visiting Malawi when he speaks later. Like all parties, the Scottish Conservative Party recognises Scotland’s strong and historic links with Malawi. Scots have helped the people there for at least 150 years through missionary work and aiding the development of basic health and education systems. We also recognise the good work that is being achieved thanks to Scotland’s financial support in that nation and the substantial support from the UK Government, which will average £93 million a year until 2015. We are aware of the significant challenges that are currently faced by Malawi, which is among the very poorest countries in the world—it ranks 171st out of 187, according to the latest United Nations human development index report—and we are aware of the potential for ever-increasing challenges in the future due to climate change, projected significant population growth, and the impact of HIV/AIDS. Scottish and UK Government support is very important. Oxfam Scotland made a strong point in its briefing in saying that it is imperative that projects that are funded by Government are sustainable so that they can carry on when that funding comes to an end, if it ever does. I am happy to support the Government’s motion and Labour’s amendment, but I want to use the opportunity that is provided by the debate to highlight the contribution of Scotland-based charities. I was slightly disappointed that my amendment was not accepted, but I take this opportunity to praise in the most positive terms—as Patricia Ferguson did—the truly amazing work that the charity Mary’s Meals does in Malawi. Mary’s Meals is based near my home village of Dalmally in Argyll and Bute, and was founded by my inspirational constituent Magnus MacFarlane-Barrow. Malawi is where the work of Mary’s Meals began in 2002 and where it now provides daily meals for more than 500,000 children who attend primary schools or under-six centres. We should all be proud that that means that a Scotland-based charity currently feeds 20 per cent of the primary school population in Malawi. The key to Mary’s Meals’ success is its close work with local communities when establishing school feeding projects. Everyone including chiefs, teachers, parents and church leaders is involved in the process, with teachers and parents organising a pool of volunteers who take turns cooking and serving meals, and Mary’s Meals providing the kitchen, cooking equipment, training, on-going support and, of course, regular supplies of likuni phala—the nutrient-rich maize-based porridge. Each project is monitored by Mary’s Meals’ staff to support the volunteers and to ensure that all is going as it should. Mary’s Meals knows how to achieve excellent value for money—it costs just £7 for it to feed a child for a whole school year. I am delighted that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Mike Russell, recently visited some of the school projects in Malawi. The work that Mary’s Meals’ under-six centres do is equally important. Many of the Malawi children who attend those centres are orphans. The children stay until around 3 pm and receive two meals: porridge in the morning, and a maize and vegetable stew before they leave. Two meals are provided because their young age makes them more vulnerable to the effects of malnutrition. The volunteers teach them songs and rhymes, and introduce them to counting and the alphabet. The aim of that early introduction to education is to encourage later enrolment in primary school. The children are also regularly visited by a Mary’s Meals nurse, who provides treatment for parasite infection. I commend my nine-year-old constituent Martha Payne from Lochgilphead, whose blog recently helped to raise about £115,000 for Mary’s Meals. As members will have seen from the media, Martha recently returned from visiting Lirangwe primary school in Malawi, which will benefit from a new kitchen thanks to her fundraising. I hope that Martha’s example will encourage many others to raise funds for Mary’s Meals and other third-sector organisations that make such a difference. This debate is useful and welcome, and I look forward to Scotland and Scottish charities continuing to play a positive role in Malawi.

Do ministers factor in the relative underfunding of Orkney, compared to funding for the other island authorities, when addressing other Government grants and funding streams? What has happened to the special island needs allowance?

5. To ask the Scottish Government how it assesses whether the provision of ferry services is adequate for the residents of Islay. (S4O-01390)

Will the minister urge CalMac to respond to the wishes of local residents and businesses on Islay and Jura for their ferry services? Above all, will he ensure that the extra sailing to and from Islay that has been introduced for the winter timetable will be kept for the summer months?

I formally apologise to the Presiding Officer and members in the chamber, especially Willie Coffey, for missing the start of the debate. I congratulate Willie Coffey on securing today’s debate. On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I extend our sympathies to the Armstrong family on the passing of one of the truly iconic figures of the 20th century and truly the bravest of the brave. The landing on the moon was unforgettable to those who experienced it. Our generation had in some ways been conditioned to expect and await that achievement by space programmes, including the fictional “Star Trek”. The importance of man going where man had never trod before was taken for granted and it was felt that it was worth every penny; it was never questioned that it was the right thing to do. Seeing William Shatner, or Captain Kirk of the starship Enterprise, speaking on “Hardtalk” on the BBC the other night, I was reminded of how his crew was made up of so many different nationalities, including of course a Scotsman—who will ever forget “Beam me up, Scotty”?—all trying to contribute towards a force for good. Although it was fictional, it was indeed inspiring and space travel gripped the world audience in a way that it does not do now. The moon landing was a wonderful moment for Scotland and the United Kingdom, as the name Armstrong has such strong connections to the Scottish Borders, where Neil’s kinsmen originally came from. As well as creating excitement, the moon landing created a sense of optimism that man could look beyond mere earthly realms to a future of exploring the universe through international co-operation. Willie Coffey is right to highlight Neil Armstrong’s family connections to Scotland. In 2009, I highlighted in a parliamentary motion the award from the University of Strathclyde of an honorary doctorate for William S McArthur Jnr, one of the most distinguished and impressive astronauts in recent NASA history and currently director of safety and mission assurance at the Lyndon B Johnson space centre and a winner of the NASA space flight medal and NASA distinguished service medal. I met Mr McArthur a few years ago, as he too has Scottish connections, through family roots in Argyll. I contacted him again in advance of today’s debate and I will quote what he said: “On 1 July 1969, I entered West Point. My class faced a future dominated by Vietnam and the Cold War. On the evening of July 20th, finishing our third week as New Cadets, we marched en masse to a large auditorium to watch the Apollo 11 moon landing. It was stirring to witness such a positive achievement in the context of the dangerous future which we, as future Army leaders, faced. Did the Moon landing that night inspire me to be an astronaut? Not immediately, but it certainly firmly planted the idea that this was the pinnacle of human endeavour. The professional, unassuming way in which Neil Armstrong served provided an example we all strove to emulate. As my career progressed and the opportunity to apply to be an astronaut opened, the example set by Neil and his fellow early astronauts set the benchmark against which all of us aviators and engineers were measured. Many years later, lecturing Cadets in that same auditorium, I felt humbled to have had the opportunity to have followed along the same path travelled by Neil, if only for a short distance. Not to the Moon, but at least out of the grasp of gravity, to view earth from orbit. Each mission, one more “small step” for humankind.” I thank Bill McArthur for sending me those words. Neil Armstrong’s achievement and legacy continue to inspire people of all ages across the planet. Now, people’s attention is switching from the moon to Mars, the red planet, and I noted on the BBC website that the roving robotic laboratory that is exploring the red planet has identified an area that they have called Glenelg and that the people of the Highland village of Glenelg have seen fit to twin with that. So, I hope that the Martians will one day come and enjoy a good dram with their counterparts opposite the isle of Skye.

Will the minister set out more details of what support the Scottish Government is offering businesses to reduce their reliance on energy from fossil-fuel sources? Will he join me in commending the work that is taking place in the Scotch whisky industry—the biggest investor in renewables in Scotland outside the utility sectors—which is confident that, by 2020, 20 per cent of its primary energy will be derived from non-fossil-fuel sources? As the Scottish Government’s failure will make future targets even more difficult to achieve, what will he do to make up the ground that has already been lost?

Does Mike MacKenzie agree that one of the problems with buyouts is not so much capital funding—which can be found—but revenue funding, which is needed later on?

I congratulate David Stewart on securing the debate. I am also very happy to pay tribute to all of my constituents on Gigha and members and supporters of the Isle of Gigha Heritage Trust for the efforts that they have made and are continuing to make to create a sustainable and successful island community. I agree with David Stewart that the success of Gigha is an inspiration to other rural and island communities. The population on Gigha is rising and the excellent primary school has 13 children, which is a testament to the health of the island and is something that we can all celebrate. Gigha is a beautiful island in a wonderful setting and I encourage my MSP colleagues and others who are listening to visit it to experience Gigha for themselves. They can be sure of a very warm welcome and excellent hospitality, whether at the Gigha hotel or at the various bed and breakfasts or self-catering cottages. The island’s Achamore gardens, golf course and clean sandy beaches are just some of the attractions that are available to the tourists. Achamore gardens are a testament to the memory of Sir James Horlick. He was a good laird and a founder of the famous malty drink, which had the slogan “The Great Family Nourisher”. Sir James Horlick was a great nourisher and a great philanthropist with a reputation as a good landlord who used his fortune to promote schemes on the island to help employment there. I welcome to the public gallery the celebrated Mr Peter Joynson, who for some 20 years was factor for Sir James Horlick on the Isle of Gigha. He has many happy memories of the island, of the people and of his former employer, who I am sure would be happy to see the Gigha community thriving once again and the population increasing. Renewable energy remains a big and often controversial issue across my region, so the example of Gigha is worth highlighting as one of success. On Gigha, the three Vestas V27 wind turbines—known locally as the dancing ladies—enjoy widespread community support, with the Gigha residents controlling the whole project and the profit being reinvested in the community. It has been so successful that local residents are seeking to erect a fourth turbine to join the current three. No one on Gigha thinks that renewables developments are incompatible with tourism—rather, they complement each other. Although I agree that valuable lessons can be learned from Gigha, not least in terms of community empowerment, which we all support, and the development of a practical island master plan that has helped to foster economic development, we are cautious about calls for further legislation on land reform and we remain unconvinced that yet more legislation in this field is required or desirable. We should recognise that Gigha has succeeded within existing land reform laws and we should seek ways of improving how those laws operate. We should also recognise the vital importance of the ferry link between Gigha and Tayinloan, which has come under pressure of late. The islanders deserve a ferry service that encourages tourism and their lifeline activities. The Gigha buyout was not a hostile buyout—rather, it was encouraged by seller and buyer alike—and I have to pay tribute to previous Argyll and Bute MSP George Lyon, who gave a great deal of his time to the project. It is very seldom—there are no Liberal Democrats in the chamber today—that I praise the work of Lib Dem MSPs, but in this case it would be churlish of me to not recognise the part that he played. While I am talking about politicians, or famous people, I note that David Stewart mentioned Professor Jim Hunter, who got to his feet recently at a meeting in Stornoway after one of the SNP people had spoken and said that he was tempted to vote Conservative, so there we are.

I will conclude by wishing my constituents on Gigha continued success in the future. They are to be congratulated for proving that determined and dynamic community effort can make even the smallest and remotest island communities sustainable and economically successful.

Will the minister join me in welcoming Historic Scotland’s recent funding support for Campbeltown’s historic wee picture house? What other support can that cinema receive to allow its restoration project to go forward?

I refer members to my agricultural interests in the register of members’ interests. I welcome the opportunity to close in the debate for the Scottish Conservatives and I thank the organisations that have provided useful briefings. There have been some good speeches in the debate, including from my friend Alex Fergusson, who set out our approach to CAP reform. There has been consensus among speakers of all parties on a number of key issues, with support across most of the chamber for the retention of the direct payments, which are so vital to so many of our farmers and crofters, and for LFASS payments—now called areas of natural constraint payments—to retain primacy over the SRDP over the life of the next programme. We recognise that the move towards equalisation or convergence of pillar 1 payments across Europe so that member states receiving less than 90 per cent of the EU average will move closer to that figure has the potential to be a real boost to Scotland, which has an average payment of around €125 per hectare, which is way below the EU average of €260 per hectare.

In a minute. The current system is simply unfair to Scotland, as we receive the fourth-lowest share of pillar 1 funding and, for that matter, the lowest share of pillar 2 funding in the whole of Europe, as many members have pointed out. The convergence must also be reflected within nation states as well as between them. That will mean a better deal for Scotland compared with the current system in the other nations of the UK, and a larger regional development fund going forward. Can the cabinet secretary set out the timescale for the convergence that he supports? Does he agree that the transition period should be as long as possible so that farmers and crofters can adapt to new systems of support, which is something that Commissioner Ciolos seemed willing to agree to on his visit to Scotland last week? We also support calls for a continuing national reserve—not just a one-year reserve; we need one that can support new businesses and those that are locked out of the historical base for single farm payments. On the rural development programme, NFU Scotland is entirely correct to call for “more accessible schemes” and “easier application and inspection processes”. Farmers and crofters, especially small-scale operators, require practical, user-friendly options that involve the minimum bureaucracy. That should apply across all agriculture support schemes. The point was made strongly to me recently in discussions with Sybil McPherson of the National Sheep Association Scotland. Ministers must be ready with bridging arrangements for all parts of rural development support until the new scheme comes on. LFASS is crucial to my region, the Highlands and Islands. We agree with the NFUS that the new areas of natural constraint system should be built on the principle of LFASS, with support going to the people who most need it, subject to an appropriate stocking requirement, to ensure continued agricultural activity. The retention of stock numbers in marginal hill and island farms and crofts is critical and direct support to protect production will be required. I am glad that deer farmers have at last been included as legitimate recipients of SFP. Does the minister envisage an increase in deer farming in Scotland as a result? Members were right to mention the growing importance of food security and I agree with them that feeding the world’s growing population will become a bigger and bigger issue. I can give way to Mr Thompson now, if he wants to intervene.

We will do everything that we can do to bang that particular drum. A theme that has run through the debate is flexibility, which will need to be embedded in many aspects of the proposals, so that the reformed schemes can be appropriate to Scotland’s conditions and requirements. In that context, will the cabinet secretary please take on board my constituents’ concerns about the potential exclusion from the eligibility criteria of non-herbaceous forage, such as heather and seaweed, which is a forage crop for sheep in some areas, especially Shetland and other islands? Such an exclusion would be most unfair for farmers who farm in such areas. In the debate in January on the same subject, I said: “Getting the CAP reform right and getting the fairest deal possible for Scotland are fundamental to the future of farms and crofts throughout Scotland and to the communities that depend on them.”—[Official Report, 18 January 2012; c 5397.] That remains the case. The cabinet secretary will have our support if he can achieve that, working closely with the UK Government. I support the amendment in Alex Fergusson’s name. Mr Fergusson asked the cabinet secretary who would pay Scottish farm subsidies were we to be an independent state and not a member of the EU, but I did not hear an answer. Will Mr Wheelhouse have a conservative stab at one when he sums up?

Can ministers give any support to livestock producers, including pig producers, who face large increases in the cost of feedstuffs, partly as a result of the circumstances about which we have heard?

I, too, congratulate Graeme Dey on securing this important debate. I also commend all my constituents throughout the Highlands and Islands who participated in this year’s national spring clean. The extent to which local residents across the Highlands and Islands got involved is demonstrated by the fact that there were around 40 spring clean sessions in Argyll and Bute alone, which involved 1,934 children and 591 adults. Participants in the sessions included a wide variety of groups and individuals, including the staff at Loch Fyne Oysters at the head of Loch Fyne, who organised a beach clean-up early in April. Rumours that they found a pocket book that belonged to Gordon Brown are unconfirmed, although there was a mass of sweetie papers underneath where John Prescott had been sitting. The spring clean sessions also involved school pupils from numerous schools, including Strachur, Kirn, Toward and Strone primaries and Dunoon grammar school. It is fantastic to see such a strong volunteering spirit. All of us would want that sense of community pride to be repeated in next year’s spring clean and, indeed, would ideally like it to become an effort that is repeated throughout the year. I have been chairman of the Loch Awe Improvement Association since 1992. I remember the first clean-up that we had, in 1993, which was organised by our volunteer wardens. It resulted in more than 1,000 black bags of rubbish being filled from the banks of Loch Awe, which somewhat overwhelmed Argyll and Bute Council. I send a wish to the council that it should back up the efforts of volunteers to clean up areas of great beauty by providing litter bins free of charge. I take the opportunity to thank the retired schoolmaster at Eredine in Argyll, Donald Beckett, who has devoted so much of his own free time over many years to pick up litter left by others so that the public can enjoy the banks of Loch Awe. All of us in the chamber support the aims of Keep Scotland Beautiful. Although clean-ups are vital in removing the presence of litter and improving the condition of our communities for local residents and tourists alike, all of us would also support tackling the scourge of littering itself, because prevention is better than cure. Keep Scotland Beautiful is to be commended for the work that it does in that regard in our schools and communities. Where adequate litter bins and receptacles are available, we should all back a zero tolerance approach to dropping litter. Councils could play a better part by providing more litter bins and emptying them more regularly. In Inverness, Keep Scotland Beautiful is working in conjunction with Highland Council and the Inverness business improvement district to tackle the littering of cigarette butts on streets and pavements. As well as the visual blight, cigarette butts can become trapped between paving stones, can be washed into drains and can cause blockages, which in turn lead to flooding. They also leak toxins that contaminate water and can harm marine life. Many smokers believe that butts are biodegradable, but due to their plastic content they can in fact take 10 to 12 years to degrade. Highland Council is also to be congratulated on the campaign that it is running to prevent people from dropping their used chewing gum on the streets. I make a plea to yachtsman off the coast of the Scottish mainland and the islands not to throw their plastic rubbish over the side. It all gets washed up on beaches—especially in the Clyde estuary—and it is a blight on the beautiful scenery and a danger to wildlife. The Scottish Conservatives are happy to support Graeme Dey’s motion and the work that Keep Scotland Beautiful is doing across the country. We hope that the spring clean 2013 will be an even greater success and will encourage local groups, schools and individuals to become involved in taking practical action that can make our localities more attractive and better for residents and the tourists who come to our country.

3. To ask the Scottish Government how businesses can benefit from being part of business improvement districts. (S4O-01248)

The minister may be aware that, in Argyll, Oban businesses are currently voting on whether to establish a BID in the town, with the result of the postal ballot due in early October. Will he join me in paying tribute to the BID4Oban team, who are seeking support from their fellow businesspeople for their positive proposal? Does he agree that a BID in Oban has the potential to boost the local economy and support local retailers, as has happened through BIDS elsewhere?

Does the member have any idea how much of Highlands and Islands Enterprise’s budget, publicly funded by us, goes into revenue funding?

I agree that buyouts are marvellous, but how can they be made to produce revenue?

I welcome the opportunity to make the closing contribution on behalf of the Scottish Conservatives. I thank those organisations that have provided useful briefings for today’s debate including Planning Aid for Scotland and the SCVO. There have been some good speeches from members on all sides, including my friend Margaret Mitchell, who laid out our general approach to the matters under discussion. Our broad-brush approach is that while we absolutely support the empowerment of communities and their renewal, the argument is still to be conclusively made that these should be matters for legislation, instead of strategic decision-making by Government, backed with resources and practical assistance. Legislation empowering communities will not, in itself, result in the desired outcome. As I have indicated, there are many themes in the consultation document that the Scottish Conservatives are happy to support and which are supported by members of all parties. Indeed, many of the themes also mirror those associated with the big society being promoted by the Prime Minister and the UK Government. The big society consists of people who volunteer their time and effort to make things happen. Never has that been more evident than at the recent Olympic games, where countless volunteers—or games makers, as they were called—took part in helping and guiding the athletes and visitors and in the outstanding ceremonies that opened and closed both the Olympic games and the Paralympic games. It is interesting to note that many more people responded to the call for stewards than responded to the call just for volunteers, which shows how vital it is to label voluntary positions correctly, giving people a far greater sense of achievement and value in what they are doing.

Of course, that is absolutely true. I will move on from there. I was only pointing out that they were a successful Olympic games and that David Cameron is a successful Prime Minister. Let us hope that the legacy of the volunteer spirit, having been rekindled, continues for many years to come. We agree that those who deliver our public services must work with communities to design and deliver those services around the communities’ needs. That should go without saying. We welcome the fact that ministers have said that they wish to strengthen opportunities for communities to take independent action to achieve the goals that they have decided that they want to achieve. Like other members, I am very positive about the role that the third sector can play in community planning and the delivery of local services. There is merit in the suggestion in the consultation document that each public sector authority should have a named, accountable officer who is responsible. We support the concept of housing tenants engaging more with their local authority or registered social landlord. Like other members, we are also positive about providing communities with space for allotments and community gardens, recognising that that can lead to better health through good diet and exercise. We would support practical proposals to enable communities to make greater use of unused and underused properties, but we would want appropriate and genuine protection for the owners of private land who may wish to utilise it in a different way in the future. A number of members have taken the opportunity to highlight examples of good practice in their constituencies and regions, and I will do the same. Just last week, the small but vibrant community of Craignish, in Argyll and Bute, was commended in the community involvement category of the Scottish awards for quality in planning for its community plan. The judges described the plan as an “excellent example of how communities can work together to deliver a good quality land-use plan for a small amount of resource”. I congratulate all my constituents who were involved. It is not the first time that I have congratulated the people who live in the Craignish peninsula, including those in Barbreck glen, Craobh Haven and Ardfern. It is one of the strongest communities in Argyll and Bute and has a volunteering ethos that is second to none. I also pay tribute to the work of community councillors throughout my region. As Planning Aid for Scotland suggests, community councils require support and training, as they are the only community group with a statutory role in the planning system. Our manifesto last year sought to boost the role of community councils by requiring local authorities to allocate a budget to them that was proportionate to the size of the area that they cover, so that they could undertake their own projects. The Scottish Conservatives encourage as many people as possible to make responses to the consultation. We will assess the results of the consultation carefully and the subsequent draft bill that ministers have pledged to produce. The ministers will have to ensure that, at all times, they are not just introducing more or disproportionate red tape, bureaucracy or regulatory burdens that serve only to disempower communities and people. I end on a more positive note. I was delighted to hear the minister stress the importance of enabling people to start managing their own projects in their local communities—at least, that is what I think I heard him say. I was also delighted to hear Mike MacKenzie’s excellent point about practice being just as important as theory and Margo MacDonald’s point about soup. Soup rivals the invention of penicillin in importance.

Will the minister give details of discussions that he and his officials have had with Serco to ensure that the transport of livestock to and from Orkney and the export of fresh produce from the islands, including shellfish, remain key considerations in the service contract, given the importance of those industries to the Orkney economy and the islands’ reputation for quality?

I thank the minister for an early copy of his statement and note his deep disappointment that a more ambitious programme was not agreed. That is echoed by The Economist, which suggests that the move to scrap fossil fuel subsidies, which have rocketed in recent years to a cost of more than $400 billion per annum, was buried, making it all but meaningless. The Economist also notes that the WWF has highlighted that the draft agreement said “encourage” 50 times but “we will” only five times, and “support” 99 times but “must” only three times. Does the minister agree with those assessments and the assessment of the EU Commissioner for Climate Action, Connie Hedegaard? She tweeted: “Telling that nobody in that room adopting the text was happy. That’s how weak it is”. On the positive side, there was political ambition for change. How will the minister ensure that that ambition is not squandered? Does he agree with the UK Government that the main sustainable development goals should cover food, water and energy, as well as his aim for climate change justice, which we commend?

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on charging shoppers 5p per plastic carrier bag. (S4F-00811)

We all agree with the aim of reducing use of plastic, but does the First Minister agree that efforts should be focused on the carrot rather than on the stick—that we should focus on incentives rather than just impose yet another tax on hard-pressed Scottish consumers? What is his response to the concerns of the Scottish Retail Consortium, whose director has stated that an obsession with carrier bags, which account for a fraction of 1 per cent of household waste, must not get in the way of the much more significant goals, such as reducing the carbon footprint of thousands of everyday products? If the First Minister’s Government goes ahead with this punitive tax on Scottish people, will the funds that are raised be used to tackle the spread of litter, which he has mentioned and which is the real cause of the problem? Will the funds also be used to encourage use of reusable bags, such as this lovely ladybird bag that I have brought into the chamber to show members? [Laughter.]

What is the minister’s response to urgent concerns that renewable energy developments by communities and individuals are being hampered by a lack of grid connection availability?

Will the minister join me in welcoming Scottish Water’s best practice incentive scheme, which seeks to protect water supply quality, for example at Loch Ascog on Bute? Could that scheme be extended elsewhere?

Although I am happy to congratulate the cabinet secretary on his undoubted stamina and ability to stay awake, I begin by doing something that he failed to do: I recognise the highly significant role of Richard Benyon MP and the UK Government, without whose voting power the outcome in Scotland’s interests would not have been achieved. The Scottish Conservatives recognise and welcome the fact that progress has been made on regionalisation, but on discard bans—something that we all want to see—are the timescales realistic? Given that the cabinet secretary is aware that the pioneering work of Scottish fleets is a work in progress, is the declaration of statutory end points rational? How will he ensure that measures to reduce discards are practical and deliverable by Scottish fishermen in our mixed fisheries? Will the cabinet secretary join me in commending Scotland’s prawn fishermen, who this year have pioneered trawls that can reduce discards by up to 70 per cent? Does he agree that that type of practical approach to fisheries management is what is needed?

As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I congratulate Liz Smith on securing this debate on an important subject, and on being on the verge of completing the ascent of all the Munros in Scotland, which is no mean feat, to say the least. I pay tribute to all the mountain rescue services in Scotland for the lives that they save and thank them for the personal risks that they take in order to do so. Like the men and women of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, those men and women are heroes and members of the finest of clubs, with the highest of principles. I particularly commend my local mountain rescue team in Oban, which is often out on Ben Cruachan, and the Glencoe mountain rescue service, which does so much. I cannot leave the chamber without mentioning Hamish MacInnes of Glencoe—a man who is revered in mountaineering circles and who, with his colleagues, has brought help and succour to so many people in distress. I commend his writings on mountaineering to those who have not been lucky enough to read them. If ever a service could be said to be an outstanding example of the best of the big society, it is the mountain rescue services of Scotland. They have earned the gratitude of so many. Long may they continue to do so.

The Scottish Conservatives always welcome the opportunity to debate fishing policy and how it can be reformed to help secure the jobs of fishermen and all the associated jobs that boost the sustainability of Scotland’s fishing communities and the people who live in them. I thank organisations such as the SFF, the Fishermen’s Association Ltd, WWF Scotland and RSPB Scotland for the useful briefings that they have provided for today’s debate. There is clear consensus that the CFP is not entirely fit for purpose and, indeed, has in many ways been immensely damaging to fish stocks and fishing communities. Although we all want genuine and substantial reforms, we need to achieve a new policy that is workable and coherent and helps our fishermen instead of working against them. None of us should underestimate the size of that challenge. We welcome the recently announced concordat between the UK Government, the Scottish Government, the Welsh Assembly Government and the Northern Ireland Executive, as a result of which each nation will be allocated annually agreed shares of UK quotas for distribution to their fleets. As the UK fisheries minister, Richard Benyon, has made clear, this is “a significant step forward” for our fishing industry and I commend the UK Government for working so constructively with the devolved Administrations to secure the agreement. As the head of the SFF, Bertie Armstrong, said recently: “Within the EU the UK has somewhere approaching 30 votes. ... we are very much less concerned about who sits in the seats. We are absolutely concerned in every detail about what is said and what is on the speaking note for the minister or his representative to speak on matters of fisheries.” The UK has a lot of clout, but the UK line must be worked out beforehand through inclusive talks involving all the devolved parts of the UK and fisheries management must be co-ordinated. The UK fishing line must have decent bait at the end of it. The new concordat is entirely in keeping with our consistent general position on CFP reform. The policy needs to be fundamentally reformed to ensure that centralised, top-down, bureaucratic micromanagement at EU level, which has, in many cases, been disastrous, is replaced by flexible regional and local management. We also want a reduction in discards, and the conservation industries and the industry itself to work in co-operation; indeed, both those aims are supported by the Parliament’s Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee and the UK Government. Although some elements of the EU’s July 2011 CFP reform proposals are steps in the right direction, we share the concerns expressed by the SFF and others about significant parts of the proposals that will not properly deliver the decentralisation that we all want. The concept of an MSY target is correct, but the aim of achieving it by 2015 is probably unrealistic. Any MSY targets must be set after long-term management plans are agreed for all fisheries and must be based on scientific evidence or the precautionary principle. With regard to discards, we have supported the Scottish Government’s catch quotas trials. We all want a reduction in discards, but we must seek to tackle the issue in a flexible way that recognises the diverse nature of mixed demersal fisheries. Indeed, in some fisheries such as nephrops, a one-size-fits-all outright ban could lead to greater mortality because fishermen will be forced to land the undersized prawns that they used to throw back into the sea alive. Indeed, I can assure the chamber that I have witnessed that very thing being done on a prawn vessel belonging to my late lamented friend Charles McLeod, who was so famous in the Skye and Lochalsh fishing community and who on two occasions was kind enough to take me as supercargo on his vessel. Others have voiced the fear that if fishermen are obliged to return their entire catch, a market for undersized fish—something we would not want—could be created. As the SFF has made clear, a total discards ban is akin to banning the symptom rather than attacking the disease itself, given that discards are caused by the fact that the volume and proportion of fishing opportunities set under the current CFP process fail to match the ecosystems’ realities. Never has a truer word been spoken. I hope to touch on a number of other issues in my closing remarks but, in the meantime, I must put on record my praise for the conservation efforts of Scottish fishermen over the past few years. They have led the way in the EU, most notably in their adherence to the cod recovery plan. Because they deserve credit for such moves, which have been widely recognised, including by environmental organisations, I have lodged the amendment in my name. I move amendment S4M-03163.1, after “conservation,” to insert: “while recognising the enormous efforts that the Scottish fishing fleet has already made in complying with conservation measures, to”.

Does the member agree that although decentralisation was the key recommendation arising from the extensive debate in the European Parliament on the green paper on CFP reform, there is very little reference to it in Mrs Damanaki’s new package?

All members have accepted the failure of the current common fisheries policy. The challenge will be to deliver regionalisation in practice without simply creating an extra layer of bureaucracy. The SFF is correct to suggest that excessively prescriptive regulation in that area could be harmful. I want to speak for the Scottish pelagic sector—mentioned by Hanzala Malik and Alison Johnstone—which has seen some benefits from the CFP. Its interests must be protected in the reform, as it is an important part of Scotland’s fishing industry; in some cases, it also provides much-needed employment in processing fish in other faraway parts of the world. It is also a sector that does not generally have such a large by-catch problem. Protecting its interests is part of the difficult balancing act that we need to achieve. Many members talked about reducing discards, and we all support that. However, to repeat my earlier comments, we need to be careful about how we achieve that in our mixed fishery. Although we can be ambitious in our aims, we must ensure that we deliver something that works in practice. The direction of travel and the success of the final result are more important than meeting any arbitrary deadline that is set by the EU or anybody else. Flexibility is the key word to produce sustainability of stocks in different areas of our seas. We need to continue to support our fishermen to allow them to buy new selective gears to minimise discards. Why should Scotland’s fishing fleet bear so much pain when its record on conservation is the best in Europe? I mentioned that in a speech that I made in 2001. I take the liberty of quoting myself: “It is especially galling that Scotland’s fishing fleet, the only one in Europe to have adopted conservation measures—such as square-mesh panels aimed at protecting the 1999 class of fish—should pay the biggest penalty for the failure of other Governments to persuade their fishing fleets to do the same.”—[Official Report, 18 January 2001; c 328.] Other member states have now come on board, but Scotland’s fishermen led the way. They should be commended and rewarded for doing so, and helped in their promotion of sustainable stocks. We have heard a lot of support today for the concept of maximum sustainable yield. Again, we need to be realistic with regard to how that can be achieved in practice. Although the aim is correct, we need to recognise the difficulty of achieving that aim for all species in a mixed fishery. No one in the industry believes that it will be possible to achieve that by 2015. The goal of multiannual, multispecies plans is supported by all, but they will take time to achieve, and getting that right is crucial. Some of my fishing constituents wish me to ask a number of questions of the minister, and I hope that he will be able to address some of the issues in his summing-up speech. How will ministers ensure the retention of the relative stability principle—which was mentioned by Annabelle Ewing—in the forthcoming period of the CFP, bearing in mind that that is what has given Scotland a large percentage of the haddock catch in the North Sea? Given the ordinary procedure or co-decision between the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament, and the 600 or so amendments that were tabled to the initial Commission proposal, how confident is the minister that the UK and Scottish requirements will find their way into the final legislation? On the two key issues of maximum sustainable yield and discards, will the minister ensure that the radicalism that is being talked about does not lead to regulations that are, in practice, unworkable and unachievable? Also, will he ensure that the needs of the artisanal smaller shellfish fisheries of the west coast are fully taken into account? May I make the same request for the white-fish boats that fish off Scotland’s north-west coast, many of which are being forced to fish outside Rockall in dangerous waters because they do not have enough quota inside?

We are in touch with the minister the whole time. The point is that the UK line is what is important. Today’s debate might seem to be about fish, but it is about deciding the future of people who are reliant on the fishing industry. Fishermen, fish processors and their families are the ones who will suffer if Governments do not get the right solutions. The Scottish Conservatives stand ready to support the Scottish Government’s approach of securing regionalisation in the CFP, so that regions have a genuine and significant role in fisheries management, without having continually to refer back to the Commission. We wish the minister well in his forthcoming talks and encourage him to work closely with the UK fisheries minister, as well as with the devolved Administrations in Wales and Northern Ireland; surprisingly, they were not mentioned by Mark McDonald in his rant about the value of having three to four votes rather than 29 to 30 UK votes supporting our line. I know what makes sense to me.

Will the cabinet secretary address the point that I made earlier, which was that although decentralisation was the key recommendation that arose from the debate in the European Parliament on the green paper, there is hardly any reference to it in Ms Damanaki’s new package? It seems that member states will now be allowed to decide on mesh sizes and discards policy, rather than on the wider, day-to-day management policies, which have been so bad for the sector in the past.

What assessment have Scottish ministers made of the effectiveness of the Scottish outdoor access code?

19. To ask the Scottish Executive how it is supporting further and higher education in the Highlands and Islands. (S4O-01087)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that the first commercial spin-out from the University of the Highlands and Islands—Greenspace Live Ltd, which was created to commercialise research that was generated at the Greenspace Research hub at Lews Castle College in Stornoway—recently became a fully fledged company. How will the Scottish Government encourage other commercial spin-offs from the excellent work that is going on in the UHI?

I, too, congratulate Aileen McLeod on securing the debate. I also thank WWF Scotland and RSPB Scotland for their very useful briefings. I hope that all of us in this chamber—perhaps I had better say this Parliament—wish the upcoming Rio+20 summit every success and agree with the seven key areas identified as priorities. I am particularly pleased that food security and sustainable agriculture will also be discussed, because feeding and watering the world’s growing population will become a bigger and bigger issue for all Governments as we go forward and risks becoming a major cause of conflict and, indeed, a threat to peace. I am happy that the minister in attendance this evening will attend the summit as part of the UK delegation—in fact, I am jealous of him. It is right that all the nations of the UK work together on these global issues. The First Minister has said that climate change should be a major theme for Rio+20. I hope that members on all sides will recognise the UK Government’s commitment to climate justice. The UK Government has committed to £2.9 billion of international climate finance specifically to help developing countries to pursue low-carbon growth and adapt to the impacts of climate change. The UK Government is to be commended for seeking to lever in private sector investment to tackling climate change in developing economies, notably through the capital markets climate initiative—the CMCI—which aims to unlock the private sector’s ability to help to meet the estimated £100 billion of new green investment that will be required annually by 2020 to tackle climate change in developing countries. The UK Government has said that it is ambitious for the summit. Caroline Spelman, who will lead the UK delegation, has rightly argued that our economic, social and environmental security—our future wellbeing—relies on tangible outcomes from Rio+20. The earth summit in 1992 is often described by commentators and historians as a major turning point in global understanding and awareness of the human impact on the world’s resources and the environment, and thank goodness for that. In most countries, the concept of sustainable development has become a mainstream one, which stems in large part from the 1992 summit. All of us hope that in 20 years’ time, Rio+20 is seen to have achieved concrete results that have helped countries, including those in the developing world, to achieve the lifting of living standards through environmentally friendly economic growth that makes sustainable use of the world’s precious natural resources without ruining them for future generations.

9. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to build affordable housing in the Highlands and Islands. (S4O-01047)

Will the minister join me in welcoming the news that Argyll Community Housing Association will begin work next week on new-build affordable homes at Dalmally in Argyll and Bute? Despite the good work that is done by ACHA, however, does the minister agree that too many people are having to wait too long to get affordable homes in Argyll and Bute? What action will ministers take to ensure that new affordable homes are built in the most rural and remote island communities as well as in towns and the larger villages?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive, in light of the potential impact on the construction industry, what its position is on the UBC Group entering administration. (S4O-01004)

I thank the minister for that answer, but is he aware of the particular concerns about the loss of 90 UBC jobs in the Western Isles, which the leader of Western Isles Council, Angus Campbell, has described as being “a devastating blow” for the economy of the Western Isles? Last week, when the First Minister announced 90 new jobs for the Western Isles, he said that that number “would equate to several thousand jobs”—[Official Report, 10 May 2012; c 8832.] in a city the size of Edinburgh. What specific support can the minister offer the Western Isles and those 90 workers who have been made redundant?

I congratulate Christine Grahame on securing the debate. I refer members to the motion that I lodged on the same subject over a year ago, which attracted cross-party support. On 22 February 1638, a huge crowd assembled in Edinburgh’s Greyfriars kirk to hear King Charles’s proclamation brought from London by the Earl of Traquair. A young man jumped on to an upturned barrel to get a better view as Archibald Johnston of Wariston, black-robed in his lawyer’s gown, delivered the ultimatum that the new prayer book must be used in every Scottish kirk. Standing beside the barrel, John Leslie, the Earl of Rothes, said: “James Graham, you will never be at rest ’til you are lifted up above the rest in three fathoms of a rope.” Those proved to be prophetic words. James Graham stands out as one of Scotland’s famous heroes. He was part heroic and part notorious but, in my view, more a hero. Christine Grahame talked about his great poem, which is an allegory of Scotland. As well as being a military genius, he was an inspired poet. I will not repeat all that Christine Grahame said, but the last two lines state: “That dares not put it to the touch, To win or lose it all.” Those are immortal words. I am told that they may well have inspired Rudyard Kipling’s poem “If”, in which the first two lines of verse 3 state: “If you can make one heap of all your winnings And risk it on one turn of pitch-and-toss”. Graham demonstrated promise and, indeed, notoriety at an early age. He was the only boy among six girls, his mother apparently having consulted witches to get the much wanted male heir. I just drank lots of port. He swallowed a toad whole, and a neighbour told his father that “this child will trouble all of Scotland.” Graham spent part of his childhood at Rossdhu on Loch Lomond—his sister Lilias having married into the Colquoun family—where he became fit climbing the hills to hunt the red deer. While living at the Graham family seat of Mugdock Castle in Milngavie, he would ride to Glasgow University on his white pony. Later, while studying Greek at St Salvator’s College in St Andrews, he won a silver medal for archery. Graham defeated six armies of covenanters. For people who want to know more about that, I recommend that they read the forthcoming thriller written by my friend Murdo Fraser, who is sitting next to me. The book will shortly be available in bookshops. Graham was an unconventional commander, invading Argyll in winter when traditionally the fighting season was closed. However, in December 1645, he took the advice of an Irish priest in his army, who pointed out that, as the wind was from the east, the weather in Argyll would be good. For the assault, Montrose was joined by Irish troops under the leadership of Alasdair MacColla MacDonald—probably a relation of Lewis Macdonald—who was son of the legendary Colkitto, and often called Colkitto himself. Incidentally, kitto means ambidextrous. Colkitto was a giant of a man and wielded a sword with a sliding ball weight of 10 pounds. On the way to Inveraray, he got the MacNabs of Barachastlain to sharpen his great weapon and those of his men. Colkitto and Montrose made a three-pronged attack on Inveraray and roundly defeated the Campbells. Argyll himself only escaped on a boat over Loch Fyne because of the east wind which blew him up the loch, otherwise he probably would have lost his life. At the battle of Inverlochy, Montrose led his men from the front in one of the greatest flanking marches in British military history, and surprised the Campbells by coming from the back of Ben Nevis. The ambidextrous Colkitto reputedly beheaded Campbell of Auchinbreck with one blow of his mighty sword. History does not relate whether that was a left-handed forward drive or a right-handed haymaker. The combination of the brain of Montrose and the brawn of MacColla was unstoppable.

Oh, right. When MacColla left, Montrose was greatly weakened and was caught unprepared at Philiphaugh. It was dreadful that he was hanged as a common criminal rather than executed as a nobleman. The final words of that loyal and highly principled man were: “God have mercy on this afflicted land”, his beloved Scotland.

I thank the organisations that provided useful briefings for the debate, including Save the Children, Barnardo’s Scotland, Children 1st and Children in Scotland. Like other members, I declare an interest as a proud father. I have six children—that is not bad for a Protestant. My eldest is 23 years old and my youngest is five years old. I hope that they will all be Conservatives one day, but who knows? The Scottish Conservatives know that a child’s early years are key to their future. I am very lucky to come from a happy family, and to have a happy family. I do not mean to say that a family should not argue, but families should be taught that argument is better than fighting. It is vital that children develop and achieve their potential. We recognise that virtually every parent will need support at some stage in the parenting experience, with particular assistance required for parents who face the most acute challenges and difficulties. When she was our party leader, my esteemed colleague, Annabel Goldie, was right to talk about the obligation on politicians to help the people who struggle most with parenthood. We are proud that our manifesto committed to moving £20 million from the health budget to provide more and better support for new parents through a massive increase in home health visiting services. On a personal note, my wife, Emma, gave me some input for the debate. She made a valid point that specific time should be set aside when children and parents can sit down together, without the distractions of electrical gadgets, gaming kits or televisions, and have proper conversations. Most people would agree that it is important that children are listened to by their parents, and that they learn the art of conversation from an early age. Some games, toys and gadgets can isolate children in an unreal fantasy world that can lead to loneliness and unhappiness. Instead, we want children to integrate with children their age in team events, in group activity, and, above all, in conversation. I have had many memorable conversations with children in the Parliament and at school outreach events, especially at primary schools. The children are often shy, and teachers are too quick to step in to ask the questions or answer for the children. What a joy it is sometimes to be asked by an articulate child an articulate question that inspires a conversation with others on the merits or the lack of merits of certain subjects. Young, articulate children can easily embarrass politicians, and they are a credit to those who parent them and those who teach them. They are the seed of a sustainable, civilised society, and that is why my friend Nanette Milne’s amendment on teachers is so valid in the debate. I support the statement in the Barnardo’s Scotland briefing that the parenting strategy must include all those who have a parenting role, including the corporate parent. Neil Bibby pointed that out. Looked-after children have some of the worst outcomes in Scotland. In many ways, the parent who needs the most support appears to be the corporate parent. Children without natural parents have so many disadvantages. It is up to a caring Government to ensure that their corporate parent is provided with every possible means of improving the lives of those children and giving them hope for and excitement about their future. I thoroughly agree with Aileen Campbell’s aspiration to make Scotland the best place in which to bring up children. If she could do something about the weather, it might help. I support the amendment in the name of my colleague Nanette Milne.

What is the Scottish Government doing to encourage an integrated system of fallowing of fin fish cage sites in sea lochs? Has it taken note of the fact that wild salmon and sea trout stocks in particular west coast areas are declining while east coast stocks appear to be rising?

Mike MacKenzie said that the Conservatives have a small number of candidates. I tell him that we have candidates in all the wards in Argyll and Bute Council and in every ward across the Highlands and Islands.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The member has misled the Parliament by saying that Conservative candidates are independent candidates. If I may say so, he is talking rubbish.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on concerns raised by residents of Islay regarding the frequency of power cuts on the island. (S4O-00910)

I thank the minister for his detailed answer. Nonetheless, is he aware that Islay, particularly the Portnahaven and Port Charlotte end, is still suffering from power cuts? The most recent was last weekend, and it cannot be blamed on the weather. Will he make strong representations to Scottish and Southern Energy on the matter? My constituents in the area are understandably losing patience. Islay is hugely important to our economy, so I am sure that the minister agrees that it deserves a proper electricity infrastructure.

I thank those organisations that provided useful briefings for the debate. Oddly, I did not get a briefing from Private Eye, but I hear from the minister that he uses it for his research. I respectfully suggest that he should also cast his eye over The Economist, a magazine that is universally respected for its economic wisdom, including, of course, in relation to transport. Today I spoke to West Coast Motors, which is based in Argyll and produces good services for the people of Argyll who use the buses. The people there asked, in essence, for no more regulation, but a better thought-out, better funded concessionary system, because that system is apparently costing them a lot of money. I emphasise that the Scottish Conservatives are fully committed to regular, efficient and affordable buses in urban and rural districts in Scotland. We recognise that such services are crucial to many of our constituents, who rely on them for commuting, shopping and visiting and seeing their friends and relatives. Bus services are also important for many of the tourists who come to Scotland, including to my region, the Highlands and Islands. We are very clear that private sector operators play a big part in delivering those services and, because of deregulation, many Scots have a choice between operators on routes. Deregulation has been a success. We are proud of it and the Labour Party is simply out of touch and backward in calling for reregulation. If reregulation is so important to the Labour Party, why did it not do something about it in the eight years in which it was in power in Holyrood? The reality is that reregulation would simply burden the bus operators with yet more bureaucracy and divert money away from services—something that we would all want to avoid. The ill-thought-out underfunding of the concessionary scheme is adding to local government costs and to the price of bus fares for people who use the buses. Alex Johnstone has set out our position on the cut in bus service operators grant, and I agree with him. We are aware of the concerns that are being expressed, especially about services in the Lothians, about which we have heard a lot today. MSPs from that region are, understandably, speaking up for their constituents. At the same time, the Scottish Government is trying to get better value for money from discretionary grants such as BSOG. We, of course, would want that to happen, but the Government should at least assess how services throughout Scotland have been affected by the changes that it has made to the scheme and be ready to be flexible with it as we go forward. We want there to be continuing, regular and genuine dialogue between ministers, their officials and the bus companies on BSOG and the concessionary fares scheme, about which they are all talking. We also support the Scottish Government’s desire to use BSOG to encourage bus operators to provide the most fuel-efficient vehicles possible and to consider using biofuels if that works. A number of members mentioned fuel costs. They impact on all forms of public and private transport and remain a big issue throughout Scotland. My constituents in the Inner and Outer Hebrides, Orkney and Shetland are being assisted from this March by the 5p cut in the price of a litre of diesel or petrol that the UK Government introduced. That did not happen in 13 years of Labour Government. The UK Government will monitor the impact of that pilot and determine whether it might be replicated in future. I liked Patrick Harvie’s speech. He talked about the motor industry. Perhaps we will see high-level talks between the Scottish Green Party and Jeremy Clarkson. I agree whole-heartedly that we should listen to the people who use the buses and, to some extent, take their advice on future services.

I congratulate David Stewart on securing the debate. It will be up to the Scottish and Westminster Governments to make up their minds about what to do with the Crown Estate’s responsibilities but, whatever happens, that will be an extremely important decision that must not be taken lightly. The motion endorses the Scottish Affairs Committee’s conclusion that recommends ending the Crown Estate Commissioners’ responsibilities in Scotland. Apparently, its view is that marine and coastal assets should be devolved to local community level. What does that mean? No detail is provided. The Crown estate is a very strategically important and unique national asset, and its handling requires great thought and detail. The Crown Estate has recently spent considerable amounts of money in places such as Tarbert and Rhu. That money did not come from Crown Estate revenues; it came from Crown Estate capital. Where would local communities get that kind of spending firepower? We should bear in mind that all revenues from the Crown Estate in Scotland go to the Treasury, which allocates 10 per cent back to the Scottish population, even though it accounts for only 8.3 per cent of the population of the UK as a whole. That represents a gain straight away. By the way, Scottish Crown Estate revenues are approximately £11 million or 3.4 per cent of the UK Crown Estate revenues of about £205 million. Any capital spending has to be paid for from capital assets, so it may sometimes seem that the Crown Estate is selling more assets rather than investing in new ones simply because it has to spend capital rather than revenue to get things done. For example, last year it paid out £1 million for dealing with the winter damage to the buildings in Glenlivet. It should also be borne in mind that the capital value of the assets of the Crown Estate in Scotland is in the region of £280 million, whereas the value of the UK assets of the Crown Estate is in the region of £7 billion. Is it wise to get rid of this huge cash cow, which can produce highly significant investment when and where it is needed, without taxing anyone to do so and with the Crown Estate revenues still coming to Scotland with the cream on top? I think that members should think very hard about those points. I agree with Alex Fergusson’s points about localism. Professor Jim Hunter has been mentioned. Anyone who has read his book “Last of the Free: A History of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland” would agree with Tavish Scott that Edinburgh taxes are liable to be much worse than London ones.

Will Kenneth Gibson give way?

Will Kenneth Gibson give way?

I am glad that Labour has chosen to debate the subject of the long-awaited Scottish ferries draft plan and I am especially glad that it has focused on a Lochboisdale to Mallaig service. Ferry services are vital to the people who live on our islands. As other members have done, I urge my constituents in the Highlands and Islands, including supporters of a Lochboisdale to Mallaig service, to ensure that they make their views known to the Scottish Government by the time the consultation closes at the end of next week. It is extremely important that ministers hear loudly and clearly the views and concerns of people and businesses that use the ferries. I agree with members who have talked about the crucial nature of regular, affordable and reliable ferry services for remote and island communities. The viability, sustainability and economic development of those areas are strongly tied to the connectivity that the ferries provide. I am aware that the Government is emphasising that the proposals in the draft plan are all just suggestions, but it is a matter of regret that quite a number of the details of the plan have caused concern and alarm in parts of my region, and that only the vaguest of references is made to introducing a Lochboisdale to Mallaig service. As others have said, the Scottish Crofting Federation has described the review as “lamentable” and has said that its general thrust seems to be “one of withdrawing and diminishing routes in peripheral areas.” I share the concern of the SCF and of other MSPs about the possible withdrawal of the vehicle ferry between Kilchoan and Tobermory and the review of the popular route between Mull and Lochaline, and I strongly support Mary Scanlon’s comments on the Mallaig to Lochboisdale route. That service would increase choice for local residents and tourists and could be a real plus not just for South Uist but for all of the Western Isles. I want also to emphasise the importance of the existing services from Oban to the Western Isles. May I make a special plea for my constituents on the Isle of Barra, including Angus Brendan MacNeil MP and Councillor Donald Manford? They might both vote SNP, but should they not have a better service than one that runs on only three days a week? In addition, I will take this opportunity to speak up for my constituents in Mid Argyll, with reference to Kenneth Gibson’s speech. Many of them are deeply worried about the possible removal of the ferry between Claonaig and Lochranza on Arran. That could hit the economy of both Mid Argyll and Arran and would completely remove connectivity between Argyll and Arran. It would also leave Arran without any ferry services if there were any problems at Brodick. An additional service that is suggested in the plan can be cautiously welcomed—namely the service between Campbeltown and the Ayrshire coast. That is an idea that I and my colleague Councillor Donald Kelly have backed consistently for some years. It would be a positive move for Kintyre, given that successive Scottish Governments have patently failed to make any progress in re-establishing the Campbeltown to Ballycastle service that existed under the Conservatives. However, local people in Campbeltown and Kintyre are very clear that a route between Campbeltown and, perhaps, Troon should run for five days a week, thereby becoming a popular service. I hope that the ministers can take that idea on board. In conclusion, today’s short debate has been welcome and useful in allowing members to speak up on behalf of their constituents’ concerns on some very important issues, including the failure to recognise the potential importance of a Lochboisdale to Mallaig service. I urge ferry users and constituents from across my region and elsewhere to take part in the consultation before the end of next week. This consultation seems to have gone on for ever, but I repeat that it closes at the end of next week.

Will the minister give way?

I thank the minister for his compliment. An enormous amount of money has been spent on the road from Fort William to Mallaig. Is it not a shame that it cannot be connected to the islands by a ferry?

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what support it is providing to the Machrihanish Airbase Community Company. (S4O-00822)

I thank the minister for that reply, but he will be aware of concerns over problems with the water, sewerage and electricity infrastructure. What support is the Scottish Government giving MACC to tackle those problems and encourage the development of what could be a dynamic and economically important site for green excellence and a great economic opportunity for the people of Campbeltown and Kintyre?

Does the minister recognise the United Kingdom Government’s commitment to climate justice? How will the Scottish Government work with the UK Government on the issue to ensure a co-ordinated approach?

I understand that sanctions might not be particularly effective, because Iceland and the Faroes sell most of the mackerel to Russia—in fact, Russia is doing some of the fishing. What can be done about that?

Although I welcome the European and External Relations Committee’s report on the Scottish Parliament’s EU priorities for 2012, this debate can at best be termed a technical debate, as I do not believe that there will be a great deal of disagreement among members in the chamber. The report could be termed the offspring of the predecessor committee’s work on the Treaty of Lisbon, which took place in the previous session when my colleagues and I were not on the committee. That report recommended that the Parliament should devise a strategy whereby it could scrutinise legislative proposals from the EU. In that respect, it intended to bring together contributions to the debate from subject committees. That has been an important development, whereby subject committees have undertaken work of their own volition following recommendations from the European and External Relations Committee. At the core of the new model is the appointment by the subject committees of European reporters, who act as conduits between the European and External Relations Committee and their committees, and have specific roles. The idea is based on a model that has been successfully used by the Parliaments of Bavaria and Flanders, and I am pleased to report that it has worked well in linking the European and External Relations Committee and the subject committees of the Scottish Parliament. Asking the Parliament’s subject committees for their assessment of the European Commission’s work programme and asking them to engage with the European and External Relations Committee generated a favourable response from previous committee conveners. I pay tribute to our former colleague Irene Oldfather, who pushed the project forward in her time as the European and External Relations Committee convener. I do not think that we would have reached this stage without her committed enthusiasm. I also pay tribute to the work of the Scottish Parliament’s European officer—now the EERC clerk—for his assiduous attention to detail, and I thank all of his clerking team for pulling the report together. The seven parliamentary committees that have contributed to the report by identifying their European priorities are wide and diverse. Therefore, in the time that is available, I will concentrate on a few that are of particular interest. One of the key areas that emanate from the EU and have an enormous impact on Scotland is the field of rural affairs and the environment. It is therefore no coincidence that the paper that was presented by the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee was by far the lengthiest submission. That committee continues to be engaged in the common fisheries policy and common agricultural policy reforms, which are subjects of great interest to many members in the chamber. However, I was interested to learn of subjects that are new to that committee and whose European dimension has an impact on Scotland, such as the effects of invasive non-native species in Scotland. Scottish fisheries—pelagic and demersal—are also facing very difficult issues. Of equal interest and importance is the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s assessment of the Commission’s work programme. Of particular relevance to me, as a Highlands and Islands MSP, is the review of state aid guidelines for broadband networks. As colleagues will no doubt agree, the committee’s initial scoping inquiry into the need for a broadband strategy across Scotland should address the specific failings in the Highlands and Islands and the need for widely available quick and affordable broadband for individuals and businesses if we are not to fall behind and be uncompetitive with other nations in Europe. I hope, in my closing remarks, to address the Scottish Government’s engagement with the EU and its priorities, as well as the views of our MEPs. For the moment, however, I am just interested in hearing the views of others.

This has been a useful and constructive debate and several members have rightly highlighted the significant contribution by other committees that was made to the European and External Relations Committee’s report into EU priorities. In my closing remarks, I want to concentrate on the other aspects of the report, namely the EU priorities of the Scottish Government for the year ahead as well as contributions from our Scottish MEPs about what they see as being the burning issues—perhaps—that are emanating from the continent. At the core of the Parliament’s EU strategy is a very clear commitment “to scrutinise the Scottish Government and its EU engagement” which must, of course, be the first role of any parliamentary committee—that is, it should hold the Government to account. As a committee, we asked the Scottish Government to examine the Commission's work programme to identify what it considered to be the coming issues that would be of greatest interest to the Government. The cabinet secretary’s response was characteristically informative, although she could not resist the temptation to bring up the smokescreen that is the presence of Scottish ministers at the EU table. However, in this consensual debate, I shall not enter that arena. The three areas that the Government identified as priorities very closely complement the Scottish Government’s action plan on European engagement. I hope that the cabinet secretary will, in her closing speech, go into further detail on energy initiatives. In particular, can she tell us how the renewable energy strategy will lead to the much-aspired-to low-carbon economy and how it will help to secure investment and jobs? Finally, I turn to the pearls of wisdom from our illustrious colleagues across the Channel. The report contains five submissions from our Scottish MEPs, with a late addendum by David Martin MEP. The priorities that the MEPs identified include increasing trade to help boost economic growth and to contribute to job creation; ensuring that the EU remains the leading voice in reforming the international and European banking sector; and pursuing the highest possible international standards for the environment, human rights and sustainable development. My good friend and colleague Struan Stevenson gave an unequivocal assessment of the areas of importance by boldly stating: “Struan’s main priorities will be Fisheries”. As I said, that is an important issue for Scotland, so I could not agree more with Struan Stevenson’s submission when it points to the red tape, planning permission issues and lack of political will that continue to hamstring the fish-farming industry in Scotland, in respect of both fin fish and shellfish. Of course, those issues also affect the wild-fish industry, and Struan highlights our decimated sea fisheries. The debate has, by its nature, been a measured one that in a sense simply brings together in one place the European workings of the Parliament’s subject committees and the Scottish Government. I commend to Parliament the European and External Relations Committee’s report.

Will the minister update the Parliament on recent discussions with Shetland Islands Council and Orkney Islands Council about this year’s extended dry-dock period for vessels?

18. To ask the Scottish Executive what support it provides to the University of the Highlands and Islands. (S4O-00786)

Is the cabinet secretary aware that last night UHI held a discussion entitled “Beyond Creativity”? It was designed to give students an insight into the work of the Highlands and Islands’ music industry’s entrepreneurs, including Steve Robertson and Joe Gibbs, who is the founder of the Belladrum Tartan Heart festival. Does the cabinet minister agree that UHI is to be commended for recognising the economic importance of the live music sector in the Highlands and Islands?

I am pleased to take part in the debate, which is, I think, the first major debate that we have had on the climate justice angle of climate change policy. I thank the various organisations that have provided briefings for today, including Oxfam and Friends of the Earth Scotland. The Scottish Conservatives recognise that climate change is one of the gravest threats to the planet, and that urgent and co-ordinated action is required at home and abroad to cut carbon emissions and decarbonise the world economy. We also recognise the moral duty that countries such as Scotland and the UK, and indeed the rest of the developed world, have in being aware that it is often the least-developed countries that suffer most from, but are least able to respond to, the effects of climate change, which in many cases they have done little to cause. There are many examples of countries that need international support to tackle the impact of climate change on their people’s lives, including Bangladesh, Nepal, Mozambique and large parts of sub-Saharan Africa. The desperate plight of individuals who have lost their families and homes in flooding, or have died from hunger, is all too often etched on our television screens. The Mary Robinson Foundation wants a human-centred approach, and that approach is right and civilised, and will count. There is no doubt in my mind that weather patterns have changed. On Loch Awe, where I live, last year’s rain gauge managed over 140in—nearly double the normal amount. Fishermen in the North Sea are catching fish from southern waters that are moving north in search of food, attracted to the cold waters. That is causing the displacement of native stocks and big problems for quota allocation within the common fisheries policy. Even in this country, where recent gales have caused endless damage, there have been floods in many parts of normally dry England while other parts, such as the south-east, are suffering severe drought. It is obvious that changes are occurring even in our own green and pleasant lands and heather-covered hills, and we must all do something about it, starting with saving as much energy as we can. Returning to the justice theme, the UK Government is to be commended for its commitment to climate justice, demonstrated by the £2.9 billion of international climate finance that it has announced, specifically to help developing countries to pursue low-carbon growth and adapt to the impacts of climate change. It is also to be praised for seeking to drive private sector investment into tackling climate change in developing economies, noticeably through the capital markets climate initiative. The CMCI aims to unlock the private sector’s ability to help to meet the estimated $100 billion of new green investment that it is estimated will be required annually by 2020 to tackle climate change in developing countries. Greg Barker, the UK minister with responsibility for climate change, is correct to argue that in general terms private sector finance is an essential component of climate solutions, while recognising that, as there will be some places that private finance will never reach, international governmental support will also be required.

That subject would take far too long to cover in this debate, when I have only a minute or two, but I will come back to Claudia Beamish on it. If, as the motion suggests, Scotland is to act as a model of best practice, we must meet our climate change emissions reduction targets and our carbon reduction targets. Energy is a very big element in that. We are positive about renewables, but we remain clear that the Scottish Government’s energy policy needs to be broader and more diverse. The secure and affordable low-carbon energy supply that we all want must come from a balanced mix of energy provision, in which nuclear power plays a part. We are clear that preserving our environment must not be seen as being in conflict with economic growth; it can go hand in hand with sustainably growing our economy and those of developing nations. Sustainable economic growth and free trade remain the key way of lifting the world’s poorest people from poverty. I was struck by comments that I read in a recent interview with Professor Sir David King, who is the head of the University of Oxford’s prestigious Smith school of enterprise and the environment, which is doing excellent work in advising the Governments of developing countries such as Rwanda on how to develop sustainable transport systems and economic growth. When he was asked whether the main responsibility for cutting carbon lay with consumers, businesses or Governments, he said: “You cannot separate responsibility ... Voltaire has a fitting quote: ‘No snowflake in an avalanche ever feels responsible.’ We’re all responsible, whether we are consumers, producers, or in government.” I concur. I add that politicians and Governments in the developed world have an extra responsibility to assist the developing world in dealing with the challenges and threats of climate change that face the world’s poorest nations, which are least able to cope with that on their own.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am pleased to close the debate for the Scottish Conservatives. I welcome the fact that Labour chose to debate the issue. As we have heard from members, including my friend Mary Scanlon and Rhoda Grant, the removal of larger commercial vehicles from the RET scheme is causing real concern in the Western Isles and on Coll and Tiree, with their fragile economies and their reliance on hauliers to supply the goods that they need. Like other Highlands members, I have been contacted by numerous concerned constituents on this matter and I first made representations to the Minister for Housing and Transport back in early December. I have since written to the minister a second and, indeed, a third time on behalf of the cross-party group on crofting about crofters’ concerns about rises in the cost of transporting stock and feedstuffs. I have also lodged a series of written questions. I accept that, thanks to the powerful and effective lobbying of many of my constituents, including the Outer Hebrides transport group, which represents more than 70 businesses, the Scottish Government has moved its position to some extent. The rises that hauliers initially faced of up to an eye-watering 175 per cent compared with current RET prices will now—thanks to some extra funding for transitional arrangements—be pegged at a still hugely alarming 50 per cent. Ministers still need to explain why they believed that the first enormous rises of up to 175 per cent were ever going to be acceptable to hauliers or consumers or, indeed, why they believed that they would be sustainable to local economies that have been so affected by the price of haulage. Why did they not anticipate the worry and anger that their plans would cause and take immediate action to prevent that? They need to do more to address the continuing concerns about rises of up to 50 per cent. Many of my constituents are frightened that those rises will be passed on to them. As Mary Scanlon rightly said, hauliers are clear that they have been able to reduce costs to customers because of their inclusion in RET. Correspondingly, they are now faced with little alternative but to pass on the costs of increased charges to consumers. Scottish hauliers who make journeys all their lives to Scottish islanders for profits that are not enormous will be gravely insulted by the Scottish Government’s insinuation that they are not passing on the benefits. The Freight Transport Association has warned that the proposals will add “serious inflationary pressure to communities, damaging their economic well-being and threatening the tourism on which they depend.” As we have heard, in its preliminary analysis of the proposals, Western Isles Council suggested that there would be a loss of around 100 full-time equivalent jobs. That is a massive number in the Western Isles.

I know quite a lot of hauliers personally, and they are not happy. They are certainly not happy about the Government’s insinuation that they are not passing on benefits when, in some cases, they are not making much profit anyway. In conclusion, as my friend Mary Scanlon said and Western Isles Council argues, the Scottish Government was correct in deciding to conduct a socioeconomic impact study of ferry fares policy, but that should be concluded before hauliers are faced with fare rises that have the potential to be seriously damaging to the economies of the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree.

Will the cabinet secretary put the review in place before it increases the charges?

Oh. Actually, I pressed my button for a supplementary to the previous question but you did not notice—

Does the minister agree that upland grazing pastures are often critical to the local biosphere and, from the point of view of biodiversity, are preferable to big plantations of sitka spruce?

I congratulate Helen Eadie on bringing this important debate to the chamber, and I am pleased to make a short contribution. I am delighted to say that, despite the huge amounts of money that were poured into Labour’s coffers by the original co-operative movement that Helen Eadie mentioned, the Scottish Conservatives are now very positive about the role of co-operatives in Scotland. I agree with Helen Eadie that co-operatives, along with other models such as charities, trusts and mutual business and private sector organisations, can help to reduce poverty and boost economic growth and employment. Co-operatives combined turnover of £3.4 billion is clearly a hugely important part of Scotland’s economy. I am pleased that the Prime Minister, David Cameron, has committed the Westminster Government to introducing new legislation governing co-operatives before the next general election. That bill will consolidate more than a dozen pieces of legislation into a single statute. I note that Ed Mayo, the general secretary of Co-operatives UK, welcomed the news, saying that he was delighted that the UK Government is “taking action to put co-operative businesses on an equal footing and create a diverse economy.” David Cameron, who established the Conservative co-operative movement in 2007, has described co-operatives as “a vital branch of popular capitalism” and said that he wants them to expand. Helen Eadie’s motion refers to co-operatives in the agriculture sector. I have some experience of those, as I was involved in two farmers co-operatives in Argyll that shared and co-ordinated machinery use and the ordering of feeding stuffs and animal medicines in the 1980s and 1990s. In fact, I was chairman of them for a while. One was called SLAG—south Lochaweside group—and the other was called SLAM—south Lochaweside machinery ring. In their initial years, those co-operatives cut local farmers’ expenditure on food and medicines by around 30 per cent by getting discounts for quantity. That was very acceptable to the farming community, but not so acceptable to the merchants, who naturally preferred to deal with individual customers. That can be a problem if a co-op is set up somewhere where, previously, trade was between individuals and merchants only. However, the merchants who get the deals do very well out of them. Scotland’s first machinery ring was established in 1987. Now, the Scottish Machinery Ring Association has member rings throughout Scotland serving more than 7,000 farmers and other rural businesses. I commend the work of the Scottish Agricultural Organisation Society Ltd, whose members are experts on co-operative and collaborative strategies, structures and management in the farming, forestry and aquaculture sectors. I particularly commend its work in promoting local food, which has the potential to be a growth area. In my region, food from Argyll—an initiative that was started by Fergus Younger, who was linked to the old Argyll and the Islands Enterprise—has gone from strength to strength. It provides marquees and events where everything from oysters and local shellfish to MacKay’s lamb stovies, beef and even Bumble’s delicious exotic puddings, which are made in Lochgilphead, are advertised and eaten. That initiative is a great shop window, which brings much added value to many farmers who, before, had to rely on the low livestock prices at store auction markets. For those who make the effort to get the added value, the rewards are significant. However, many are now complaining about the high prices that event organisers who have cottoned on to that are charging for stalls and marquees. If I might say so, those organisers are becoming greedy and should give Scottish food producers—who, after all, provide a service—a fair deal. There are some first-class examples of co-operatives in Scotland, and we have heard about many of them this evening.

I thank those MSPs who signed my motion, particularly Margo MacDonald and Willie Rennie, whose cross-party support has enabled the debate to take place. My purpose is to highlight the strongly felt concerns of many constituents about the Barra proposal and the virtually unanimous opposition of Western Isles Council to it. I hope to increase understanding on both sides of the debate, and the focus of my remarks will be on the Barra proposal. The debate mirrors closely a previous members’ business debate in April 2002 about an earlier attempt to introduce a special area of conservation in the same area. That did not go ahead because it was shown that Scottish Natural Heritage’s evidence was simply wrong, because the number of common or harbour seals was less than the 1 per cent of the national seal population that was then required to justify such a designation. However, with no apparent explanation or justification, the proposed designation of Barra was never taken off the table. It has now been resurrected with extended boundaries and with different and additional goalposts: namely, the sandbanks containing maerl beds, and the reefs, which were not previously deemed to be important enough to merit designation. SNH’s consultation document states that the proposed Sound of Barra designation would represent 0.1 to 0.4 per cent of the overall total of United Kingdom sandbanks, 0.7 per cent of the overall total UK common seal population and a mere 0.07 per cent of the overall total UK reef resource. By any standards, those are very low percentages. In 2007, the Joint Nature Conservation Committee assessed the Minches and west Scotland regional sea as not requiring “any additional areas for sandbanks/reefs for possible inclusion” in SACs. With regard to seals, SNH states: “Harbour seals are widespread in the outer Hebrides”, and yet the seal population in the Sound of Barra is low, unstable and not fully understood. With regard to reefs, the JNCC stated in 2009 that the Sound of Barra “contains similar reef types to other sites in this regional” area. With regard to sandbanks, SNH fails to give any supporting data for its assertion that they are “in good condition”; fails to acknowledge that they are continually in motion, as the local fishermen well know; and concedes that what little maerl remains alive is often sparsely distributed, which is not the case everywhere in Scotland. All of that, and the lack of robust scientific supporting data, feeds into local concerns that the Sound of Barra proposal is being singled out in order to avoid somebody losing face. It is telling that the consultation response of the widely respected and independent Scottish Association for Marine Science twice notes that the Sound of Barra data is “limited and the references sparse”. Detailed concerns about the scientific basis for the proposal have been identified in Ian Mitchell’s comprehensive paper, which was commissioned jointly by the Western Isles Council and the Mallaig & North West Fishermen’s Association. Surely, if we agree that decisions should be evidence based, SNH should have made an appropriate and thorough assessment of all other marine sites to ensure that the Sound of Barra genuinely is such an important location and the best one. That simply has not taken place, which is what concerns so many of my constituents. SAMS has stated: “This is not the only area of maerl worthy of consideration: the Sound of Harris is another excellent site and ... a comparative study” should be done “of the pros and cons of the two sites.” Does the minister agree that Ian Mitchell’s report appears to reveal collusion between Marine Scotland and SNH over reclassifying the designation so that the Barra sandbanks were upgraded to fit the criteria? If so, does he agree that that is unethical? SNH is meant to be an independent advisory body to the Government, and Marine Scotland is a tool of the Government I will touch on the impact of an SAC on the local economy. The Scottish Government-commissioned Halcrow report in 2010 suggested that the closure of the proposed SAC to mobile fisheries gear operators would result in a loss of landings worth £121,000 per annum. However, industry feedback suggests that that is a gross underestimate of the value of the shellfish. Those sectors support a significant number of jobs both at sea and in onshore processing, and are a crucial part of the fragile economy of Barra, Uist and Harris. What angers local fishermen is the total lack of evidence that existing fishing activity has contributed to a deterioration in any of the marine features that SNH says are already in good condition. Scallop fishermen know better than to draw their gear over rocks and risk losing it, and—at the very least—information from existing scallop vessels should be incorporated into designation assessment in order to retain existing scallop activity. Despite assurances that have been given about fishing interests, the minister should be aware of the impact that such a designation may have on creel fishermen in Strangford Lough in Northern Ireland, as reported in last week’s Fishing News. Despite the assurances that were given beforehand, the European Union is demanding ever more restrictions there. There are also concerns about the impact that designations might have on possible future renewables developments pertaining to the island of Barra. Constituents have asked me to raise their concerns about the way in which SNH has gone about consulting the community and local interests. One constituent e-mailed me this week, imploring me to emphasise today “how bitter and disenfranchised we feel in regards to the whole so-called ‘consultation process’”. He went on to criticise “the so-called experts from SNH who come to Barra and in public meetings cannot give answers on the very subject they are supposed to be expert on.” SAMS has expressed concern at the approach that has been taken and at the SNH consultation document, which “pays little regard to future management strategies and stakeholder interests”, regretting the “polarisation” that has occurred and noting that “suspicion and distrust is exacerbated by the lack of transparency.” That must be a concern for all of us, and lessons should be learned. The same things were said in the 2002 debate. For example, Fiona McLeod of the SNP said: “SNH is not alone in being a public body that is not good at consultation”. I repeat some comments that I made in my debate in 2002, which are just as valid today: “It is ... vital that the needs and concerns of local people in areas of proposed designations are taken into consideration. The people who live and work the land and get their feet muddy are the people who know the environment best. In many cases, they are the reason that the species are there. They are the people who have been protecting the land and the wildlife for centuries, and who will make or break the protection.”—[Official Report, 18 April 2002; c 8088, 8082.] In a letter to me, the chairman of SNH, Andrew Thin, said that “an erroneous impression has been promulgated locally to the effect that designation will prevent local fishermen and others from continuing with activities that currently take place within the designated area.” Local people in Barra and the Western Isles are still worried and feel that their views are simply being ignored by the Scottish Government. I hope that the minister will remedy that, as the minister did in 2002, and look closely again at all the evidence before submitting the area for designation. I call on the minister to assure me that he will give timely notice to the people of Barra and the Western Isles before he makes any decision, so that they can begin to make plans for their future livelihoods and income streams should those in any way be strangled by the designation.

Will the minister take on board the fact that windows of economic opportunity are not an overburdening factor in the Western Isles? Windows of economic opportunity must be grabbed, not thrown away.

I, too, congratulate Linda Fabiani on securing the debate, in which I am pleased to make a short speech. I also congratulate her on exposing what appears to be a rather unfair anomaly. Like other members, I am happy to take the opportunity to commend the valuable role that guide dogs, hearing dogs and other assistance dogs play in helping many of our citizens. Guide dogs and hearing dogs are perhaps the most well known to many of us, but I am aware that assistance dogs can make a huge difference to the lives of wheelchair users by helping with everyday tasks such as opening and shutting doors, unloading washing machines, picking up dropped items, pressing buttons and switches and by getting help in emergencies. As well as helping with the physical side, assistance dogs can often provide psychological and social benefits for their human companions, including increased independence, confidence, motivation and self-esteem. I have owned dogs all my life—dogs of different breeds and of all shapes and sizes. They have all become my best friends. I hope that they would say the same about me, although they might not, of course. Dogs cannot speak, but the least that we can do is feed them as well as we can. I praise the excellent work that is done by charities such as Guide Dogs Scotland, Hearing Dogs for Deaf People and Canine Partners, including the work that is done in my region of the Highlands and Islands. I pay tribute to all those who are involved in those charities for their work and their brilliant fundraising efforts. I accept that it appears to be an unfair anomaly that only high-protein dog food for working dogs is zero-rated for VAT. Such dog food is unsuitable for most of the assistance dogs that we are talking about. Currently, VAT must be paid on assistance dogs’ food, unlike the food for sheepdogs, gamekeepers’ dogs and police dogs. If the charities that train assistance dogs did not have to pay VAT on those dogs’ food, the saved money would—I hope—be reinvested in other aspects of those charities’ work. There is no doubt that assistance dogs are very important working dogs. They do a fantastic job. As VAT is reserved to the Westminster Parliament, I am happy to write to Treasury ministers to make a case for a derogation for assistance dogs. I will enclose a copy of this evening’s debate, ask those ministers for their comments and ask whether they can show flexibility, so that the VAT exemption might be extended to the cases that we are talking about.

Does the minister know whether, when a working dog reaches old age—and, I presume, takes less exercise and moves on to a lower-protein diet—it is forced to go on eating the wrong type of food because, otherwise, VAT would have to be paid?

Recently, I visited the Holocaust exhibition at the Imperial War Museum in London, which is an example of excellence and will certainly be a way of keeping the memory of what happened alive.

Does the minister accept that the health of seabird populations is also a barometer of the health of the marine food chain, and that that applies equally to fish stocks? Is enough research and development being done on the subject?

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to upgrade the A83 and prevent future landslips from closing the road. (S4O-00590)

I thank the minister for mentioning all those points. If they come to bear, that will be a great thing. The minister has told me that there is the potential for a far larger landslide to occur. Is he aware of the anxiety that is now being experienced by my constituents and others who have to sit at traffic lights in the area? Will he do everything in his power to ensure that the road is opened fully to two-way traffic as soon as possible, to keep things moving? Will he also recognise that everyone in Argyll and Bute—and, indeed, beyond—knows that capital investment is going to be needed on the route to prevent further landslides and closures? The Scottish Government must accept that and the strategic importance of the A83—something that, with due respect, it is currently failing to do.

I refer members to my agricultural entry in the register of members’ interests. Getting the CAP reform right and getting the fairest deal possible for Scotland are fundamental to the future of farms and crofts throughout Scotland and to the communities that depend on them. My friend Alex Fergusson was right to talk about the need for flexibility. It is accepted that we will move towards an area-based single farm payment, but there must be an appropriate transitional period, which could be longer than is currently envisaged. The Irish Government is keen to achieve that. It is worth pointing out that England’s move to area-based payments began in 2005 but will be completed only in 2014. The key challenge will be to achieve a flexible arrangement whereby those who might lose most under the move to an area-based system—I am talking about key groups such as Orkney and Caithness beef producers and the dairy farmers of Kintyre—can be compensated through flexible alternative measures that recognise their needs and the number of animals that they keep. We need flexibility over the national reserve. We are sympathetic to the NFUS’s view that the reserve should not be only for one year and should be on-going, not least to support new entrants, who are important to the farming industry. Food security and maintaining stock numbers are vital. I share the anxiety that the proposals for greening pillar 1 could lead to additional bureaucracy that is associated with yet more cross-compliance. Farmers have faced difficulties in the EID tagging of sheep. I brokered a meeting only last week of the agriculture and rural development directorate-general’s deputy director-general and his officials with George Milne and James Sinclair of the National Sheep Association. The NSA made the point effectively that Scotland has achieved movement traceability par excellence but is being penalised for doing so. It is eight years since the relevant regulation came into being and a review is needed to correct the imbalances and unforeseen consequences that are hindering Scottish farmers’ attempts to lead the field on traceability and making them fear cross-compliance issues. I return to the CAP. I agree with the widespread criticism of the proposal to define permanent pasture as any grassland that is more than five years old. That definition is far too crude and fails to recognise that many Scottish hill farmers run a 10-year or longer rotation on pasture. If the proposal was implemented, artificial fertilisers would have to be used more and more, instead of reseeding. The proposal that a blanket 7 per cent of land should be left fallow is questionable in food security terms and fails to recognise the good work that many farmers are doing. That figure must be lower; it should apply on a farm scale and certainly not on a field scale. The future of LFA support is vital, too. We need to come up with the most appropriate solutions for targeting support within the LFA boundary. The Scottish farming and crofting community hopes that overall support levels will be maintained, but all of us are aware that, if CAP budgets are cut because of the financial crises that are afflicting Europe, we must as a priority protect LFA support for our vulnerable areas. Again, the proposed areas of natural constraint system must be as flexible as possible. Given that the current rural development programme concludes in 2013, the Scottish Government must be prepared to use a bridging mechanism to allow the rollover of existing schemes until the new regime is in place. We simply cannot have a situation such as that which arose in 2007-08, which I well remember, when the introduction of the new SRDP meant that no agri-environmental schemes were approved for approximately 18 months, and some valuable projects were lost. Since the removal of hill tracks to improve accessibility for the public from the menu of options that are available to hill farmers, little in the land management option scheme is of much practical use. I encourage a look at the options to make them more practical and useable for farmers. I suggested something on quad bikes, which every hill farmer uses. The idea was popular with them but it has so far not come to fruition. Although farmers are enjoying an increase in livestock prices, they have only caught up with the vastly increased cost of input that farmers have experienced, so there is no room for complacency in trying to achieve the best results for Scottish farmers in the reformed CAP. There is a new optimism about farming and it is important that the Scottish Government and the European Commission fan the vital spark that is the lifeline of Scotland’s rural communities. I agree with Jean Urquhart that Scottish food and especially Scottish drink are very important for the tourism sector. Today’s debate has been important and useful and I look forward to the committee’s report on the subject and to future debates on the CAP reforms, which are simply vital for Scotland.

6. During yesterday’s statement on fisheries—

I beg your pardon. To ask the First Minister how Scottish fishermen will be affected by the outcome of the European Union fisheries negotiations. (S4F-00361)

During his statement on fisheries, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, said that “common sense was no match for the legal straitjacket”—[Official Report, 21 December 2011; c 4908.] of the cod recovery plan and described his frustration at not being able to secure a pause in automatic yearly cuts in days at sea. He said that the United Kingdom delegation was supported by France, Germany and Spain in its efforts towards achieving that. However, despite not being isolated in Europe, the result is bitterly disappointing to the Scottish fleet. What will the First Minister do to help Scottish fishermen to cope with the cuts in days at sea? Will he specifically assure the Parliament that the Scottish nephrops fleet will be provided with additional support to help it to deliver the highly selective gear that will allow it to continue to catch white fish, which are an important element of the sector’s income?

The percentage of waste that is being recycled in the island local authorities in the Highlands and Islands is noticeably below the national average. What support can the Scottish Government give those authorities, where economies of scale are much more difficult to achieve due to the low and dispersed populations there?

Scaring techniques in an offshore archipelago like Orkney tend to result only in moving geese from one island to another. The island of Islay has a very good scheme to manage geese. Would the minister commit to further studies on the impact of the greylag geese in Orkney with a view to introducing an appropriate management scheme in the future?

I thank the minister for sight of his statement. This is indeed lumpy water yet again for the Scottish fishing fleet. Despite welcome quota increases in west coast haddock and North Sea herring, and the smaller increase in North Sea haddock, what was given to the Scottish fleet by the Commission’s right hand was taken away by its left hand. The reaction of the Scottish fleet to me is that it is hugely disappointed and that the outcome is a bitter blow. Does the cabinet secretary feel that the result is a good one? Does he think that the status quo would have been a good enough result? Why does the Scottish fleet, which has been praised by the Commission for conservation, again have to suffer cuts in effort, which will play havoc with the livelihoods of people in fishing communities up and down the Scottish coastline? Why is poor Scotland, which has strived to perfect conservation measures, being punished while Iceland and the Faroes, which, frankly, have done the opposite, are so far basking in their forbidden fruits—or should I say forbidden fish? Is it any wonder that Euroscepticism and disillusion with politicians thrive when, in the cabinet secretary’s own words, “common sense was no match for the legal straitjacket” of the Commission’s plans?

Does the minister agree that Orkney’s internal ferries are vital to the small island communities that they serve? Will he set out in more detail how Orkney Islands Council can access the infrastructure funding that was announced this week, in order to upgrade and replace vessels?

9. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to promote the teaching of foreign languages in schools. (S4O-00467)

The minister will be aware of the British Council’s alarm that the number of foreign language assistants in Scotland’s schools has fallen by 80 per cent in just six years, and the consuls general of France, Germany, Spain, Italy and China have joined forces to stress the importance of those native-language-speaking assistants. Does he agree that urgent action is required to increase the number of foreign language assistants, who not only assist with the development of modern foreign languages in our schools but are fundamental to increasing our international cultural and economic links?

I thank the cabinet secretary for presenting a united front with the UK fisheries minister on the highly sensitive issue of cuts in days at sea, which is of huge importance to people in Scottish fishing communities. First, how will the cabinet secretary spell out to the commissioner the true impact of unfair micromanagement on the lives of many people in Scottish communities on the east and west coasts and on hundreds of fishing vessels and thousands of jobs in connected onshore businesses? Secondly, how will the cabinet secretary illustrate the woeful damage to people’s livelihoods and households that will be caused by the fleet’s being able to fish only four days a fortnight? Thirdly, can the cabinet secretary make Commissioner Damanaki fully understand that hailing the Scottish effort on cod recovery as a success and then instantly punishing the fleet on days at sea has produced righteous fury among Scottish fisherman and generated public Euroscepticism in Scotland and the UK? Fourthly, is there a way that the Commission’s figures can be closely monitored in the future to prevent a repeat of bombshells of this kind without prior notice? We are grateful that the Commission has suspended the regulation, but how can the cabinet secretary get a guarantee that it will not be laid again so that the UK and Scottish nets, which have done more for true conservation than any other, will not be hung out to dry?

Is the minister aware that, despite the cuts in feed-in tariffs, installation costs have fallen by around 30 per cent from previous levels? Combined with electricity price rises, that should mean that solar panels will still be viable in a lot of cases.

The First Minister will be aware of today’s closure of the A83 trunk road in both directions following yet another landslide at the Rest and be Thankful. Given that the A83 is the key road route into and out of large parts of Argyll, including Dunoon, Campbeltown and Kintyre, can the First Minister assure me that the Scottish Government will do everything in its power to ensure that the road is reopened as soon as possible and that action will be taken to prevent further such landslides, which are potentially devastating for the Argyll and Bute economy?

Is the minister satisfied with the level of service of Argyll Ferries on the Gourock to Dunoon route? I am sure that he is aware that the people of Dunoon are certainly not.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The previous member might have misled Parliament when he said that revenues from the Crown estate go to the royal family. In fact, they go to the Treasury.

I congratulate Kevin Stewart on securing today’s debate. I have just returned from a European and External Relations Committee trip to Brussels, where we were greatly entertained by Dr Louise Richardson, the principal of the University of St Andrews, the third-oldest seat of higher learning in the UK. She talked about that, about St Andrew and about the importance of the four-year university course, which gives students a decent chance to be enlightened in the country that, after all, initiated the enlightenment and the creation of western civilisation as we now know it. She emphasised that St Andrews is a Scottish, British and European university, which I found quite refreshing, but she complained strongly about the extraordinary anomaly that means that English students have to pay fees while those from other EU member states do not. I do not think that St Andrew would have approved of that unfair and—dare I say it?—anti-English position.

I thought that that might cause a slight disturbance, but I will not give way at the moment. St Andrew was Jesus’s first apostle and a fisherman, to boot. Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day; teach a man to fish, and he can do the same for many others for a lifetime. Jesus said to all his apostles that they should “become fishers of men”. Owing to the lack of hills in Belgium, the sky sits at a low level and seems almost touchable. For once, it was blue with fluffy clouds, and crossed with the white condensation trails of numerous aeroplanes. One saw at once the saltire, Scotland’s national flag, which St Andrew perceived in a dream. Some have unfairly suggested that, like all fishermen, he was good at telling whoppers, but I do not think so. As Kevin Stewart and others have been, I am happy to pay tribute to our former colleague, Dennis Canavan, who made a significant contribution to the work of this Parliament between 1999 and 2007, not least in his determination to raise the profile of St Andrew’s day, which he continues to do with passion outwith the Parliament. The Scottish Conservatives’ position on the issue has been consistent and clear. We have always been supportive of the desire to have St Andrew’s day as a bank holiday, but in exchange for another day, not in addition to existing days. That was the approach that was adopted in the St Andrew's Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Act 2007, and we remain supportive of that. St Andrew’s day is, correctly, a voluntary public holiday. We did not support the argument that St Andrew’s day must be a compulsory national holiday, because the cost of that would fall on businesses—especially small businesses—and the taxpayer.

In a moment. CBI Scotland has stated that more and more firms are moving away from shutting on specified days and towards a system in which employees have an annual leave entitlement and decide for themselves, in agreement with the employer, when to take holidays. We are content for employers to engage with employees to discuss taking St Andrew’s day off. It might well suit people with children or partners who are doing the same thing. We agree with the sentiment that was so ably expressed by Christine Grahame that St Andrew’s day is a useful opportunity for all of us to celebrate the culture and traditions of Scotland and to showcase Scotland. We support the businesses, shops and tourism enterprises that use St Andrew’s day to boost their trade. On my return from Brussels yesterday, I was delighted to see the baggage trollies in Edinburgh airport adorned with the saltire. However, since it was originally St Andrew’s flag and was later adopted as the Scottish flag, there should be a mention of St Andrew himself on the special day that now commemorates him.

All right.

Oh. Right. In that case, it is interesting to note that some English schools and institutions recognise St Andrew’s day. One of those is Eton College, the educational establishment of our Prime Minister, our former Presiding Officer Alex Fergusson and—representing the lesser mortals—me.

I promise to be brief. I am sorry that I did not take an intervention from Jamie Hepburn, but I ran out of time. He talked about schools recognising St Andrew’s day. The reason why I made the point about Eton—which was a serious point, in fact—was that I feel that, if it can hold St Andrew’s day in esteem and make it a holiday, more institutions in Scotland should do the same.

I am pleased to take part in today’s important debate. As usual, we Conservatives are dealing with the difficult issues head on. We are not afraid to do that in the interests of our economy and, especially, our pensioners in the public sector. The subject is one that requires long-term strategy rather than short-term fix, and Francis Maude has a very good record of finding solutions. I praise the role of public sector workers, especially in my region of the Highlands and Islands. Our teachers, policemen, firefighters, doctors and nurses and all the other public sector employees do superb work. We also recognise the pensioners’ contribution to society more generally in all the extracurricular, voluntary and community activities that so many undertake. They are a major element of the big society on which we all depend, and they deserve decent pensions—the increased pensions that Mary Scanlon quantified in her excellent speech—and a Government that plans ahead to deliver them. The fact of the matter is that the UK Government is having to deal with the dreadful state of the public finances left by the last Labour Government. I commend its efforts in doing that. If we had not taken the decisive action of deficit reduction, our economy would be facing the Italian scenario, with Italian bond yields above 7 per cent again this week, despite efforts to secure a new Government, compared with UK yields of around 2 per cent. On that basis, in the future I would rather be a British pensioner than an Italian one or, for that matter, a Greek one. People now realise the enormity of the crisis that we face in western Europe. It started as a liquidity crisis, mutated into a solvency crisis and has now become a systemic crisis. That means that the economic infrastructure is crumbling and severe measures are necessary now to avoid a far worse scenario in years to come. That is the reality. Part of reconfiguring the public finances must involve genuine reform of public sector pensions, which the previous Labour Government patently failed to achieve. The proposed phased rise in employee contributions will average 3.2 per cent from April 2014, but the rises will be staggered according to salary with high earners paying the biggest rises.

I am sorry; I cannot do that at the moment. Even after the changes, public sector pensions will still be miles above the average in the private sector. The UK Government’s pension reform plans are realistic, practical and detailed, and the Government has responded to specific concerns by, for example, confirming that no worker within 10 years of his or her retirement on 1 April 2012 would see either an increase in the age at which they retire or a decrease in the pension that they receive. It is a cop-out for the SNP Government to claim that more time is required to assess the proposals. We must act now in the interests of future pensioners. Any responsible Scottish Government should recognise the economic circumstances and support the UK Government’s plans. I will take that intervention from Patrick Harvie.

As usual, Patrick Harvie shoots off after another red herring. All I know is that the UK Government is trying to plan for good pensions for people in the future. I urge the trade unions to reconsider the strike action on 30 November, which will be disruptive for families and communities. Everyone should get back round the negotiating table and engage on the issue. The Parliament should send out that message loud and clear. Nobody likes paying more for anything, but the alternative to reforming public sector pensions is to burden further the general taxpayer disproportionately for years to come, which would be a dereliction of responsibility that no Government should accept.

Is the minister aware of the comments of the leader of Orkney Islands Council, Stephen Hagan, who fears that Orkney is losing out on tourism because of the lack of RET there? The people on Mull, Islay, Jura and Colonsay also feel that they are losing out.

Will the minister join me in welcoming Highland Council’s recent initiative with the chewing gum action group to tackle gum litter and get chewers to bin their gum rather than spitting it on the pavement?

I am pleased to take part in today’s debate on behalf of the Scottish Conservatives. I thank those external organisations that sent briefings in advance, including Architecture and Design Scotland, the Architectural Heritage Society of Scotland, Planning Aid Scotland, Living Streets Scotland, Archaeology Scotland and the Scottish Wildlife Trust. All those briefings were useful and concise, and helped inform preparations for the debate. I will make some general remarks on the subject before looking at some specific examples and issues, including some that are particularly relevant to my region of the Highlands and Islands. The motion highlights “placemaking”. That was originally planning terminology and it has now been adopted by architects and building professionals. Place making is also important to landscape architects in relation to producing public spaces and gathering points that are conducive to and appropriate for communities. Place making is site specific, and when it is done properly it can bring a focal point to a community, thereby improving the community’s social fabric and wellbeing. The Scottish Conservatives agree with the Scottish Government that the quality of the built environment has the potential to affect everyone, and that the purpose of architecture and urban design should be not only to meet our practical needs by housing ourselves and our activities, but to take account of the social and cultural values of our people and to help to improve their quality of life. Good architecture and place making are crucial to the health of our economy, as they can make an area an appealing place to live and work in and visit. They can also attract inward investment, which underpins sustainable job creation.

We will not, first of all, because that will cost £2 billion, and, secondly, because there are probably better ways to achieve what we want to achieve.

No, I will not just at the moment. We accept that architecture is about much more than just building design, although design that is pleasing to the eye is of great value. For example, my local town and royal burgh of Inveraray in Argyll and Bute, which is one of the first planned towns in Scotland, was designed by Robert Adam. To this day it remains virtually unchanged in appearance and produces huge pride among the inhabitants for its architectural beauty. It does of course have a magnificent castle, which was built much later, but it is the town that has the best architecture. If we compare that with the woeful architecture in some other places, where 1960s concrete seems to instil depression and even deprivation, it is obvious that enlightened, modern housing developments can inspire optimism and be hugely beneficial. That can be helped by well-designed green spaces that allow people’s imagination to flourish, meaning that we get more poets, artists and writers. I agree with John Mason on the importance of having green spaces within reach of everybody. I am aware that the Scottish Government’s spending review 2011 seeks to support Architecture and Design Scotland in championing the highest standards in architecture and place making across all sectors and advocating a better understanding of the importance and economic value of quality design in both the public and private sectors. We are sympathetic to those aims but remain of the view, as set out in our manifesto earlier this year, that there is merit in turning Architecture and Design Scotland into a self-sustaining social enterprise free from the Government. Given the pressure on public expenditure, we believe that the Scottish Government should explore such a model. My amendment refers to the contribution of businesses to economic growth and the need to support them, and it urges the Scottish Government to initiate a review of the planning system to identify barriers that still hinder business growth—something that was also in our recent manifesto. It is a matter of real concern to us that, as Audit Scotland’s recent report highlighted, the cost of submitting a planning application has risen by 40 per cent in the past six years and the cost of processing planning applications has increased by 17 per cent in real terms over the same period. Will the cabinet secretary explain those figures?

I am grateful for that information, and I am sure that we will take up the invitation one way or another. The call for the reduction in VAT on repairs and home improvements has been raised already. I recognise the potential boost that that would provide, but it has to be balanced against the current fiscal position of the UK Government and the anticipated cost of £2.2 billion in year 1 alone. I have no doubt that the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s autumn statement at the end of the month will take into account all the issues and will seek to help businesses and families wherever possible to get over the appalling mess left by the last Labour Government. The office of the Cabinet Secretary for Parliamentary Business and Government Strategy circulated web links for this debate, and I was pleased to see highlighted two examples of good practice in rural design initiatives in my region of the Highlands and Islands. The Outer Hebrides kit-house study has seen architects work with Scotframe Timber Engineering kit-house suppliers and manufacturers, the Scottish Government and Western Isles Council to design an appropriate kit-house that is both economically competitive and architecturally sensitive to the special Hebridean landscape. On Orkney, the Scottish Government invited Dualchas Building Design to work with local planners, roads engineers and councillors to take a fresh approach to the development of eight houses in the village of Birsay, which is the ancient capital of Orkney and which contains the nationally important Earl’s palace. New proposals emerged following substantial community engagement that reduced infrastructure costs and achieved a higher number of houses on the site with better public amenity space—all great improvements. There are clearly lessons that can be applied to other housing developments in rural communities with particular historic importance. In conclusion, today’s debate is welcome and timely. I move amendment S4M-01287.1, to leave out from “and calls on” to end and insert: “; recognises the vital contribution of businesses, large and small, to economic growth and the need to support them, and urges the Scottish Government to initiate a review of the planning system with a view to identifying the barriers that still exist in the system.”

We have had a largely useful and constructive debate with some good speeches. I thank Mike MacKenzie for his kind remarks and assure him that the Scottish Conservatives recognise the importance of high-quality buildings and place making. I am encouraged that there has been broad consensus on a key issue: namely, the importance of high-quality buildings and place making and their large interconnection with the economic growth that we all want for our communities and constituents. We can be very proud that our architects and town planners such as Robert Adam, Charles Rennie Mackintosh, Patrick Geddes and Robert Matthew have not only given Scotland places of distinction, but have exerted—and continue to exert—global influence. A number of members referred to the economic importance of our historic buildings. I emphasise the value of that sector, not least in my region—the Highlands and Islands—where tourism is such a big creator of employment. Research suggests that as many as 83 per cent of visitors to Scotland come primarily to visit our historic sites. I welcome Historic Scotland’s recent award of building repair grants to a number of important historic properties, including Campbeltown’s old courthouse—one of that proud burgh’s very oldest buildings—which has been previously listed as a building that is at high risk of being lost altogether.

I have already said that I will not do that. You do bang on about it. If the Government takes VAT off that, it will have to find the money from somewhere else for other things. Perhaps the member would like to come back on that. The project in Campbeltown aims to repair the courthouse and ensure a sustainable long-term future for the building, which is a very good thing. Another project involves the Burgh hall in Dunoon, which was recently reconstructed by the notable Scottish architect John McAslan. It is fast becoming a meeting point and an exhibition centre for Dunoon, and I congratulate John McAslan on bringing something back to the town of his birth. A number of members spoke about architecture’s place in greening our society, and I think that we would all support the vital role that our architects and place makers play in helping to reduce the local and global environmental impact of our consumption and production. That is very important if we are to meet our green targets, not least on energy efficiency. Our buildings must be environmentally sustainable and resource efficient; I note the Scottish Government’s efforts to raise awareness of the green infrastructure, which I suspect we will hear more about. I agree with the Government’s reference to the economic benefit of reusing existing buildings. I have previously championed use of the rural empty properties grant, which seeks to increase the supply of rented housing in rural areas by assisting projects that improve or convert eligible empty properties—including old farm buildings such as steadings and cottages—for provision of affordable rental units. Such schemes are to be recommended.

That is a good point well made, but I do not agree with it. As I have already said, I agree with the Government’s reference to the benefit of using existing buildings. I also want to talk about the price of poor design. It is unusual for me to agree with the Government or Labour, but I agree with a comment in its policy statement “Designing Places” from 2001—all those years ago, when Labour held sway. It stated: “The price of poor design is paid by people who find their familiar routes blocked, who walk in the shadows of blank walls, whose choices are limited by spaces that make them feel unsafe and unwelcome ... The price is paid by people who find themselves living in newly built suburban housing whose designers gave no thought to the quality and distinctiveness of the place they were making.” That is an unusual piece of prose for a Government document, and I recommend it. I will focus my closing remarks on the planning system, which I have already asked the minister about. Why does it now cost twice as much to make a planning application as it did in 2005? That seems absurd, and it is why I lodged my amendment.

I am winding up. [Laughter.] Audit Scotland’s recent report “Modernising the planning system” specifically called for greater focus on engagement in planning and greater creativity in the way in which we involve people in planning. If we get those aspects right we will, I hope, see the increase in the efficiency of the planning system that is so important for businesses and jobs. That is what my amendment talks about, and I hope that members will support it this evening.

I wonder what the member thought about the Pompidou centre.

Will the minister give way?

I congratulate Liam McArthur on securing today’s debate, which is significant to the many communities in the Highlands and Islands—in Colonsay, Orkney, Shetland, the Western Isles, Islay, Jura, Caithness and north-west Sutherland—that are eligible to take part in the air discount scheme. The scheme is of particular value to my constituents in the remote island communities who do not enjoy the benefits of the road equivalent tariff scheme on ferries. As Liam McArthur said, the air discount scheme has made a difference to many of my constituents since 2006. It is popular and well used. David Stewart made a strong point very well: that the money that the Scottish Government has saved by getting rid of the discount’s business element is being paid for by the island businesses that are no longer part of the scheme. Earlier this year, the EU gave its agreement for the scheme to continue for a further four years until 2015. We need a scheme to tackle the problem of high air fares for the remotest communities in the Highlands and Islands. What sustains island communities, if not business? Like Liam McArthur, I am aware of the genuine concerns because of the decision to exclude business travel from the scheme from April this year and because of the impact of that on businesspeople and those who are involved in the charity sector, including representatives of religious organisations, such as the Western Isles presbytery of the Free Church of Scotland, who are often short of money. I agree with him that it is disappointing that the decision was taken without the relevant communities being consulted. The detailed 2008 “Review of the Air Discount Scheme” concluded: “Most stakeholders agree that the ADS has had a positive impact on businesses and commercial inclusion as it enables them to reduce their travel budget and journey times or to travel more frequently for the same travel budget as before.” Orkney Islands Council’s leader, Stephen Hagan, was right to say: “As well as the additional cost to the Island Councils, other public sector bodies, businesses, voluntary and charitable organisations, there is a real risk that the number of passengers travelling by air will fall, leading to a corresponding reduction in the level of the air service in the future. This has the potential to impact on all potential users of the air services to and from remote island communities.” The exclusion of business travel from the scheme is an important issue for many of my constituents. I am pleased to support Liam McArthur’s call for a review. The issue is especially important to the island of Barra, which has been notoriously difficult to get to. Barra’s airport is famous and makes the island famous, and it is one feature that draws businesses there. I hope and am sure that the minister will reply positively and constructively.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Like Jean Urquhart, I commend all those involved in Room 13. Does the minister agree that Room 13 network schools such as Duror in Appin and Strachur primary in Argyll are also worthy of support? Will he encourage other schools to follow those excellent examples so that we can get more artists in the Highlands?

I am pleased to take part in the debate. I thank organisations including Save the Children and Barnardo’s Scotland for their useful briefings, which have helped to inform discussions. Barnardo’s Scotland is to be commended for highlighting looked-after children’s needs. It surely is not acceptable to any of us here that looked-after children’s attainment level in schools is five and a half times lower than that of all schoolchildren and that only 1 per cent of looked-after children go on to higher education, compared with 36 per cent of all school leavers. I associate myself with the excellent opening speech by my friend Liz Smith. I will focus on the importance of rural schools and their role in helping to raise attainment and ambition. I was pleased to receive recently the call for evidence from the commission on rural education, which I sent to the many dozens of parents in Argyll and Bute who have contacted me in the past year as Argyll and Bute Council has proposed rural-school closure programmes that have outraged many people. I urge all those in my region of the Highlands and Islands and elsewhere across Scotland who value rural primary schools and who have opinions on how we can retain, protect and improve them, to make their views known to the commission before the call for evidence closes on 12 January next year. The commission provides an important opportunity for rural communities to have their say about a key part of their infrastructure and their future. Part of the commission’s remit is “To examine how the delivery of rural education can maximize attainment and outcomes to give pupils the best life chances, and to examine, where appropriate, how this can be applied more widely”. If we accept the evidence that primary school attainment plays a much greater role in students’ potential 16-plus than does their secondary school education, it is clear that many excellent examples of the work that goes on in rural primary schools can be replicated elsewhere in the school system. I commend the pupils of Clachan primary school in Argyll, which is a small rural primary that was recently threatened with closure, for their success in the school’s being named joint winner of the prestigious best green school in Scotland award 2011. That shows that best practice can exist in the smallest schools as well as in larger ones. Rural primaries often have educational programmes that specialise in the biodiversity that surrounds them. For example, the excellent Argyll project called rivers in the classroom brings aquariums into the classroom to teach children about many aspects of freshwater fisheries and aquaculture, which are both important parts of the local economy. I thank the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning for coming to the renowned Dalmally agricultural show to present the first, second and third prizes for participation in that project to Dalmally, Kilchrenan and Inveraray primary schools. The project is a great way to teach children about the importance of clean watercourses, which are barometers of the environment’s health. The available evidence indicates that remote rural primary schools have higher attainment levels than do other schools, that attainment in secondary 4 is higher in rural secondary schools and that pupils from the most remote rural areas are more likely to go into employment or higher education as school leaver destinations than are pupils from other areas. I wonder why. Of course, rural schools often provide a range of additional services to the communities that they serve, including nurseries and crèches. Rural schools have wonderful diversity and much initiative is shown by their teachers. The Scottish Conservatives fully support rural schools’ role and wish the commission on rural education success in its deliberations. I will say a word about the importance of sport and physical activity, including competitive team sports, in helping to improve pupils’ physical and mental wellbeing, which in turn aids attainment levels and promotes lifelong team spirit. Local access to facilities is therefore vital. I am grateful to Scottish Gas for its continuing support for the mid-Argyll community swimming pool in Lochgilphead. The funding has helped to secure the pool’s future, which is welcome as it provides a much-needed swimming facility for the children of mid-Argyll.

Will the minister flag up at the next joint ministerial meeting the importance of getting CAP reform right for our Scottish farmers, crofters and the countryside?

Does the cabinet secretary appreciate that, in my region of the Highlands and Islands, a great many people cannot access broadband properly? What can be done about that?

The debate has been good, and I have enjoyed it. There have been some good contributions, including that from my colleague Ruth Davidson. She rightly extolled the virtues of the Arbroath smokie—a true triumph of taste—and Joan McAlpine rightly mentioned stovies, which are another Scottish icon. I associate myself with the very positive comments about the Scottish ten, and I am delighted that two of the three Scottish UNESCO world heritage sites—neolithic Orkney and St Kilda—are in my region. I expect that, like Patricia Ferguson, I am one of the few MSPs to have set foot on St Kilda. I will never forget that when I arrived at the islands on a June morning, the sky went black with the many thousands of seabirds that rose to greet us. That was a breathtaking sight. I climbed to the top of Hirta—the edge of the world. At the top of the 1,300ft cliffs, I peered over and marvelled at how the St Kilda people had surefootedly hopped from one crag to another and had risked life and limb to eke a living from the flesh, oil and feathers of the seabirds that surrounded them. St Kilda had its own biodiversity then—it also had its own Parliament and mail service. Those are the great stories of our heritage. Anyone who has—like me—been to the Neolithic village of Skara Brae, which the cabinet secretary mentioned, and to the immense stone circle of Brodgar, which are both in Orkney, will know that we in Scotland have one of the most interesting historical and archaeological heritages of anywhere in the world. The images that are available on the Scottish ten website are indeed stunning. Members have emphasised the importance of Scotland’s heritage to culture and the economy. Genealogical tourism is economically important and has huge potential for growth, given the Scottish diaspora’s size and the ever-growing interest in family history. Today, I had a meeting with the convener of the Standing Council of Scottish Chiefs, who told me what clan societies are doing to encourage tourism and said that they would like to do more. He made the point that Jean Urquhart raised about the importance of Scottish history and said that many people who live abroad seem to know more about it than we do. When people come to Scotland, they like to find their ancestors. People like to find their roots—especially their roots in Scotland. People come to Scotland to find those roots and most of them return. They also pass on the message, which is wonderful. I came across a website called findagraveinscotland.com. That is nothing to do with “Taggart” or Inspector Rebus; it is run by an organisation that aims to create one central online facility for all Scotland’s burial and cremation records, which must be a good thing. Like others, I commend the work of the team at the National Records of Scotland—under the outstanding leadership of my friend George MacKenzie—on the ScotlandsPeople website, which is a world-class resource. I also thank him and his colleagues for their excellent work in setting up the “Scottish Register of Tartans” database—a digital masterpiece that was established as a result of my member’s bill in the previous parliamentary session. Members might be pleased to learn that, since the tartan register came into existence in February 2009, 480 new tartans have been added to it, which is more than double the expected 100 per year. The register is, of course, a permanent, accessible and sustainable record of all our existing historic tartans, in addition to the new tartans. That is another example of a first-class digital heritage resource of which we can be proud. I am proud to have introduced the bill for that. The National Library of Scotland holds many documents that are fundamental to our heritage. The NLS has a very good digital gallery with a vast array of material that covers subjects as diverse as Churchill’s career as a Dundee MP, the medical history of British India and golf in Scotland from 1457 to 1744. Many of the NLS’s sources can be used by schools. That takes one back to that glorious moment in Scotland’s history that followed the act of union—Scotland’s great enlightenment and our influence in creating the western society in which we now live. In that respect, we stand on the shoulders of giants. We must strive to maintain the legacy and to improve on it. The importance of libraries and museums to education and improvement is enormous. On a negative note, I mention again that, although broadband take-up across the UK has increased to 74 per cent, Scotland has the lowest take-up, at only 61 per cent. Others have mentioned that. The Scottish Conservatives stand ready to support the good and incredibly important work that is being done to digitise our heritage. We will be positive about further initiatives—especially those that are geared to exploiting the economic opportunities that arise from our heritage. At the same time, we recognise the budgetary pressure that public sector organisations face. Historic Scotland’s budget will be cut by 24 per cent in real terms—from £47 million this year to £33 million in 2014-15. The challenge will therefore be to protect key projects that are of the highest quality.

I came across one lady who was a farmer and who was using her Avanti dish to feed her chickens.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to support farmers and crofters in controlling bracken. (S4O-00219)

There was a lot of warning that this was going to happen. Nevertheless, does the cabinet secretary agree that crofters and farmers in the Highlands and Islands depend on asulox or asulam to tackle the spread of bracken, which is a growing problem because of climate change and, in particular, the loss of stock on the hills? Will he ensure that he makes the strongest possible representations to the European Union on this matter and that, if that approach fails, he will, as he has indicated, press the UK Government to issue national emergency authorisations of the herbicide so that it can at least be used for three months a year?

I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests. This has generally been a good debate. Malcolm Chisholm cannot see the trees for the burning wood. John Wilson reminded me how much I miss Jim Mather’s excellent mind maps—bring him back. I thank all those organisations that provided briefings for the debate, including the Scottish Wildlife Trust, RSPB Scotland and the Royal Society of Edinburgh. All of us support the aim of moving to a low-carbon economy, but there are obvious differences about how we should achieve that and how big a role renewables can play. There is controversy over the cost of Scottish Government funding of action to achieve its emissions targets, as it will inevitably result in an impact on spend across other portfolios. The Government paper that was obtained through a freedom of information request by Scotland on Sunday revealed that, according to Government officials, the cost of meeting the 2020 emissions target is £8 billion—as Alex Johnstone pointed out—including £3.9 billion in transport costs and £3.2 billion in spending mainly on the conservation of energy. In the previous session of Parliament, Derek Brownlee said: “We need to make sure we are not reducing emissions by wrecking the economy.” He had a point. Like Maureen Watt, we believe that it is too soon to exclude nuclear power from the energy mix in Scotland. Wood Mackenzie published an independent assessment of Scotland’s energy options, as recommended by the Government’s own economic advisers, which noted that, were both nuclear plants—Hunterston and Torness—to be removed, Scotland would lose a very significant volume of low-carbon power. We were glad to secure an amendment to section 65 of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, which enables local authorities to establish schemes for reducing council tax when improvements are made to the energy efficiency of homes. Moreover, to achieve a low-carbon economy, Scotland must invest in high-quality public transport. A number of members described the good work done in their constituencies or regions. It was encouraging to read the news reports from the Scottish Renewables marine energy conference held at the Eden Court Theatre in Inverness earlier this week, which attracted 200 delegates. Ministers must heed the warning of Ken Street, head of business development at the ocean energy division of Alstom Hydro, who said that while the industry was at a tipping point, hurdles remain for firms moving from single devices such as those being tested at the European Marine Energy Centre in Orkney. He also said that there are real challenges over energy transmission, and long-term commitment from the Scottish Government is needed. Our Scottish Conservative amendment refers to the possible impact on migratory and non-migratory marine species and cetaceans of offshore wind farms and wave and tidal developments. I raise the issue because concerns have been expressed to me by people in the Highlands and Islands region about the proposed massive offshore wind development in the outer Moray Firth. There are fears about its impact on migratory stocks of salmon and sea trout and, possibly, on cetaceans. I hope that work is on-going to identify any possible problems, but my confidence was somewhat undermined when I heard that a senior Marine Scotland official had said to a senior marine lab official that salmon had been forgotten in the plan. It appears that the consultants, Brown & May Marine, while aware of the cetaceans, did not realise the huge importance of the migratory fish in the Moray Firth. It would be churlish to point out that, under the special areas of conservation rules, it would be the UK and not Scotland that risked facing enormous fines. If Scotland was separate, the Scottish Government would face those fines. What is important is that enough pilot studies and research are carried out beforehand in order to identify whether there will be problems in the marine environment. The development could be the biggest offshore wind farm project in the world, so it is very exciting. However, the Government must ensure that it does not throw the baby out with the bathwater with regard to vital elements of the present economy.

It is very kind of the minister to say that I can write to him and I certainly will do so. Some 17 important salmon rivers debouch into the outer Moray Firth. Several of them are special areas of conservation, such as the Moriston, the Beauly and the Spey, because of the migratory species. The European eel is protected on the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s red list and is also migratory. The proposed energy site is to be built on sandbanks around the Smith Bank, an important sand eel breeding area. Sand eels are a vital element in the marine food chain for young fish and seabirds. The outer Moray Firth is also rich in cetacean life, such as bottlenose dolphins and porpoises, not to mention the visits from killer whales that come to eat the seals. Some of these protected species are under international, not just EU and UK, designations. It has been a good debate, and I support the amendment in Alex Johnstone’s name.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that arrangements for the attendance of Scottish ministers at European Union meetings are already in place? Has she not therefore all but admitted that the amendment to the Scotland Bill on the matter, which was one of Alex Salmond’s six demands, is totally unnecessary?

Will the cabinet secretary support the rights of Welsh and Northern Irish ministers in this regard?

Many of us will recall Harold Wilson’s comment that “a week is a long time in politics.” With the Scottish National Party, three days appears to be a long time. Having drafted its initial motion on Monday calling for statutory rights for Scottish ministers to be part of British delegations to EU meetings, by Tuesday it had been watered down to the flimsy motion that we now have before us. Indeed, it is almost as flimsy as the paper that was launched by the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs earlier in the summer. Having said that, I am delighted by the SNP’s spectacular U-turn, which rightly acknowledges the UK coalition Government’s commitment to giving a greater say to devolved Administrations on our relationship with Europe. However, the cabinet secretary’s motion fails to highlight the fact that we in Scotland have a strong role in European policy making through our partnerships within the United Kingdom. That is why I have lodged an amendment. Although we may be tempted to enter a partisan debate on the role that Scotland would play in Europe if the SNP separated her from the rest of the UK family, I intend to consider the positive current position that Scotland enjoys with the EU. It is true that when it comes to fisheries, 70 per cent of UK landings are by the Scottish fleet. In that very clear sense, Scotland should have a greater say in decisions that are taken at the annual fisheries council in Brussels each December. Indeed, our own European and External Relations Committee made the point in its recent “Inquiry into the Impact of the Treaty of Lisbon on Scotland” that there is scope in the treaty for national Parliaments, devolved Parliaments and devolved Governments to play a greater role in the EU’s decision-making process. Although I acknowledge that it was unfortunate that the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment was allegedly excluded by the previous Labour Government from attending a meeting in Vigo in April 2010 to discuss the future of the common fisheries policy, it is clear that our present Prime Minister, David Cameron, is open to greater flexibility. Indeed, in September of last year David Cameron agreed to allow Richard Lochhead to lead UK-level fisheries talks in Brussels on the on-going mackerel dispute with Iceland and the Faroes. The, as usual, gracious response from our First Minister Alex Salmond was: “I am glad that … the Prime Minister has accepted the request for Richard Lochhead to speak on this vitally important issue for Scottish fishermen.”

I will quickly do so.

Rome was not built in a day, and neither was the United Kingdom. I am somewhat confused as to why the SNP Administration initially thought it necessary to propose an amendment to the Scotland Bill to formalise in legislation the presence of Scottish ministers at EU meetings. It is using a sledgehammer to crack a nut. The current arrangements appear to work and David Cameron has been true to his word in starting to develop the coalition Government’s respect agenda for Scotland. Within three days of becoming Prime Minister, he came to the Scottish Parliament to meet Mr Salmond. Blair did not do that and Brown did not do that. UK ministers now regularly appear before our parliamentary committees.

In a moment. The question that the SNP needs to answer is this: where do we draw the line on the attendance at EU meetings of ministers from devolved Assemblies? If the SNP’s underlying attitude were to be implemented, what would stop the Northern Irish or Welsh arguing for a greater say at European level? People from the Basque Country, the Catalans, the Flemish, the Bavarians and people from the five Italian regions would all want their interests to be represented at the Council of Ministers. It would be like the tower of Babel all over again; it would become unmanageable and unsustainable. Scottish ministers should focus their attention on active discussions with their UK counterparts prior to meetings with our EU neighbours. It is called forward planning. Why not negotiate as one and argue as one, to achieve the best results for all people in the UK?

I think that David Cameron has a great respect for the Scottish Government, as do other members. At the joint ministerial committee on 8 June 2010, William Hague undertook to write to his Cabinet colleagues to ask them to respond positively to approaches from devolved Administrations to attend and speak at council meetings. He is one of David Cameron’s ministers, so I imagine that he would not have said that unless he meant it—[Interruption.] May I make some progress? Ministers should remember—

Oh. Right. It is great that the SNP has watered down its motion. There is nothing like a sinner who repents, and today the SNP has repented. I will be charitable and say that the party might simply have realised that the Scottish people do not need unnecessary political and constitutional tinkering. What the Scottish people need is sustainable jobs and better living standards. I move amendment S4M-00797.1, to leave out from “should” to end and insert: “has a strengthened role in European policy making through its membership of the United Kingdom; welcomes the decision of the Scottish Government to drop its unnecessary demand for Scottish ministers to have statutory rights to be included in UK delegations through an amendment to the Scotland Bill, and further welcomes the ongoing active cooperation and consultation between the Scottish and UK governments, which ensures that the interests of the Scottish people are fully represented in the European Union in both devolved and reserved matters.”

17. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with NHS Highland regarding the future of Cowal hospice in Dunoon. (S4O-00108)

The minister is right that there is an enormous amount of high feeling about the issue. Does she agree that it is not surprising that people want local accessibility to high-quality palliative care services and that those are a key factor in a place such as Dunoon?

Does the cabinet secretary accept that one of the problems for small and large developers is the difficulty in getting grid connections? What can the Scottish Government do to help with that?

On the point about events—particularly in relation to Glasgow—would the cabinet secretary consider the idea put forward by Richard Demarco a few years ago of holding a biennale, similar to that in Venice, of the visual arts in Glasgow?

Thank you very much for being so generous, Presiding Officer. I am pleased to have inherited my party’s spokesmanship on Europe and external affairs from my great old friend Ted Brocklebank. I am sure that others in the chamber will want to wish Ted and his fiancée, Frances, best wishes for their future together, as their wedding will take place next week. That just shows the extra energy that retirement from politics can release—it appears that there is life in the old dog yet. I congratulate Hanzala Malik on a really inspirational maiden speech. The only thing that I disagreed with was that he said that we were an industrial nation, not an agricultural one—I would like to think that we are both. My friend Ruth Davidson has dealt very impressively with the cultural aspect of the debate. In my contribution, which will not include a rendition of “Campbeltown Loch” or any other song, I will focus on European issues and then say a few words about Scotland’s role in external affairs and, specifically, our relationship with Malawi. The forthcoming reform of the common agricultural policy is a vital crossroads for the Scottish agricultural industry and, indeed, the whole rural sector in Scotland. Although I welcome the interventions of the European Parliament’s Agriculture and Rural Development Committee in support of food production, I know that Scottish farmers are still plagued by too much bureaucracy and regulation. It is important that access to agri-environmental schemes helps, rather than hinders, Scottish farmers and crofters. Moreover, we need a fairer EU-wide playing field on the issue of modulation. Integrating greening measures into a reformed common agricultural policy should make life easier rather than more complicated and it should open up more income streams. The fact that our European cousins have recently seen the value of peatlands as a carbon sink could also be very important to Scotland, given our high proportion of peat-rich soil. Public good and food production should be seen in the same light, in terms of value to our farmers and crofters as well as the welfare of all people throughout the world. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will address that in her closing remarks. Another area in need of urgent reform is the common fisheries policy, which for decades has beleaguered our once-prosperous fishing communities throughout Scotland. Every job at sea promotes at least four on the land. That is why the industry is so important and why we, along with the UK Government and the Scottish Government, welcome the European Commission’s commitment to devolving competence for fisheries management to member-state Governments. We await with interest the Commission’s legislative proposals on reform, which are due to be published next month. We want an early appraisal from the Scottish industry and the Scottish Government of the proposals’ value for Scotland. Overall, the coalition Government’s attitude to the EU is sensible and pragmatic. Many members would agree that some decisions that Brussels takes are making people feel increasingly isolated and disconnected from the European decision-making process. That is why David Cameron has pledged that an EU bill will be introduced to give the British people—I am glad to say that that includes us—a greater say in any decisions that the EU takes in their name. The bill will also ensure that any further handover of power from this country to Brussels takes place only with their consent. Any such proposal will be put to a vote, through a national referendum. That referendum will not be delayed for fear of not getting the result that the UK Government wants—unlike the planned referenda of some other politicians who are not a million miles from where I am standing. All of us can be proud of Scotland’s contribution to external aid and charity. Our strong and historic connections with Malawi, which go back centuries, have been augmented by the work of Scottish individuals, not least former members of the Parliament such as Jack McConnell and Karen Gillon. The former First Minister’s initiative in 2005 of signing a co-operation agreement with Malawi demonstrated the Scottish tendency to help those who are in need. I hope that the current Scottish Government and the minister will continue the good work of Lord McConnell of Glenscorrodale—my goodness, that is a mouthful. The minister’s announcement last year that financial support will be provided for 1,000 primary school teachers in Malawi is most welcome. I pay tribute to my local charity, Mary’s Meals, which is based in Dalmally in Argyll and has recently done so much in Malawi as well as elsewhere.

I thank the minister for that remark. We who live near Dalmally are proud of our local charity and its humble origins. It is an acorn that has become a mighty oak. Since Scotland conceived the enlightenment, which changed the face of western civilisation, our country has continued as an active international voice. The Parliament is effective in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. I hope that the new executive board that was elected yesterday will continue its good work. Other bodies, such as the British Council Scotland, provide a forum for international cultural and educational exchange. Over the past year, the council has supported more than 1,000 international activities in 15 per cent of all Scottish schools, as well as giving global study and work opportunities to around 4,000 Scottish and international students. It is vital that the high quality and standards of our learning institutions are not allowed to drop due to financial constraint, because we must never lose Scotland’s reputation for high-quality academia and for being outward looking and inventive. Scotland has a key role to play in the UK in promoting what is good and fair across the world. We Scots have a wonderful reputation, but we must always remember why we have it. Being part of the UK has helped the Scottish reputation abroad in the past. I hope that it will continue to do so in the future.

I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests. I am pleased to take part in today’s debate. It is right that we debate this issue early in this new session, because rural affairs and the environmental issues that face Scotland are important, especially to my area, the Highlands and Islands, and to farming, fishing and crofting communities. There have been some good speeches today, including some by the Parliament’s new members. That bodes well for the years ahead. Alex Fergusson and others rightly focused on the CAP reform. I agree with the bottom lines that he set out in relation to our approach. In its manifesto, the SNP said that it will build on the recommendations of the Brian Pack inquiry. I was surprised that the cabinet secretary did not mention Mr Pack’s report. I rather wonder what has happened to it, and I ask the minister to set out in some detail how the recommendations will be implemented.

If it was mentioned, I am delighted. However, I would like some more details, in particular on issues that are of concern in my region, such as the question of how headage payments will be made available to producers in less favoured areas, and how stock numbers can be maintained and boosted in our remote rural and island communities, with all the connected infrastructure that accompanies the keeping of livestock—that is one of my priorities, and it must be one of the Scottish Government’s as well, especially after the worrying declines over the past few years.

I would like to make some progress, minister. On the subject of stock, I want to mention the electronic identification of sheep. The cabinet secretary will remember the warnings that we heard in the chamber on that subject, and he will doubtless have read the front page of The Scottish Farmer. It is not as if we had no warning. The main focus for so many sheep producers in the Highlands and Islands is just a few weeks away when the sales start. What assurance can he give that sheep farmers will not be penalised on cross-compliance if their records are not 100 per cent accurate? Does he agree that the Brussels bureaucrats need to recognise the reality on the ground of recording sheep movements in Scotland. The sheep are not all kept in fields; they are on big mountains. It is unfair on farmers and crofters to have the extra worry about EID when they explained what it would all mean ages ago. I hope that the talks with Brussels that I know the minister is having on the subject are going well. We all accept that greening will be a major part of the reformed CAP, but I agree with NFU Scotland that the EU must take a proportionate and commonsense approach. In practice, that means agri-environmental schemes being delivered on the farm through simple measures that will allow productivity and farm competitiveness to be maintained. It might be that the new-found importance of peat as a deliverer of public good in relation to global warming can produce extra benefit for those who farm on peatlands, many of whom are in severely disadvantaged areas. I hope that the minister will comment on that in his summing up. I agree with the other members who said that food production must be at the heart of our agricultural policy. The importance of food security, which John Scott promoted so effectively during the previous parliamentary session, is becoming increasingly mainstream, and Scotland is well placed to take advantage of that. If the cabinet secretary still wants to intervene, I would be delighted to give way now.

I would be delighted to have a word about that, but I wonder what the cabinet secretary is going to do to bring it about. The Scottish Conservatives are determined to secure a genuine reform to the common fisheries policy that ensures that conservation and industry work hand in hand, and recognises the conservation measures that Scotland’s fishermen have already taken in recent years. They have undergone more pain than any other fleet has. The reduction and elimination of discards are obviously a priority, and the Government must listen to and understand the priorities of the different sectors of the industry, from east to west. Fish farming, or aquaculture of shellfish and fish, is also of economic importance to my region, particularly in some remote areas, and some excellent work is being done there, as highlighted recently in the Crown Estate aquaculture awards. At the same time, the importance of Scottish angling should not be underestimated. Tensions remain between fish farming and the wild fisheries sector, and I had a short discussion about that issue with the environment minister last week. This week, representatives of the Clyde Fishermen’s Association raised their worries about the impact of the chemicals that are used to tackle sea lice on the maerl seaweed beds.

Right. The Scottish Conservatives will support the Government in trying to find common ground and ways ahead as we all seek to achieve sustainable co-existence in the fisheries area.

Today’s debate has been largely useful, with some good and pertinent speeches from all sides. Aileen McLeod and Alex Fergusson rightly made many good points about the Crichton campus in Dumfries, and I stress the importance of the UHI to the Highlands and Islands. I thank organisations such as Universities Scotland, Scotland’s Colleges and the Alliance of Sector Skills Councils Scotland, which have provided us with useful briefings in advance of the debate. I stress the importance of physical education in schools, particularly competitive sports. What is the point of races or games that nobody wins? That is hardly an inspiration for the Olympics. It is important that we build young people’s confidence and develop in them vital transferable skills, such as team working, that are important in later life. I listened to the admirable Stewart Maxwell’s list of SNP achievements. Like him, I declare an interest, in that my daughter is studying primary teaching at the University of Aberdeen. I hope that, when she leaves, she will be one of the lucky 20 per cent who are able to get a job.

Only one in five newly qualified teachers gets a job at the moment. The SNP’s record from its first term in government is poor because it never delivered the two hours a week of PE that was promised in its 2007 manifesto. We look forward to the present cabinet secretary doing better and repeat our consistent call for more local authority schools’ sports grounds to be opened after school hours and at weekends so that they can be used by enthusiastic youngsters who want to play and practice what they have learned. I turn to the issue of rural school closures, specifically in Argyll and Bute. I welcomed the council’s pragmatic decision on Tuesday to halt its current consultation in the light of what the cabinet secretary announced to the Parliament last week. The entire Argyll and Bute rural schools closure issue has been an unfortunate saga that has affected many communities. I congratulate the small schools for literally keeping their banners flying throughout. The cabinet secretary does not like to be reminded of this, but the fact stands that it was the then SNP and independent-led council that started it all off with its proposals to close 26 schools. Numerous concerns have emerged as the proposals have gone forward, albeit with a reduced number of 11 schools facing closure in the most recent list. Those concerns have been varied, covering issues from the accuracy of the information that has been used by the council in closure consultation documents and how it has arrived at future roll projections, to how the council has gone about consulting individual parents, pupils and staff. Those genuine concerns are more than legitimate enough to justify the cabinet secretary’s decision to call for a moratorium while key issues are addressed. Nevertheless, like Liz Smith, I question why that will take a whole year. One message that has been sent loud and clear concerns the vital role that rural primary schools play in sustaining rural communities. Businesses, including those in the aquaculture and renewables sectors, have made the point to me that their ability to attract high-quality workers to remote areas is dependent on education provision being locally available and accessible. The purpose of the Government should be to revive rural communities, and good local schools are a way of doing that. Before I leave the subject of rural schools, I highlight the efforts of the school community at Craignish primary school at Ardfern in Argyll, who are this year celebrating the school’s 150th anniversary. Under the excellent leadership of head teacher Anne Wilson, Craignish is an outstanding example of the kind of primary school that we want to flourish in our rural areas. The school is one of the reasons why the community of Ardfern is one of the strongest and most genuinely independent in Argyll and Bute. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary spoke of his support for Gaelic education. Regrettably, however, it was reported last week in McCaig’s column in The Oban Times that a female student was unable to sit highers in Gaelic and music at Oban high school and would have to go to a school in Glasgow if she wanted to study those subjects. Yet Oban regularly hosts the Mod and the Highlands are full of ethnic musical talent. If, as the cabinet secretary says, there is plenty of money for education, why is there not enough to widen Oban high school’s higher curriculum to include subjects that are truly relevant to the area? I am sure that the cabinet secretary is sincere in his wish for improvement, but seeing will be believing. I echo the sentiments of my friend Liz Smith about the worrying statistic that only a fifth of newly qualified teachers are able to find jobs, and the concerns about the SNP’s refusal to acknowledge the true size of the universities’ funding gap. The cabinet secretary has a very full inbox with many and varied challenges ahead, and the Scottish Conservatives are prepared to work positively with the Government in the best interests of Scotland’s pupils, parents and teachers. We will, however, vigorously oppose any moves to centralise issues. We look forward to working with the cabinet secretary.

Is it not true that the Scottish Government promised probationary teachers that, after their year’s probation job, they would get a proper job?

How will the cabinet secretary ensure that the commission on the delivery of rural education has strong community input to its work to ensure that its output is credible, understandable and acceptable to all stakeholders?

Does the member mean that Scotland would receive none of the Crown Estate’s wealth from south of the border?

I congratulate the First Minister on being reappointed, and the new cabinet secretaries and ministers on their appointments. They are the people in whose hands Scotland’s immediate economic, cultural and social future lies, and they have a daunting task. We on this side of the chamber will certainly not be shy in holding them to account if they start to fail. There will be no room for passengers or for self-indulgence on pet schemes. The hideous debt that was left by the last Labour Government has left no spare room for anything other than practical, sharp and efficient policies that can cut waste and deliver prosperity and hope for people in Scotland. Keeping efficient front-line public services is paramount, as is keeping things such as small rural primary schools in small rural communities. Growth is also paramount, and we Conservatives think that a duty to promote economic growth should be placed on all public agencies and that they should report on whether the impact on growth of any of their decisions has been positive or negative. In that way, we will know whether their decisions were right or wrong. We must also help small business, which means having low tax. We think that the business rates poundage must be no higher than that in England, and we would like to see a business rates reform bill that would consolidate legislation on non-domestic rates and make permanent the small business discount that we secured from the SNP Government in the previous session of Parliament. The SNP Government should also extend the scope of the small business rates relief scheme in this Parliament. In the 2010 revaluation, far too many businesses found out that their valuations had increased at very short notice, which can obviously affect their ability to budget properly. We therefore urge the Government to increase to at least six months the notice period for a change in business rates. Small businesses have told me that when they appeal against a higher valuation, they have to pay the new extra tax until their appeal has been heard. That can be difficult for them to manage, so we ask that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth allow businesses to defer payment of the disputed amount until an appeal has been heard and decided on. During my recent campaign in Argyll and Bute—I am sure that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Michael Russell, will agree with me on this—the people of Argyll and Bute raised again and again the issue of the appalling state of the roads infrastructure there, which is officially the worst in Scotland. If the Government wants to take Scotland forward and encourage growth and small business, especially tourism-related business, it must do something drastic to improve our roads infrastructure, look at the relevant Audit Scotland report and stop passing the buck to hard-pressed local authorities, which cannot stretch their budgets. I hate to bring in a sour note at this point, but e-mails poured in this morning about the conclusion of the tendering process for the Dunoon-Gourock CalMac ferry route. People in Dunoon are outraged that despite their previous MSP, Jim Mather, promising them two shiny new vehicle ferries for the route, there are now to be no vehicle ferries at all and it is to be restricted to a passenger-only service. That will upset the commuter plans of many and all others who have used that useful service for generations. However, what staggers me most are the remarks of the new Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, Alex Neil—a man whom I have often admired but who seems to consider that the destruction of the vehicle ferry service to Dunoon is an achievement. Let me take the liberty of quoting his statement on the issue: “The Scottish Government has committed to delivering an improved ferry service for the people of Cowal and Inverclyde, understanding the importance of this continued ferry route for our remote and island communities and this winning bid achieves that.” Has he moved to another planet? First, people in Dunoon may consider that his description of their historic and distinguished town as a “remote ... island” community is a shade inaccurate, to say the least, and some of the more touchy among them may even feel insulted, but he has actually and factually succeeded in making them even more remote. If the SNP Government really considers that that is an achievement, God help all of us for the next five years.

In a moment. I am quite certain that Alex Neil will go to Dunoon along with his fellow cabinet secretary and local MSP, Mike Russell, to explain to the people who live there the benefits of the so-called improved service. He will probably say that they are better off than the people of Campbeltown and he would be right, because they have no ferry service at all, despite having been promised one. In a spirit of co-operation, let me remind him, before he travels, to remind his chauffeur to take the route to Western Ferries at McInroy’s Point because, sadly, the Gourock terminal will no longer provide him with a vehicle service.

If I am allowed to.

I remember a good many things about the campaign—very pleasurable the hustings were, too—but I do not remember refusing to give a commitment, because I did not make such a promise in the first place, unlike the cabinet secretary’s predecessor, who promised two shiny new ferries. Now, there is not even a rowing boat to take a car.

I, too, thank Marlyn Glen for everything that she has done in the Parliament and wish her happiness and success in the future. It is a pleasure to close for the Scottish Conservatives in this short debate on the last day of the present session. Like others, I pay tribute to the work of the Equal Opportunities Committee, ably led by my friend Margaret Mitchell, for a very good stage 1 report and for its subsequent work at stage 2. All those who gave evidence to the committee are to be commended, as are the staff members of SPICe, who produced two extremely useful briefings that helped to inform our debates. The bill has enjoyed widespread cross-party support since its publication last year, and rightly so. The whole Parliament is united in seeking to ensure that people who wish to marry or enter into a civil partnership can do so freely and without coercion of any kind. It is the duty of any Government to protect the citizens who elected it from bullying, harassment and threats, especially in the case of marriage. It is appropriate that the bill will bring Scotland into line with legislation elsewhere in the UK. The value of the bill also lies in the public message that it sends: that the Parliament is prepared to bring the matter out into the open and to take the lead in achieving a consensus that forced marriage will not be tolerated. As we heard earlier and during the stage 1 proceedings, although the evidence suggests that the incidence of forced marriage in Scotland is low, it is an extremely high-impact occurrence, and one that it is right that the Parliament takes strong action against. The ability for victims of forced marriage to apply to a civil court for a forced marriage protection order has been widely welcomed. As Louise Johnson told the committee, “it does what it says on the tin”.—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 23 November 2010; c 2180.] In conclusion, the Scottish Conservatives welcome the improvements to the bill that were made at stage 2 and are very happy to support its passing at stage 3. All of us hope that, when its provisions are enacted, the bill will prove to be of real use in preventing forced marriages and assisting the victims of such a dreadful occurrence. Our Parliament can be proud to pass the bill.

Does the minister agree that the local Barra community should be commended for a project that will, I hope, produce a sustainable income for the community for many years to come and for many generations of Barra people?

I am pleased to close the debate on the bill for the Scottish Conservatives. I join many others in paying tribute to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee for its good stage 1 report and its efforts at subsequent stages, and I thank the many organisations and individuals who took the time to give evidence to the committee or to send briefings to MSPs. In addition, SPICe’s Alasdair Reid produced two very good briefings, which were helpful for today’s debate and the stage 1 debate. I very much enjoyed Stewart Stevenson’s speech. “The Dam Busters” is one of my favourite films. He was right when he said that an explosion at the front of a dam can cause it to fall in the other way—we saw that happening in the film. I wondered whether he might have heard the strains of “The Dambusters March” as he spoke.

No, I am not going to sing it because I am not allowed to in here, but it is one of my favourite tunes. As I said in the stage 1 debate, the bill is of particular importance to my region of the Highlands and Islands because of the high number of reservoirs and lochs there. In that debate, I focused on concerns that were voiced in the stage 1 report about the cost implications for current and potential managers of medium or high-risk reservoirs. Amendments at stage 2 and today have gone some way towards addressing those concerns. It is right for ministers to put in place regulations before SEPA is able to charge any fees. It is also right that SEPA must consult widely on any charging scheme for the initial registration fee, annual charges and the cost of checking the dams, which might be done every year. I would be grateful if the minister could set out in more detail how the Government envisages consultation taking place and how it will ensure that it is as comprehensive as possible. In Scotland, the feed-in tariff scheme is encouraging the construction of many small to medium-sized hydro schemes, especially in the Highlands and Islands. The developers of many of those schemes will want to construct and engineer storage reservoirs or to use existing lochs in the hills as storage reservoirs to maximise the potential of the schemes in dry weather. It is therefore important that developers are aware of any additional costs that SEPA might levy so that those can be factored into the schemes’ budgets. That will be important when people are trying to raise money from bankers to pay for the schemes—everyone knows how difficult that can be. I welcome the fact that the bill will give ministers the power to issue grants to managers of high or medium-risk reservoirs that are not regulated by the 1975 act to help them to comply with the new legislation. Again, any further details on such grants from ministers at this stage would be welcomed by constituents who might be affected for the reasons that I have given. How will ministers make people aware of such grants? Will it be done in the same way as it was for the notorious agri-environmental grants? The Scottish Conservatives are content to see the bill passed today because we recognise the need to enhance reservoir safety and clarify the legal framework that surrounds the construction and management of controlled reservoirs. However, we do not want people to suddenly have to pay charges for natural lochans in the hills just because they are there. We look to ministers to ensure that any remaining concerns about the cost implications are fully addressed and that all stakeholders are fully involved and consulted as the legislation is being implemented.

I am delighted that there will be grants towards the costs of people developing reservoirs or bringing them up to standard, but what about inspection charges in the years thereafter? Does the cabinet secretary know how much those inspection charges will be and how often the reservoirs will have to be inspected?

I welcome the opportunity to take part in today’s debate. As Jackson Carlaw has indicated, the Scottish Conservatives value very highly the work of the Public Audit Committee. I welcome the report’s key themes, and I pay tribute to the committee members and the committee clerks and support staff for producing a sensible and very useful report, and for all their work in the current session of Parliament. The committee has in this session produced some excellent reports that have been of genuine importance to my region of the Highlands and Islands. Those include the 2008 “Report on the 2006/07 Audit of the Western Isles Health Board” and the 2010 “Review of Cairngorm funicular railway”, both of which addressed significant issues of public concern. More widely, the committee’s other reports this session have been especially good, such as those on free personal and nursing care and palliative care, and the review of the First ScotRail passenger rail franchise. I agree strongly with the committee’s recommendations and requests for updates from the Scottish Government, particularly on the need for maximum transparency in the use of public funds and the decision-making processes of ministers and officials. As the committee suggests, the Government should provide an update on how it proposes to increase transparency in those key aspects. In the context of financial transparency, I will touch on the gathering in 2009, which David Whitton mentioned, and on the committee’s good report on it, which was published last week. There could be no more appropriate case in which more financial transparency was needed from the Scottish Government. It is a sad and damning indictment of the Scottish Government’s handling of the affair that the report concludes that all due diligence was not undertaken before the Scottish Government provided a public loan; that the permanent secretary was not informed of the loan; and that the Scottish Government has undertaken no internal audit in relation to the gathering. Where were the caution and care for the interests of taxpayers’ money? Where were the caution and care for the wellbeing of the small businesses that ended up losing money for a job well done while the Government crowed over the gathering’s success? My wish for greater financial transparency, as suggested in the report’s key themes, is driven by a desire to protect small businesses from facing financial hardship as they did after The Gathering 2009 Ltd collapsed. It is shameful that, to this day, a group of 12 creditors of The Gathering 2009 Ltd—from caterers to public relations professionals—is still trying desperately to obtain payment of £110,000. They are small companies, which are the backbone of our economy. They deserve far better from the Scottish Government, which—arguably—steered and controlled the one-off stand-alone event. Losing money because of one’s own mistakes is one thing, but the bitterest pill for small businesses is not to be paid for work that was well done in good faith, because that leaves a rotten taste. The creditors are adamant that, had the Scottish Government not extended a loan of £180,000 to The Gathering 2009 Ltd, the event would have been cancelled. That would have been highly embarrassing for the Government, but at least the creditors would not have incurred debts. As the key themes report suggests, transparency might have prevented financial hardship in our small business sector. The committee slates the City of Edinburgh Council’s role in the sorry saga. I hope that those who are involved will be fully held to account and that that will happen next week.

I hardly think that the Government acted in good faith when what was going on was not transparent. The committee plays a vital role in the Parliament’s workings and I am confident that it will continue to do so in the next session. As the key themes report concludes, the pressure on public expenditure for the foreseeable future means that the report and its findings are even more timely, so it is even more important that its recommendations are adopted, whatever the make-up of the next Scottish Government might be.

Will the member take an intervention?

The purpose of amendments 57 and 58 is to help to address concerns about sika deer in Scotland. [Interruption.]

Native to east Asia, sika have escaped from parks since the late 19th century and have become established in the wilds of Scotland. Their populations can reach higher densities than those of any other species in a similar habitat and they can cause significant damage to trees and agricultural production. The main concern in relation to sika is their ability to interbreed with our native red deer and produce fertile offspring. Research into the matter was recently carried out by a team of international researchers in Kintyre and was published in the Journal of Animal Ecology in 2009. Professor Josephine Pemberton, of the University of Edinburgh, whose laboratory undertook the research, said: “It is possible that a new type of deer with new ecological impacts will emerge … the ‘Mongrel of the Glens’ is a real possibility.” The fact that, according to the Scottish Government’s own figures, sika now occupy more than 40 per cent of the red deer range underlines the seriousness of the problem. I welcome the fact that some refuges for red deer that are free from sika deer genes have been established on west coast islands. However, it is my firm belief that we have an obligation to do much more to protect the genetic integrity of what is arguably Scotland’s most iconic animal. There are robust ecological, heritage and economic reasons to act. For visitors coming to Scotland, few experiences match the thrill of spotting a red deer stag on the hillside. However, the appeal of our tourism product will be markedly lessened if we cannot guarantee that what looks like a red deer is a red deer. Similarly, for people who come from across the globe to stalk and hunt our famous red deer, the appeal of doing so would undoubtedly be lessened should there be uncertainty about the purity of the red deer stock. Last August, when I asked the minister, in a written question, about the Government’s aim with regards to sika, I was told that SNH had a statutory duty, under the Deer (Scotland) Act 1996 to “further the conservation ... of deer” —[Official Report, Written Answers, 25 August 2010; S3W-35553.] and that that applies to all deer in Scotland, including sika and hybrids. Although any widespread efforts to eradicate sika would be neither desirable nor achievable, I believe that SNH should be developing a robust strategy to deal with sika in areas in which hybridisation is widespread. A statutory duty to conserve all deer would appear to militate against any such strategy. The effect of the amendments is to remove the duty that is placed on SNH to conserve all deer and to replace it with a duty to conserve native deer. That is an important first step if we are serious about protecting the genetic purity of our native red deer. I move amendment 57.

Anyone who regularly drives through areas such as Glen Coe often sees the carcases of deer by the side of the road. That is the case elsewhere in the north of Scotland. I have no doubt that the flashing warning signs that were recently installed in Glen Coe following lobbying by me and others have reduced the number of such collisions. However, accidents involving red deer remain too frequent. It has been my distressing experience on occasion to come across deer that are badly wounded and obviously in great pain as a result of being hit by vehicles and left to die. I am concerned that many people are not aware of what to do if they hit a deer and cripple it or if they find a deer in the circumstances that I have described. I am grateful to the retired Dalmally policeman Christopher Gillespie for giving me his experience on the issue. He found that people would bring wounded deer to him at the police station. He informed me of something called the SHAMPOG pool that is taught at the Scottish Police College at Tulliallan. SHAMPOG stands for sheep, horses, asses, mules, pigs, ox and goats. People must report to the police any accident involving an animal on that list, but it does not include deer. That adds to my theory that wounded deer are left lying in pain at the side of the road. In my view, that situation should be changed. The answer is clearly a matter of education. I therefore urge SNH to look into the matter and to address what is undoubtedly a gap in the code of good practice regarding deer welfare. Amendment 59 seeks to clarify in the bill that SNH can take measures to ensure that drivers are made aware of whom to contact following a collision with a deer. I commend it to members. I move amendment 59.

The minister might consider the possibility of getting deer added to the SHAMPOG pool, which I explained earlier. However, on the strength of what she has said, I am prepared to accept that something will be done about the issue, so I seek to withdraw the amendment. Amendment 59, by agreement, withdrawn. Section 27—Protection of badgers Amendment 36 moved—[Elaine Murray]—and agreed to. After section 28A

As I said in the stage 1 debate, “It is vital that we get the bill right for those men and women who work in the hills and glens and keep them well managed”.—[Official Report, 2 December 2010; c 31244.] After all, the bill will impact on land managers and estates throughout Scotland, and I am always incredibly conscious of the socioeconomic importance of the country sports industry, especially in fragile remote and rural areas. Although the parliamentary process has improved the bill in many ways, some concerns definitely remain and, given that much of the media coverage of the bill has focused on wildlife crime, I want to use this opportunity to bring some balance and proportionality to the debate. I believe that everyone in the Parliament deplores wildlife crime of every kind and supports strong action against it. The vast majority of landowners and land managers deplore it, too. We should not forget that we are talking about a very small number of culprits. We must be aware that the vast majority of Scotland’s sporting estates are among the best managed and often most conservation friendly in Europe—and, indeed, further afield. I agree with the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association and the Game and Wildlife Conservation Trust Scotland that peer pressure is likely to have a greater effect than overburdensome statutory intervention. That is one reason why the Scottish Conservatives were the only party to oppose the vicarious liability provisions at stage 2, and we make no apology for doing that. Nonetheless, as John Scott said, we are where we are. Can the minister give detailed timescales on the commencement of that part of the bill? Is it correct that it will not be commenced for six months, to allow the Government to draw up guidance, and that organisations such as the SRPBA and the GWCTS will be involved in that process? I would be grateful if the minister could put that information on the record. Also, what defence does a landowner have against being framed or stitched up by people who are intent on doing them down by placing poisoned baits on their land? How can they prove their innocence? During stages 1 and 2, it was clearly demonstrated that the snaring of foxes is vital in allowing land managers to protect livestock and maximise biodiversity. Snaring, with the strict regulation that is placed on it, is a key tool for many farmers, crofters and land managers in my region of the Highlands and Islands. Anybody who has witnessed the bloody, distressing and savage results of Mr Fox’s visits to a chicken run, a lambing park or a pheasant pen would probably be shocked into realising the necessity of snares as a preventive tool. The Scottish Conservatives were pleased to amend the bill successfully at stages 2 and 3. We welcome large parts of the bill, including the modernisation of game law and the regulation of non-native species, and I thank the minister for supporting my amendments. As I indicated, however, we remain concerned that the Government has pushed ahead in some areas—notably on vicarious liability—without the support of key countryside stakeholders. We are content for the bill as a whole to pass at stage 3 but ask that ministers work as closely and positively as possible with all the countryside interests in the most co-operative manner as the bill’s provisions are enacted. I close by saying how good the committee was, as were the people who made contributions to the debates.

Just for information, the cost of diesel on Tiree is 155p per litre and, on Islay, it is 148p.

In her initial reply, the minister mentioned waterways. Does she agree that canals and river banks are often good, hidden wildlife corridors but that they tend to suffer from neglect and to be covered in rubbish and the like? Will the minister turn her attention to improving some of those wildlife areas, not only for the wildlife but for the people who can see the wildlife in them?

I am pleased to close this important debate for the Scottish Conservatives. Like other members, I pay tribute to the excellent work of my friend Margaret Mitchell and commend all the members, clerks and support staff of the Equal Opportunities Committee for another very thorough and useful report. Thanks should also go to all those who gave evidence, both oral and written. The debate has largely been constructive, as befits the subject, and there have been some excellent speeches. Given the importance of the issues that we have been talking about, the debate could have gone on for much longer. One theme that emerges strongly in the report, which has been raised by several members today, is the lack of meaningful data about migrants who live and work in Scotland and the difficulties that that can cause. I hope that the UK Border Agency will seriously reconsider the committee’s suggestion that migration figures be produced on a Scotland basis, not just a UK basis. As we heard, the lack of meaningful migration data is felt especially acutely in the education sector, in which the planning of services is so important. Paragraph 62 of the report talks about the working in Scotland scheme, which allowed international students the opportunity to remain in Scotland to work for up to two years following their graduation from a Scottish university or college. That scheme attracted more than 8,400 graduates—the brightest and best students from around the world—and seems to have been a very good idea. I happen to know that it was particularly valuable to those at art colleges who were able to stay here and paint some of Scotland after they finished their work in college. The committee also makes important recommendations for tackling negative perceptions of migrants in Scotland. MSPs and other elected representatives have an important role to play in tackling prejudice and misconceptions. As Mary Scanlon rightly highlighted, businesses in the Highlands and Islands—not least those in the tourism and aquaculture sectors—and our public services have benefited hugely from the contribution of migrant workers. We need to recognise that and talk up the many positives that are associated with migration to Scotland. The committee’s conclusions on trafficking are practical and common sense, and they will receive support from across the chamber. Human trafficking is a vile and malevolent trade that all agencies at every level must work to prevent, but we need accurate statistics to ensure that we are directing appropriate resources to tackle it. Close and effective working relationships between the Scottish and UK Governments are essential, so I welcome the response of Damian Green, the UK Minister for Immigration, to the committee’s report and the news that the UK Human Trafficking Centre will hold a trafficking training day in Glasgow for all agencies next month. It is also appropriate that the Scottish Government examine what more it can do to push forward an anti-trafficking agenda, raising awareness of the problem and the assistance that is available. In addition, the Scottish Conservatives acknowledge the important role that the voluntary sector plays in supporting migrants and the victims or potential victims of human trafficking. As Margaret Mitchell and others have said, concerns have been expressed that the London Olympics next year and the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth games could lead to an increase in human trafficking, which makes the debate even more timely. It would be a travesty if the potential of those mega-events to achieve so much for nations across the globe was in any way negated by an increase in human suffering. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the Equal Opportunities Committee report and the debate. The report is an important basis on which to move forward on these matters and will be of real use to the Government and the Parliament more widely in the years ahead.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had regarding the proposal to close the Cowal hospice at Dunoon hospital. (S3O-12824)

I am delighted to hear the news that NHS Highland has postponed taking the decision, but is the minister aware of the strength of feeling on the issue in Dunoon and Cowal? Local general practitioners and many thousands of local residents are united in seeking to retain an in-patient hospice facility at Dunoon hospital. Does the minister agree that local accessibility to hospice facilities is of key importance for patients and their families and friends alike, and that that should be a major consideration for NHS Highland?

As members have said, we are clear that there is a key and fundamental distinction between forced marriages, in which one or both people are forced to marry against their free will and which often involve abduction or abuse, and arranged marriages, to which both parties give their free consent. Although the evidence suggests that the incidence of forced marriage in Scotland is low—we support moves to improve the collection of data on that—it is an extremely high-impact occurrence, so it is right that the Parliament should take strong action against it. It is also right that we bring Scotland into line with legislation elsewhere in the UK to prevent forced marriage and protect victims. In paragraph 16 on page 5 of the Equal Opportunities Committee’s stage 1 report, I read about the distressing case that was outlined by Laura McCrum of Saheliya in which a young girl of 15, the bride, and a young disabled British national with learning difficulties were turned into tragic victims through no wish of their own and to their considerable detriment through a forced marriage. That is the sort of thing that we hope the bill will prevent. The bill sets out Scotland’s position on forced marriage—namely, that we will not condone it. There is widespread general support for the bill from many organisations, including Shakti Women’s Aid, Black and Ethnic Minority Infrastructure in Scotland, the Scottish Council of Jewish Communities and ACPOS, to name but a few. I was struck by the comments of Assistant Chief Constable Iain Livingstone of ACPOS, who told the committee: “The bill’s ... value lies in its public message. We need to bring the matter into the open and to secure an absolute consensus that forced marriage will not be tolerated.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 23 November 2010; c 2175.] We support the committee’s calls for the Scottish Government to continue to engage with all relevant religious authorities on the issue of nullification of forced marriages, to raise awareness of the bill among all religious organisations and communities and to ask for their points of view. When the Parliament debated the issue in December 2008, as the then communities spokesman for the Scottish Conservatives I said that we were ready to work with the Scottish Government to ensure that the legislation “is as effective as possible, in the interests of all victims and potential victims of forced marriage.”—[Official Report, 4 December 2008; c 13143.] That remains our approach. We look forward to the subsequent stages of the bill and to achieving a positive outcome for all in what is a sensitive area. Louise Johnson told the committee: “The beauty of having a forced marriage protection order is that it does what it says on the tin”.—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 23 November 2010; c 2180.] She beautifully summed up what the bill should do.

I am pleased to speak for the Scottish Conservatives in the debate. It might not be the most controversial debate, but it is important. I put on record my thanks to the members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, including my friend the deputy convener, John Scott, for a thorough and useful stage 1 report, which has helped me to prepare for the debate. Thanks should also be recorded to the committee’s clerking and support team, and to all those individuals and organisations who gave written or oral evidence to the committee. SPICe’s Alasdair Reid produced a helpful briefing paper on the bill and the Law Society of Scotland also submitted a briefing for the debate. The Scottish Conservatives share the Scottish Government’s recognition of the specific need to enhance reservoir safety and to seek a clear legal and administrative framework for the construction and management of controlled reservoirs so that the risk of uncontrolled releases of water and their consequences can be reduced. The debate is of particular importance to my region of the Highlands and Islands. The Highland Council area has the highest number in Scotland of reservoirs holding 25,000m3 or more of water—127—while my native Argyll and Bute has the second highest number, at 76. I expect that both areas will remain near the top of the tables for the most reservoirs when the bill brings all the smaller reservoirs above 10,000m3 under the auspices of the new system. With the push towards new hydro schemes, there may also be pump storage areas that are made into new reservoirs. I will ask the minister to comment in more detail on two specific areas. The first relates to whether the probability of an uncontrolled release of water from a reservoir or just the consequences of such a release should be considered. Alex Macdonald of the Institution of Civil Engineers raised the issue in his evidence to the committee, and I have sympathy with the view that the consequence should be the key driver. Secondly, given the concerns that have been expressed about the impact on small businesses and not-for-profit organisations that run reservoirs from both compliance and decommissioning costs, what if any costings has the Scottish Government done on the options for taking reservoirs off small operators’ hands? I was interested in the committee’s comments on the issue in its report. At paragraph 40, it states: “There is uncertainty over the status and likely level of annual or subsistence charges likely to arise under the Bill. The Committee recommends that this be addressed as a matter of urgency, so as to provide greater certainty to stakeholders, particularly those persons who anticipate becoming managers of medium or high-risk reservoirs under the Bill and who are confused by the financial implications of this.” At paragraph 44, it states: “The Committee notes the Minister for Environment and Climate Change’s recognition that the Bill might lead to difficulties for some reservoir managers, and welcomes her tentative indication that the Government might consider providing some sort of assistance in extreme cases.” Like the committee, I seek further clarification on what sort of assistance the minister and the Scottish Government might have in mind.

This short debate has been useful, and has contained some good speeches. As I suspected at the beginning, it has been consensual, as befits the subject. However, I am sure that the cabinet secretary will want to address a few points. Reservoir safety is the key aim of the bill. I live on Loch Aweside in Argyll, and I well remember the events of 1992, when a combination of circumstances led to an 18ft wall of water being released from the Loch Awe barrage dam. A dam does not have to break to cause damage—there can just be an exceptional release. In that case, it washed away a three-arch-span Thomas Telford bridge and did untold damage to the banks of the river and to angling interests. The rubble of the bridge and the damage to the banks can still be seen today. We have seen the power of water and flooding recently in news bulletins from Australia and South America, and we must not forget the collapse of the reservoir that held toxic waste in Hungary. Those incidents must all make us very aware of the danger of the collapse of reservoirs, and the bill is important in that respect. I will not add a great deal to my earlier remarks, but I ask the cabinet secretary to give a clear assurance—for which the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee has also asked—that the Government remains committed to substantial dialogue with the Institution of Civil Engineers and other key stakeholders in the subsequent stages of the bill. On the finances, and the extra charges that may come from the bill, there seems to be a huge discrepancy. According to the financial memorandum, the SEPA charges and costs for supervision and reviewing and testing flood plans vary from £525 to £21,000. Supplementary evidence from SEPA states that the annual subsistence charges will be in the region of £100 to £300. There is a vast disparity in the figures, and I hope that the cabinet secretary can clarify what the charges for small businesses—which they have not previously had to pay—are likely to be. The Scottish Conservatives are otherwise happy to support the bill and to allow it to move to stage 2.

Will the cabinet secretary clarify whether SEPA will pick up the cost of the initial risk assessment?

I congratulate Alasdair Allan on securing this important debate. I have received hundreds of messages from constituents in the Highlands and Islands on the importance of the coastguard, and I am very aware of people’s concerns. Following the debate, I will write to the United Kingdom transport secretary to express the sentiments of my constituents on the issue. Two of the remaining coastguard centres are in the Highlands and Islands—one is in Shetland and the other is in Stornoway. Those bases have undoubtedly provided an excellent service in the past. As my colleague Jackson Carlaw said, we are all indebted for the countless lives that have been saved as a result of the bravery and professionalism of our coastguards. It is important that we do not lose the effectiveness of a system that is of huge importance to our island nation, with its archipelagos. I asked local lifeboat volunteers from Oban for their points of view and they told me that since they lost the Oban coastguard station some years ago, they have operated through Clyde coastguard, which is now scheduled for closure. What will be of the greatest importance to them and to coastal communities such as theirs is that there is not a cut in sector officers, because they provide the local knowledge in any search. Local knowledge saves time, which saves lives. That will be important in maintaining the confidence of maritime communities in any new arrangements, which will require a great deal of efficiency from any new service. Whatever is put in place has to be super-efficient. We all know that our coastal waters are extremely dangerous and that cold water takes no prisoners. I stress the huge importance of the auxiliary volunteer coastguards, who keep their eyes open on our coasts all year round. Many of those are farmers and crofters who live near the sea. For many generations such volunteers have been the eyes and ears of the coast, reporting immediately any incidents that seem to be out of the ordinary. They provide the initial watch, which can then be responded to by the rescue services or the police. There must be a good centre that can collate incoming information from the volunteers and respond with the appropriate action. Lines of communication must always remain open and voluntary service must be encouraged. Oban and Appin rescue team, for example, has 16 coastguard rescue officers—all volunteers—on standby to respond to any coastal emergency. The coastguard teams cover a distance of 70 road miles between Loch Sween in the south and Appin in the north, including many small islands. The Oban team relies heavily on its flank teams at Crinan, Appin and Inveraray for initial response. The teams have a good relationship with other emergency services, which means that they are often called to assist in searches for missing persons or at road-traffic accidents. They are called out regularly for medical evacuations at Oban hospital and at diving incidents, which are on the increase as subsurface adventure tourism grows more popular. I cannot stress enough the importance of the volunteers. I hope that as many as possible are included in any consultation that seeks to modernise Scotland’s coastguard services. I agree with Jackson Carlaw that we should all work together to ensure the best possible outcome of the consultation for Scotland’s vital coastguard provision.

The Highlands’ share of the Scottish salmon farming industry is some £58 million, in terms of rural employment. What is the minister doing to encourage other forms of fish farming in Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member sympathise with many of my constituents in Acharacle, who will be disappointed that the bill will do nothing to address the issue of Castle Tioram, whose owner has spent 14 years trying to restore a Scottish heirloom of great importance, which is falling into the sea?

Yesterday, I spoke to one of our well-respected senior citizens, who was on a transport committee when the original dualling of the A9 between Perth and Inverness was done. He said that the intention at that time was that the road should be totally dualled. We have the wonderful engineering feat of the Kessock bridge, but he pointed out that, sadly, nothing much in the way of improvement has happened since then. More is the pity. The A9 is Scotland’s major highway north of the Tay, so why does it not get more attention? The SNP was committed to dualling the road before it came to office, so it should be committed to doing it now. I am glad to hear it say that it is, but its compromise of three-lane overtaking stretches is confusing and dangerous, and the hills and corners that would have been all right if they were dualled as intended are far too steep for those three-lane experiments. That is why the Moy turn, which Murdo Fraser mentioned, cannot be used by vehicles and pedestrians if they are going north. That was an awful waste of money. Foreign drivers and tourists who are used to European highways hate the A9. The normal dangers of driving are increased by going from dual carriageway to single carriageway. Jamie Stone made pleas for improvements north of Inverness, as well. I agree with him. The USA’s highway systems and how they have opened up outlying areas should be looked at. On behalf of my Highlands and Islands constituents, I say to the minister that the dualling of the A9 should be completed, please. That will cut half an hour off journeys and cut down on costs for businesses. Above all, it will cut down the number of tragic deaths.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to boost affordable housing provision in Argyll and Bute. (S3O-12588)

Is the minister aware that housing associations in Argyll and Bute that are keen to build new homes to assist the housing needs of the 3,500 families and single people who are still on the waiting list there are alarmed at the proposed 19 per cent cut in the Scottish Government housing investment budget next year? What will he do to allay those concerns? Given the likely pressure on public sector budgets for the foreseeable future, will he pledge to engage with the private sector infrastructure investment funds that want to start lending to our housing associations?

I am pleased to speak in this debate. The Scottish Conservatives have consistently argued for an education system that sees much more power and decision making passed to schools, parents and teachers and an end to the top-down, centralised, Government-knows-best attitude of the past, which the SNP Government, with its numerous national targets imposed on teachers, is making even worse. A more free, more diverse and more locally responsive system has a great deal of support among parents and an increasing number of education experts and stakeholders at all levels. If we had that type of system, in which local priorities based on local needs were the key, we would perhaps not be in the situation that we are in regarding the cabinet secretary's handling of the Argyll and Bute schools issue. The national targets and policy impositions of his own Government have made the serious challenges that Argyll and Bute councillors and officials face even more difficult. I will not add a great deal on the specifics of the cabinet secretary's involvement in the Argyll and Bute issue. I thank him for complimenting me, during yesterday's statement, for defending the Argyll schools. I am delighted—and I compliment him—if he is intent on saving the Argyll schools from closure. After all, he is a cabinet secretary and gets far more publicity than a mere MSP and candidate such as me.

Not just at the moment. Nevertheless, I again refer to his statement in an e-mail that nine of the schools in Argyll and Bute could be closed with minimal difficulty and ask him to name those schools in the interests of openness and of my constituents. To add further to that openness, would he be prepared to publish all his correspondence with the SNP councillors on  the issue? He has made it clear in public—including during oral answers in the chamber—that it would be "quite improper" to comment on the proposals or the process. However, we know that, behind the scenes, he was e-mailing the SNP councillors in detail on the matters, not only commenting on them but suggesting alternative closure proposals, so what would be wrong with putting all of that on the record? The Argyll and Bute schools issue has caused and continues to cause worry to parents and pupils in dozens of rural communities. That should be the focus of the debate, and we should be seeking to achieve the best possible education for our children in all the communities that we represent. That is a particular challenge in Argyll and Bute, given the special needs of such a dispersed rural and island constituency. It should be pointed out that, despite the current position, the proposals to close the 26 primary schools were unveiled to the public on 26 October and were the plans of the SNP/independent-led council. I am glad that the whole process has now been postponed until March. Why is it, though, that Argyll and Bute Council achieved such a dismal settlement in its negotiations with the Scottish Government compared with those of other councils? That obviously affects how much money the council can spend on education. Although the Scottish Conservatives are aware of the pressure that council budgets are under and the need for efficiencies, we believe that each individual school should be judged on its educational and social merits. We believe in maintaining rural primary schools because of the role that they play in sustaining community life and the attainment levels of those who attend the schools, which is well above average. In looking to the future of rural communities, we must surely look not just at the cost of schools today, but at the appearance of tomorrow and the future for the young people who live in those communities. Education is a key factor in self-improvement. That should be pointed out emphatically to pupils who want to get on in life and emulate some of the Scottish giants on whose shoulders we stand, whom Liz Smith mentioned.

My point is that the closures were proposed by an SNP-dominated council. A theme that continually emerges among parents in Argyll is the inaccuracy of the council's closure proposal documents, which were wrong on a wide range of issues from pupil roll projections, which are for only one year, to estimated travel  times to other schools and anticipated savings. The same concern has also been voiced by Argyll rural schools network, and I pay tribute to that body for the work that it has done. It is surely a matter of real concern that experts say that the expected financial saving of £24,000 a year on which the proposal to close North Bute primary school was based was incorrectly calculated and that the closure of the school would actually cost the council £50,000 a year due to the loss in grant-aided expenditure for the funding of rural primary schools. Furthermore, what is behind the proposed closure of Barcaldine primary school, which is at 96 per cent capacity, is in the top third of primary schools with the lowest per-pupil cost, is rated as the county's most cost-effective school building and has an A rating for educational suitability? Who on earth would want to close a school like that?

Well, the cabinet secretary has said it. I emphasise the importance of rural schools in attracting new families to areas to take up jobs. Landcatch, a fish farming entity in my constituency, which is soon to be taken over by the world-leading Hendrix Genetics, is a major employer in rural mid-Argyll. I support the company in arguing strongly that its local school, Achahoish primary school, is fundamental to attracting and expanding its workforce—something that we all want to see. We must listen to the words of businesses and all the community groups in our constituencies.

We know, from the cabinet secretary's e-mail correspondence and from what we have already heard, about the eight or nine primary schools that he suggests could be closed without any difficulty. First, can he name those schools and explain how he reconciles his suggestions with the legislation that he says he supports, which  states that each school should be considered individually on its educational merits? Secondly, the minister stated that the SNP withdrew from the council administration on 25 November, but did it not do that on 6 December? Thirdly, he stated that six Lib Dems and two Tories voted through the list of 25 closures, but did they not vote for consultation?

To ask the Scottish Executive when deer farmers will be able to access support through the single farm payment scheme. (S3O-12344)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that assurance, as this situation has been going on for a long time. Does the cabinet secretary recognise the extent of the frustration among Scotland's historic deer farmers who, for years, have been trying to achieve equity with every other farmer in Scotland, who had an entitlement to the single farm payment given to them by right? Given that most deer farmers already have to adhere to all the cross-compliant rules, will the cabinet secretary explain to Scottish deer farmers why his Government is refusing, so far, to bring them into the SFP system by using the national reserve, which it is perfectly able to do under European Union law?

In light of recent adverse comments in the press in connection with the pilot project to reintroduce beavers to Knapdale in Argyll, does the minister envisage that beavers in river basins will chop down newly-planted trees, thereby causing flooding?

To ask the Scottish Executive what it is doing to encourage the promotion and marketing of local food including meat from native breeds and produce from integrated farming systems. (S3O-12250)

Will future Scotland rural development programme mechanisms under the common agricultural policy after 2013 provide incentives for food producers who provide public benefits to the environment and human health and help to address climate change by producing local food, farming native breeds and promoting integrated farming systems?

I am delighted to sum up in this debate. It is vital that we get the bill right for those men and women who work in the hills and glens and keep them well managed, even when, as now, they are hindered by several feet of snowdrifts while we sit cosily in the chamber. They are straightforward, tough people—the very salt of Scotland's earth—and they deserve a fair deal.  The minister said that she had listened to many people from different walks of life. Well done to her for that, and well done also for recognising the importance of this sector of rural life. She has listened to people who do not often get heard and who do not get heard often enough. I thank my friend John Scott and other members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, as well as the committee clerking team, for a thorough stage 1 report, which has informed today's debate. Much of the debate has focused on wildlife crime and, as John Scott set out, we believe—like Bill Wilson—that the argument has not been made convincingly that single witness evidence should apply on this issue. Rather, as Sheriff Drummond suggested when he gave evidence, the focus should be on the collection of solid evidence. Given that the evidence to the committee suggested that it was incredibly rare for someone to be prosecuted for an offence of egg stealing on the evidence of a single witness, it surely is illogical to extend single witness evidence to other wildlife crime. Such a move might even open up the door to frame-ups. Surely law is good only if it works to stop crime. Likewise, the Scottish Conservatives have serious worries about the Government's intention to introduce vicarious liability at stage 2, because we again pay heed to the words of Sheriff Drummond, an expert on wildlife crime, who said: "There are so many ways round it. Vicarious liability has been floated as some kind of answer. It is not an answer".—[ Official Report, Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 15 September 2010; c 3104.] Much legislation already exists, and we should surely concentrate on achieving better enforcement of current laws before adding additional measures to the statute book. In other words, we should tighten up existing laws and ensure that they work against wildlife crime. Snaring is another subject that many members have raised. I am well aware of the strong feelings about snaring—indeed, I, too, have strong feelings about it—and I welcome the committee's balanced conclusions on it. Its report states: "the Committee also acknowledges that pest control is a vital part of land management and that, if properly regulated and managed, limited and appropriate use of snares should continue to be an option for land managers in Scotland." As Bert Burnett of the Scottish Gamekeepers Association said this week, the majority of practitioners are already highly skilled, and they have welcomed the tightening of snaring regulations and demonstrated a clear willingness to meet modern expectations by signing up for detailed practical and written training in order to meet the highest welfare standards.  To many of my constituents in the Highlands and Islands, snares remain a vital tool in controlling escalating fox numbers, which can do much damage to our populations of rare waders and ground-nesting birds as well as to valuable game birds, not to mention the lambs on numerous sheep farms throughout the Highlands. At this point, I suppose that I had better refer members to my agricultural interests in the register of members' interests. On game management, we are happy to welcome the modernisation of game law and the abolition of game licences. The bill will also repeal the restriction on selling game at certain times of the year by amending section 4 of the Game Act 1831, which was aimed at stopping the killing of game birds and hares during closed seasons. Refrigeration now means that game that has been killed in the open season can be kept and sold throughout the year. I hope that the bill will open up more marketing opportunities for those who wish to sell Scottish game in restaurants and shops all year round. The SRPBA is right to argue that any future changes to the list of game species must be subject to full parliamentary scrutiny. I strongly support the committee's call for any proposed removals from the game species list to be subject to affirmative rather than negative procedure, which would mean that any proposals would be voted on. More generally, I welcome the Government's and the committee's recognition that shooting and red deer stalking are of real economic importance to many areas of Scotland. That is especially so in the Highlands, where the income from country sports provides work for gamekeepers and numerous other jobs associated with them. I want to put on record my support for the wildlife estates Scotland initiative, which I was pleased to see the minister launch at Colquhalzie in Perthshire on 23 November. Everyone involved in that initiative is to be commended. I know that those people will step up to the mark in showing to the public that our Scottish country estates are integral to protecting and preserving our natural environment. The pilot scheme will run in the Cairngorms national park area, and will doubtless be reviewed regularly. The scheme is not, as some have suggested, some sort of voluntary licensing scheme; it is a voluntary accreditation scheme in which the code of acceptable good practice that everybody should follow will be set out. Finally, Bill Wilson referred to bees. He may know that the bees in many hives in Scotland stopped breeding in September because they knew that bad weather was coming. That shows  that a bee is better than the BBC at weather forecasting. The Scottish Conservatives are happy to support the general principles of the bill, and we welcome the fact that many of the concerns that existed, particularly relating to deer management, have been dealt with.

The proposed cut of 15 per cent in the west coast prawn quota will, if ratified, devastate my fishing constituents, who are represented by the Clyde Fishermen's Association, the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association and the Western Isles Fishermen's Association. The chairman of the Western Isles Fishermen's Association, Duncan MacInnes, said: "it's cuts on cuts and I think it's beginning to tip the balance where vessels are no longer viable". Prawns are the mainstay of those fleets. The Clyde prawn quota was not fully taken up last year for a variety of reasons, such as the limitation on the number of days at sea; the weekend ban, which the Commission seems to ignore; the increase in mesh size that allows the escape of marketable prawns; and the new OMEGA measuring gauge, which has forced a further increase in mesh size. In addition, in the past 12 months we have seen a huge increase in the presence of Irish vessels, because of large quota cuts in their sector. If that trend continues, the quota for 2011 will run out before the end of the year. Those Irish vessels represent an increase in fishing effort of about 30 per cent, which, combined with the proposed 15 per cent cut in quota, will cause an early closure of the fishery. What will the cabinet secretary do to prevent that? Tavish Scott spoke admirably about the problems in Shetland, and Orkney white-fish boats have received no reward for their past conservation efforts. The size of the real-time closures for cod is displacing fishermen from large areas of the North Sea to traditional Orkney fishing grounds and other species. The EU Commission seems to refuse to acknowledge the benefits that the fishermen's good efforts have already achieved. Regarding discards, the cabinet secretary will be aware that the SFF thinks that a land-all-you-catch policy is the industry's big hope for salvation, but what is his response to the concern of those who have participated in the trials to date that unless changes are made to the present TAC and quota rules, the policy will simply not work in reducing discards or in improving the commercial position of the white-fish fleet? Will the cabinet secretary give the chamber an update on his talks with the Manx Government on fishing for king scallops, which my west coast constituents have traditionally harvested in Manx  waters? Will he address the very real concerns of fishermen in the Hebrides who face seeing their livelihoods taken away as a result of the special area of conservation designation that is planned for east Mingulay, which Alasdair Allan mentioned, where they have fished for generations without doing too much damage to any reef? It saddens me that, 12 years after the Parliament's establishment, there is still such a gulf between the fishing industry and the EU Commission on fisheries management. Scottish fishermen cannot be criticised for questioning so-called science when they can clearly see the true facts for themselves. With respect to genuine scientists, I refer members to Winston Churchill's view, which was that it is better to have science on tap than science on top. No fleet has taken more pain than the Scottish fleet when it comes to conserving fish stocks but, as Bertie Armstrong says, the Commission proposals are a "study in arrogance" that some MEPs condone. One fishermen's representative told me that those MEPs were as much use as a set of bagpipes tuned by Edward Scissorhands. I know that the cabinet secretary can do much better than they can, and I wish him and Richard Benyon every success in their efforts.

Will the member take an intervention?

I praise Mary Scanlon for lodging such an important motion. I also put on record my praise for all the staff and managers of care homes in my region, who work hard day in, day out to provide excellent care for our elderly people. In my native Argyll and Bute, there are 24 care homes with more than 600  places for older people. Those homes fulfil a very important role. I also welcome Scottish Care's recently published manifesto "Making the case for care: A Manifesto for the future of care and support services for older people in Scotland". It sets out clearly the extent and gravity of the challenges that face us as we try to reconcile increasing levels of demand and complexity of need, the rising costs of care and support delivery, and the continuing shift of the balance in care away from the acute health sector. Those challenges are set against a backdrop of very challenging public expenditure levels. Because of all those factors and the need to ensure that available public resources achieve the most efficient results, the Scottish Conservatives will continue to speak out about the disparity that exists between the costs of local authority and independent sector care homes. Scottish Care indicates, as Mary Scanlon pointed out, that the average local authority cost per place per week for non-nursing care is around £800, while the equivalent cost for a place under the national care home contract is around £480. That is a massive difference. The cost per hour of care at home and housing support is estimated at £21 to £25 in the local authority, compared with £16 to £18 in the voluntary sector and £12 to £15 in the private sector. Having spoken to the excellent Eventide care home in Oban, which is independent, I find that Argyll and Bute Council has done away with the enhanced rate, which added about £40 per week for clients who need extra care. However, the patients in that category still come to the home, which is paid the basic rate of £475, while a self-funding resident next door at the council's Eadar Glinn care home pays £903. That is an enormous discrepancy and is unfair on those who provide a vital care service on which many of us depend. I do not know whether other councils have also abandoned that category, but it is obviously a cost-cutting exercise rather than a care improver. Although I recognise the current mixed economy of care home supply in Scotland, we should still scrutinise the 15 per cent or so of care home places—and, indeed, the 50 per cent of care at home and housing support—that local authorities provide and ask why it is so much more expensive than the provision that is offered by the independent and voluntary sectors.

As Scottish Care's manifesto suggests, "it seems clear that",  where the private and voluntary sector can provide a stable system of care homes, "pursuing a phased process of outsourcing has to be the most sensible option, potentially delivering higher volumes of care and support for the same or possibly reduced levels of expenditure." Scottish Care also goes on to point out—rightly—that there is no evidence that, in general, local authority-delivered services are of higher quality, despite the higher cost. Why should they be? That is not an attack on local authority provision for the sake of it; rather, it is about a genuine desire that as many of our senior citizens as possible benefit as much as possible while we ensure the most effective use of taxpayers' money. However, it is not only about money: placing a relative in a care home is often an emotional event for their family members. Therefore, it is essential that an esteemed relative or friend be looked after in the best possible way. Confidence in our care system is one of the marks of a truly secure and civilised society. I will take an intervention.

Of course that is a good way to proceed, but we must prove that the local authorities get extra value for the extra money that they spend. That is the point. At the moment, there is nothing to show that. Representatives of the independent care sector have also asked me to raise the issue of bed blocking.

Okay.  Hospitals complained to me in 2007 about bed blocking. Why is it still a problem? The Scottish Government should act—

All right, Presiding Officer. Bed blocking is still a scandal.

In his statement, the cabinet secretary said that he has set "ambitious" and world-leading targets on emissions and renewables, but last Friday the chief executive of Aggreko, the energy expert Mr Rupert Soames, said in this chamber that the problem is more with the timescales for the targets than with the targets themselves and that, broadly, we need to add 10 years to all of them. Does the cabinet secretary agree with that captain of industry?

What is the minister's response to the fact that my dairy farming constituents in the southern isles ring-fenced area face financial ruin as a result of not being able to sell their milk quota on the national milk quota market—something that every other dairy farmer can do?

The First Minister will be aware of recent events affecting Campbeltown. What actions can he and his ministers take to minimise and prevent the possible unemployment triple whammy in Campbeltown, owing to the difficulties that are now faced by the Skykon wind tower company—which the First Minister opened—and to the collapse of Highlands and Islands Enterprise's construction framework contractor Rok, which owes its subcontractors in Campbeltown, including McFadyens Contractors, hundreds of thousands of pounds? Its work on the new Skykon factory, which is vital for making Skykon more competitive, is 90 per cent complete but still needs to be finished. What will the First Minister do to prevent an unemployment meltdown in Campbeltown and to ensure continuity for Skykon, which is the only wind tower producer in Scotland?

Does the minister agree that it is perhaps time to look again at the land valuations that the Macaulay institute made in, I think, the 1960s, and, this time, to consider the element of public good as well as the element of food production?

I congratulate Rob Gibson on securing tonight's important debate. As Rob Gibson and others have done, I welcome the fact that the IUCN will study our peatland resources. I am very clear that Scotland's peatlands are a resource that is of genuine world importance both in terms of the ecosystem that they provide and in terms of their impact on climate change through locking up carbon. Peatlands are a resource that we all must work to preserve as much as we can. Peatlands are the most extensive semi-natural habitat in Scotland. They cover some 1.8 million hectares—which is 23 per cent of our land area—and are much prized by sportsmen and hill walkers for their openness, accessibility and beauty. Sensible grazing of peatlands—I refer to grazing by sheep and deer—should be the accepted norm and the desired target. Peatlands produce an environment for our wild herds of red deer and our red grouse, black grouse, ptarmigan, mountain hare and a range of other animals and birds. They also contain rare moths and butterflies and a myriad of rare alpine plants. I thank the representatives of Scotland's moorland forum for the helpful information that it gave me for today's debate and for all the excellent work that it does. It is a fact that peat soils in Scotland contain almost 25 times as much carbon as all other plant life in the UK. Scotland's peat soils hold almost a third of the carbon that is held by all Europe's forests—3 billion tonnes out of 9.5 billion tonnes. Undisturbed peatlands store about a quarter of a tonne per hectare each year, while each household in Scotland releases about half a tonne of carbon into the atmosphere through its electricity usage each year. The good that peatlands does can be seen. Many of my constituents wish to see more priority being given to restoration of damaged peatlands. The one-off cost of restoring bogs by drain blocking varies a lot: the price can be several hundred pounds a hectare or as low as £8 or £10 a hectare in the flow country of Caithness and Sutherland. Restoration work that is done now will prevent more costly work from being necessary in the future. Constituents also want to see further improvements to management practices, and for the public and private sectors to do more to encourage and support peatland management. I will be interested to hear the minister's comments  on the matter. That said, I want, of course, to highlight the successful management of Scotland's peat resource up to this point. We have a very good base on which to build. Have ministers considered any proposal to make peatlands the subject of the tradable green certificates that have the potential to bring about management revenue for constituents and communities in the Highlands and Islands? Furthermore, if peatlands were to produce public good in terms of carbon storage, surely that should be reflected in the hectarage valuation of peatlands under single farm payments. That would be helpful to many farmers and crofters in the remote and rural areas of Scotland and it would encourage the sensible grazing levels and peat restoration measures that I have mentioned. By raising the profile of Scotland's peatlands and by encouraging proper management and restoration of these sensitive areas, the IUCN peatland programme is doing valuable work for Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to prevent the closure of rural primary schools in Argyll and Bute. (S3O-11761)

I am glad to hear that. Is the cabinet secretary aware of the anger felt by parents and communities throughout Argyll and Bute at the council's shocking plans to close 26 primary schools? Many of those people are already questioning the basis for the proposals and whether the council has genuinely explored all the other options before considering what should be the last resort of closure. Does he agree that rural primary schools such as Southend, Glenbarr, Barcaldine, Keills, Ulva, Luing and all the others are fundamental to the socioeconomic fabric of fragile rural and island communities and that government at all levels should be working to support them? Finally, will he assure local parents that he is doing so?

I am delighted to speak in tonight's debate, and I congratulate my friend Ted Brocklebank on securing it. It is of particular importance and interest to many of my constituents in the Highlands and Islands, especially in Stornoway and the Western Isles, where I started my political career in 1996. I remember that I had a leaflet printed that said that the Conservatives had put £16 million into Gaelic. I wanted to emphasise that, so I got it translated into Gaelic. Unfortunately, the translator got the word for million wrong, and there was an article in the next Sunday Express that said that the Conservatives were putting £16 billion into Gaelic. I do not know  what the TaxPayers Alliance would have thought of that—although it did me no harm. The Scottish Conservatives have always been supportive of BBC Alba, and I pay tribute to all those who work for the channel and their achievements over the past two years. It really is an interesting channel. We agree with Bòrd na Gàidhlig that support for BBC Alba is essential for Gaelic's future and that its availability on Freeview is vital. The fact that BBC Alba is watched by many more people than there are Gaelic speakers is a strong demonstration of the quality of its programmes, but it remains a real concern that fewer than one in four television sets can receive it as it is currently available only on satellite and online platforms. That means that many of my constituents in the Highlands and Islands, many of whom are Gaelic speakers, are excluded from BBC Alba. That is surely unacceptable, and it must be addressed by the BBC trust. All of us are impatient for a statement by the BBC trust, and we expect one before the end of the month. Given that we are going through the changeover from analogue to digital, now seems a good time for BBC Alba to be transmitted on Freeview. Many more viewers would be given access to BBC Alba who cannot get it on the ordinary analogue channels at the moment. When the BBC trust finally makes a decision—we hope that it will be positive—the channel can expect to gain an additional 150,000 to 180,000 viewers. The number of people who might lose their television radio, so to speak, is probably only about 3,000 or 4,000. That would be difficult for them, but they could always tune in somewhere else and it would be marvellous how many more viewers would be able to see BBC Alba. In preparing for today's debate, I consulted my friend and constituent Brigadier John MacFarlane, who sings in the Taynuilt Gaelic choir. He rightly emphasised how beneficial BBC Alba had been in furthering youth interest in Gaelic culture, in the development of the language and in increasing people's vocabulary. He also praised the range and quality of the programmes on BBC Alba, describing "Eòrpa" as one of the best and most authoritative current affairs programmes available. In a very short time, BBC Alba has established a formidable reputation and is rightly seen as one of the best ways of sustaining and promoting our Gaelic heritage, culture and language. We look to the BBC trust to take account of the consensus of people across Scotland and the political will of all parties in the Parliament by ensuring that more people can enjoy the channel by allowing it to be made available on Freeview.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to reduce methadone dependence among prisoners. (S3O-11470)

Does the minister think that that percentage is big enough? He will be aware of the recent figures showing that just 157 of the 777 participating prisoners are on a reducing dose. Does he share the widespread concern over the revelation that 80 per cent of the prisoners concerned are essentially being parked on methadone and forgotten about? What action will he take to improve the continual monitoring of prisoners on methadone, with as many of the prisoners as possible given appropriate support to reduce their methadone dosage with a view to coming off methadone altogether?

I am sure that the minister is aware that most local people see the option of two replacement vessels as being the most flexible. Whatever successor service is put in place on that vital route, will the minister ensure that flexibility is a key priority, and that a service that accepts unaccompanied vehicles and goods as well as commercial vehicles will be retained?

I am pleased to take part in today's debate, and I remain of the strong opinion that my region of the Highlands and Islands, with its unrivalled wind, wave, hydro and tidal resources, can lead the way for Scotland as we seek to develop a low-carbon economy. As we have heard today, Scotland has 25 per cent of Europe's offshore power and 25 per cent of Europe's tidal power potential. It is estimated that 21.5GW of commercial capacity is available from the waters around Scotland, and there is particular potential around the northern isles and the Pentland Firth. The Crown Estate has received a  total of 42 applications from 20 bidders for wave and tidal energy leases that will deliver at least 700MW of power by 2020. It is also doing good work in enabling the expansion of offshore wind energy, and by investing in research and in carbon capture and storage. I emphasise that the Scottish Conservatives genuinely believe that there need be no conflict between a low-carbon economy and a growing economy. Indeed, the development of low-carbon technology has the potential to drive the economy, especially in my resource-rich region. A decarbonised Scotland can be a world leader in green technology, engineering, innovation and, therefore, growth. In the Highlands and Islands, we already have good examples of how we are leading the way in such innovation. The world's largest tidal power turbine—the AK1000 by Atlantis—was unveiled earlier this summer at Orkney's excellent European Marine Energy Centre. The turbine is capable of generating power for more than 1,000 homes, so we wish it every success. That is the result of 10 years of hard work and has the potential to realise some of the aspirations for tidal power that we have talked about for so many years. In addition, in the fast-flowing Kyle Rhea narrows off Skye, Pulse Energy is undertaking a one-year study of a tidal device that sits on the sea bed and is not visible on the surface of the sea. That has huge potential. In Shetland, the promoting Unst renewable energy—PURE—project is gaining global recognition for its groundbreaking work in hydrogen technology. The PURE team designed Britain's first licensed hydrogen fuel cell car and is now seeking to commercialise its work so that it can further develop its hydrogen-based projects. Twelve miles east of Helmsdale, in waters more than 40m deep, Talisman Energy's Beatrice wind farm demonstrator project includes two of the world's largest wind turbines as part of a pilot study that will end next year. In Stornoway, good work is also taking place at Lews Castle College, which is part of the UHI Millennium Institute. Earlier this year, I was pleased to be able to tour those facilities, where I met many of the talented individuals involved. In addition, planning consent has just been granted for the largest hydroelectric project in Scotland for five years, at Kildermorie near Ardross in Ross-shire. That project will power more than 4,000 homes. I remain very supportive of the role that small-scale hydro schemes can play. The Scottish Conservatives' approach to energy that Jackson Carlaw set out is something that all members with common sense should agree with. Our future energy needs must be met from a  broad and balanced range of sources, including wave, tidal and solar power, offshore wind and appropriately sited onshore wind developments, biogas and clean-coal technology. Nuclear power must also be part of that mix. That is being said not just by Conservatives but by leading experts, academics and business leaders. Only this week, the chairman of Centrica, Roger Carr, said that nuclear power is a "practical necessity", without which the country will face an "incredible challenge" to meet its power needs. SNP members are, I regret to say, simply in denial if they think otherwise. At the Industrial and Power Association dinner last night, I listened to Lord George Foulkes confess his conversion to nuclear power. Having been a minister and a member of the energy review advisory group, he said—

In a moment. Let me just finish what I was about to say about Lord Foulkes. The minister would not want not to hear that. Lord Foulkes said that he had gone from being an anti-nuclear protester to being convinced that nuclear energy was the only way that we could keep a decent energy mix in this country. He argued very strongly for nuclear power. I will take the minister's intervention.

The minister does not need to defend Lord Foulkes, as I approached him earlier and got his permission to quote what he said. Yesterday, I had a very useful meeting with ConstructionSkills, which aims to ensure that Scotland's construction industry can respond effectively to the low-carbon agenda with suitably trained individuals and that the supply side can deliver the skills that are required. That sector skills council expressed serious concerns about the cuts in funding to construction courses that could seriously affect the available infrastructure to deliver on that. ConstructionSkills is also looking at developing specialist qualifications to provide the specific civil engineering skills in the marine environment. That is to be commended. The way in which we transmit our energy must also change and advance, which I am pleased to say is a priority for the coalition Government at Westminster. Mainly post-war technology transmits electricity across dumb networks, which  cannot intelligently manage the load on them to reflect the capacity available. It is akin to the analogue system, with little scope for interactivity between producer and consumer.

I am just finishing up. Do I have a moment?

Ah. Well, finally, Presiding Officer, I want to make the point—

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has given instructions to police forces regarding how people whose roadside walls, fences or buildings have been damaged as a result of vehicle accidents access their reports. (S3O-11382)

On 8 April this year, the cabinet secretary told me in a letter that "farmers or other land owners whose property is damaged have the right to request certain information from the police free of charge", including "details of the vehicle involved, including make and registration, the driver's name and, if known, the insurance company and policy number covering the vehicle." That advice was clear and unambiguous. Then, in another letter on 9 August, he told me that "the decision whether or not to release personal details ... rests with the police" and that "in most cases the police will be reluctant to do so." Who got at the justice secretary? What changed his mind? How can a right belonging to my constituents—one set out in black and white by the justice secretary—be done away with in a matter of weeks? Will he please instruct the police to provide the information that he believed in April should be people's right, so that they can avoid costs for accidents that are, after all, not their fault?

I congratulate Linda Fabiani on securing this important debate. I, too, put on record my good wishes to Richard Demarco on his 80th birthday. My first encounter with Ricky was back in the 1970s, when he took foreign students round the ancient archaeological sites in my native Argyll and stayed at the renowned establishment of Lunga house at Ardfern, which was run by his great friend and fellow thespian, Colin Lindsay-MacDougall. I was immediately struck by the feeling that here was someone very notable who would make a difference, and I was not wrong. Other members have, rightly, referred to Richard Demarco's wonderful encouragement of young people—people with talent who wish to become involved in the arts sector. I can vouch for that through experience. In 2008, my daughter Sarah McGrigor put on a play—it was called "Forgive Me Father"—at the Edinburgh fringe. I approached Richard, who was a tower of strength and encouragement as she put on her controversial work in the Demarco Roxy art house. He gave us the benefit of his deep knowledge and experience, which were invaluable. In the past, Richard has spoken passionately of the importance of the Edinburgh international festival and fringe to the lives of countless young people at school and university who, in some cases, travel many thousands of miles to present their love of theatre. None of us can overstate the importance of the festival and fringe and Richard Demarco's contribution to them since their inception. The festival and fringe attract hundreds of thousands of visitors to the most dynamic and diverse arts festival on the globe. They bring millions into our economy. The fact that the festival and fringe continue to enjoy such a reputation and that they are still seen as innovative is thanks in no small part to the efforts of Richard Demarco. I cannot overstate the importance of Richard's archive. It represents 60 years of non-stop collecting. It portrays Scotland in relation to 52 countries, including every country in Europe and the Commonwealth. He wanted to locate the archive at Craigcrook castle because, of course, that was the meeting place of Sir Walter Scott, Thomas Carlyle, Lord Henry Cockburn and, above all, Lord Francis Jeffrey, the publisher of the  Edinburgh Review , which was read so widely internationally at the time. The legacy of the enlightenment to Edinburgh and to publishing is enormous, and Richard has always wanted to bring back that status to the capital of Scotland. He has worked tirelessly for that. While others played golf and went on holidays, Richard acted as a sentinel for Scotland's arts; he manned the ramparts against the philistines. In a speech to Frank McAveety when he was the Labour Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport, I called for Ricky's idea of a festival that would compare with the Venice biennale. I remember Frank McAveety having trouble with the word "philistine"—I think he had a pie in his mouth at the time. Richard's idea was for a biennial festival that linked Glasgow and Edinburgh. He saw that such a festival would draw international support and raise our cultural status, thereby attracting many more students to Scotland's educational establishments. On a more serious note, how can Richard really celebrate his 80 years when the future of the archive is so uncertain? For that reason, I congratulate the Minister for Culture and External Affairs, Fiona Hyslop, on going to Craigcrook and taking her team with her. We now want to know what the result will be. Will she produce any concrete help and funding towards the running of Craigcrook? There is also Richard's real need for at least four archivists to sort out the collection before it goes to the RSA and the National Galleries of Scotland for the exhibition that opens on 26 November. The running costs of the archive are £15,000 a quarter to look after a collection that may be priceless and which Richard is virtually offering to Scotland as a gift. Just as the church cannot be run on hail Marys, neither can an 80-year-old, unretired Richard continue to pay for everything himself. The archive is a work of genius. It will be appreciated long after all of us are gone. I say to the minister, let us give it a chance. That would be a good present to Ricky, Edinburgh and the people of Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will safeguard the future of rural schools. (S3O-11300)

The cabinet secretary may be aware of the campaign in the first session of the Scottish Parliament, which I supported, to save six rural primary schools in Argyll and Bute, such as the successful and popular Drumlemble primary school near Campbeltown, which I recently visited with Annabel Goldie and which, I am glad to say, is still thriving. Given the importance of rural primary schools in both providing good-quality, accessible education and helping to sustain fragile rural communities, what specific assurances can he give about the action that ministers will take to prevent the closure of threatened rural schools when local authorities are facing such challenging financial circumstances?

Will the member give way?

I refer members to my farming interests in the register of members' interests and inform the chamber that I am a member and vice-convener of the cross-party group on crofting. I am pleased to close for the Scottish Conservatives in this stage 3 debate. Like other members, I thank all those who provided briefings for today's debate and for previous debates, including SPICe's Tom Edwards, and the members and clerks of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee for their efforts. The crofting register has become perhaps the most contentious issue in the latter stages of the bill's passage. Both in the past and in recent weeks I have had numerous conversations on the subject with individual crofting constituents and representatives of the Scottish Crofting Federation—Eleanor Arthur, Norman Leask, Patrick Krause, Neil Macleod, Donald Linton, Murdo MacLennan, Drew Ratter and Becky Shaw, to name but a few—and I thank them all for their time and for giving me their expertise with regard to the ocean of crofting legislation. As my colleague and friend John Scott has already indicated, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee received conflicting advice on the development of a map-based crofting register but, on balance, the evidence suggested that such a register would be in the best long-term interests of crofters and crofting, so we have decided to proceed on that basis. We acknowledge that concerns remain and will continue to put pressure on ministers to engage fully with the issues and ensure that cost considerations are the utmost priority.

I will come back to the member in a moment. I also restate the fact that, from the Crofters Holdings (Scotland) Acts of 1886 and 1887 to the Transfer of Crofting Estates (Scotland) Act 1997, the Scottish Conservatives have a proud record of supporting our crofters, and the Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993 remains the principal statute in crofting law. I might add that that record stands in stark contrast to the efforts of the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat coalition Government in Scotland, whose Crofting Reform etc (Scotland) Act 2007 was passed only after chaotic scenes in the chamber. Of course it was the same Executive that initiated the Shucksmith inquiry that ultimately led to the bill being debated this afternoon. I am glad that my friend John Scott's amendment 176 was agreed to, as it ensures that flag irises are not classed as weeds and recognises their value to corncrakes. The seilisdeir, as it is called in Gaelic, has a beautiful yellow flower and is glorified both in song and in poetry. Moreover, Mr Scott's amendment with regard to self-certification will improve crofting land. I say to Karen Gillon that some of the finest crofters I have ever met are women. Many's the time I have visited Ena McNeill, the former president of the Scottish Crofters Union, at her North Uist home and have been spoiled by the delicious slow-matured Highland beef that she and her son Angus Macdonald rear on their crofts. I could take an intervention from Karen Gillon now, if I am allowed.

They did not ask me specifically for a land-based register. I am rather surprised that you should ask me that question, since it was your party that initiated the consultation and the Shucksmith report in the first place. I beg your pardon, Presiding Officer. I should not say "you"; I should say "the member". In conclusion, many of us hope that the bill will be the final piece of crofting legislation that is thought to be necessary for many years to come. Let us now move forward, working in partnership with crofters, to focus on the big, vital challenges of halting and reversing the decline in livestock numbers on our remote hills and especially the islands, and ensuring that crofting has a sustainable future in modern Scotland.

What specific support is available to help rural communities to develop small-scale biomass plants?

Does the minister agree that some of those regulations are not fit for purpose in Scotland and especially in the Highlands, and are better suited to the small fields of French, German and perhaps Greek farms? The Scottish situation is completely different. We have talked about difficulties with cattle numbers; the difficulties with sheep numbers are much greater.

I declare an interest as a hill farmer of sheep and cattle since 1974. Anyone looking at the hairstyles of John Scott, who declared a similar interest, and me will see how we have suffered. In my earlier farming days, the picture was happier. Plenty of young people were keen to work in the industry, there was plenty of teaching, there were reasonable subsidies and prices for livestock, and there was less paperwork. Above all, there was an attitude of helpfulness from my local department of agriculture and fisheries office in Oban with completing the forms and other paperwork that I and others found confusing. There was a pro-farming attitude, especially towards hill farmers, who were seen as the seedcorn for the fattening industry in the lowlands. Due to the decline in farming, it is now very difficult to get enough people to gather sheep in large areas among the Scottish hills and glens. Some gatherings take more than a day, with huge acreages being covered by fewer and fewer people. Hopefully, the situation will improve now that we have slightly better prices, but at the moment, with the new EID scheme, sheep farmers are nervous about the severe financial penalties that might result from their not being able to show all their animals at short notice, which they might be called upon to do. The NFUS notes: "The penalty levels are now significantly out of line with the seriousness of the error, in NFU Scotland's view, and a degree of proportionality must be factored in to penalty awards."  I hope that the minister is aware of the conundrum and will ensure that inspections show flexibility and allow time for compliance. Dave Thompson talked about bracken, which is a curse in the Highlands, as it is difficult and expensive to clear. It often costs more to treat bracken-infested land than the land is actually worth. One solution could be to use free-range pigs, which root out the bracken and haul out the secondary root system in a most effective way. That is far more effective than spraying the bracken. However, although pigs eat bracken and other herbage, they are not considered by agricultural government to be grazing animals, so they do not attract payment under LFASS. That system of bracken clearance does not attract support even though it deals with the bracken problem while also producing income for the farmer and delicious free-range meat. Will the minister consider that method of bracken clearance, which could perhaps—

It is all—

I will come back to it. With regard to possible penalties on land that might not attract IACS payments in the future, will the minister consider that method of clearing the bracken—using pigs—which could perhaps then go on to the menu of options under land management or under the Scottish rural development programme?

Many people will be shocked by the stark statistics that we heard today, especially those on the massive differences in life expectancy in different, but sometimes neighbouring, communities. I recognise the passion in Duncan McNeil's speech, but it is a sad fact that, after 13 years of so-called socialist government at the UK level, income inequality is at its highest since records began and UK working age poverty stands at its highest level since 1961. History teaches us—this is a fundamental Conservative principle—that the single most effective way in which to lift people out of poverty is to grow the economy so that more people are in work and earning enough money to allow them to provide for themselves and their families, and to provide the wherewithal for decent pensions and good welfare. Therefore, every available adult of working age must be given the incentive to do that; the stronger the economy, the better the welfare system will be. A good welfare system is required financially to enable those people who are unable to work or who find themselves temporarily out of work. We are living in difficult economic times and we are faced with unprecedented challenges over the public finances, but it must be a Government priority to ensure that job creation and economic competitiveness underpin policy decisions. The rise in unemployment that was revealed yesterday is disappointing; Scottish Chambers of Commerce was right to say that it will be down to the private sector, which Johann Lamont mentioned, to drive our economy forward and create new development opportunities. I ask the minister to help it to do that. Jamie Stone mentioned fuel poverty, which is a real issue in many parts of the Highlands and Islands region. Figures from 2008 suggest that more than a quarter of Scots live in fuel poverty— we are all aware that fuel price rises since 2003 have exacerbated the problem. Yesterday, I chaired the cross-party group on renewable energy and energy efficiency, which received excellent presentations from energy saving Scotland and WWF Scotland on the good work that is being done to find community-scale solutions to energy efficiency. Although much excellent and often innovative work is being done, many concerns have been expressed about the support that is available to communities who are seeking to improve energy efficiency. I ask the minister to help those groups. As well as finding ways of making the economy more competitive, the Scottish Conservatives have a range of practical policy measures that we believe will tackle the consequences of poverty. For example, we propose the introduction of a universal health visitor service attached to general practitioner surgeries to provide support to families from the birth of a child until it reaches the age of five; after all, according to research, the first five years are the most important in ensuring a child's health. Although we recognise that there is no magic bullet for reducing all health inequalities, we believe that that sort of measure empowers individuals to make the right decisions and lead healthier lives. Annabel Goldie's sterling efforts also secured the new national drug strategy, which was published in May 2008.

I am sorry—I am afraid that I do not have time. Much of today's debate has focused on the very concentrated and highly visible problems of poverty in urban Scotland. That is understandable, but as a Highlands and Islands MSP I try to speak out about the poverty in some of our remote communities, including those in our small islands, which can be just as serious. The primary industries of our rural economy remain under real pressure and I hope that, in his closing remarks, the minister will give an assurance that he takes tackling rural poverty just as seriously as challenging urban problems. We hope that the Scottish Government will take a constructive approach to working with UK ministers on shared aims. In that respect, I commend to members the recent speech by the new Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, Iain Duncan Smith, entitled "Welfare for the 21st Century". In it, he rightly identifies the current problems in the current benefits and tax system, which far too often disincentivises people from finding work and imposes prohibitive marginal tax rates on too many people who want to return to work, making the option of work simply not economically viable for too many people.  I would accept an intervention from Mr Stone now.

Rural transport's spasmodic and often inefficient nature is a huge problem. Because such transport does not really fit in with people's way of life, the car becomes absolutely vital for those who live in remote areas. We agree with many elements of "Achieving Our Potential", notably the focus on economic opportunities as the key to achieving a wealthier and fairer Scotland. As it is right to prioritise work as the main route out of poverty, every effort should be focused on creating the right conditions for companies and individuals to create jobs in Scotland and on helping the small businesses that are key to Scotland's economy. We look forward to ministers' delivering the poverty framework.

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with representatives of Scottish publishers. (S3O-10930)

Is the minister aware of the very real concerns of Scottish publishers about the Government's on-going centralising book procurement policies, especially with regard to VisitScotland, Historic Scotland and the public and educational library sector? What action will the Government take to address those concerns and ensure that procurement includes small businesses and the local economy, and therefore does not lead to a loss of diversity of range and supply? It may otherwise appear to people that a Scottish National Party Government is creating a system that offers big English companies hard contracts and small Scottish businesses only bland words.

Will the member give way?

I refer members to my agricultural interests in the register of members' interests. The Scottish Conservatives recognise that in recent years there has been an increase in the demand for new tracks in the Scottish uplands. Some of the demand is due to traditional activities, but additional demand is often associated with the development of wind farms and telecommunications infrastructure, including mobile phone networks. From a personal angle, I have to say that after I constructed a new hill road on my hill sheep farm in 1985, the management of livestock improved dramatically and the death rate for livestock fell considerably. Nobody complained about it. As the average age of farmers increases, it becomes more important that they have vehicle access to the hills. I have the honour of being president of Highland Disabled Ramblers. Hill roads afford disabled and elderly people the chance to go into the hills that they love and that they should surely be allowed to appreciate just as much as do fit hillwalkers and mountaineers. I agree that huge scars on  mountainsides are very unsightly, but I grew up on Loch Awe directly opposite the Cruachan dam, and I tell members that the huge road to the dam, which was complained about avidly during its construction, is now difficult to see. Nature heals scars just as a body heals wounds. I am sure that we all share the desire to have a thriving rural economy, and, as a result, I believe that an overriding principle should be a recognition of the needs of farmers and land managers and an aversion to placing on them yet more red tape and bureaucracy unless every option has been exhausted. Many of the original tracks were pony tracks for bringing in cut peats and venisons, and as technology has advanced the tracks have been widened to allow access for quad bikes and vehicles. That is just progress. I see no reason why that should affect the flora and fauna of a hill region any more than does quad bikes or Argocats taking different routes across the same area. Originally, the tracks were hand dug at a time when there were plenty of people to carry out that work, but they still left scars.

I ask the member to hold on a minute. In its briefing, NFU Scotland urges MSPs to recognise the importance of hill tracks to land management, especially in getting feed to starving animals in hard winters, such as the one that we have just had. There is no doubt that hill roads saved the lives of many farm animals last winter. Access is vital not only for feeding but for gathering, especially in an age in which it is getting more and more difficult to find enough manpower and good sheepdogs to perform such operations. The NFUS also makes the point that hill tracks are in the public interest, as they enable land managers to manage more efficiently. If we take that into account, the benefits to the environment and local economy become clear.

If the member does not mind, I would rather not at the moment. Upland tracks serve a combination of purposes, including the management and welfare of upland grazing livestock, forestry work, deerstalking, angling, habitat management, adventure tourism, muirburn and mountain rescue. Hill tracks are also immensely useful for transporting people to the myriad hill lochs in Scotland for brown trout fishing. Indeed, that underused facility could be used far more.  Given that the purpose of many of the bulldozed tracks relates to telecommunications and windfarms, they are already covered by the planning system. In addition, with good construction methods, the look of new tracks can dramatically improve within months. We recognise that the uplands are a sensitive and valued part of Scotland's natural heritage. No one loves being in the hills more than I do—preferably at the top of them, and I believe that the tracks can help in that respect. As a result, we support the current approach to the management of hill tracks, including observing codes of good practice, such as SNH's "Constructed tracks in the Scottish Uplands", which, as its name suggests, aims to reduce the impact of tracks on the natural heritage of the Scottish uplands. Indeed, that is the aim of all sensible farmers and land managers.

May I take an intervention, Presiding Officer?

I will come to an end, then. I very much respect Peter Peacock's concern for our wild places, but I am interested to know which particular tracks concern him. When I drove from Caithness to Edinburgh the other day, only one ugly scar, near Drumochter, caught my eye. The Scottish Government itself is supporting the development of new and improved tracks through a number of its rural support schemes. Except in the case of major projects, we do not feel that planning permission should be required for what are basically farm tracks.

What additional measures will ministers consider adopting to cut the amount of biodegradable waste that goes into landfill?

I congratulate Stuart McMillan on securing the debate. I am glad that we are debating the importance of our oceans. At the weekend I was in the famous Loch Fyne oyster bar. The Gaelic motto of Loch Fyne Oysters is "Nach urramach an cuan", which means, "How worthy of honour is the sea". Surely that  philosophy should guide policy makers all over the world, where the oceans are concerned. The sea is indeed a wonderful resource, but it is a fragile one that we should honour and respect if we are to ensure its viability for all future generations. I congratulate the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission on reaching its 50th anniversary this year and I thank everyone who has contributed to the commission's work over the years. We can all support the IOC's aim, which is to promote international co-operation and to co-ordinate programmes in research, services and capacity building, so that we can learn more about the nature and resources of the oceans and coastal areas and apply that knowledge for the purposes of improved management, sustainable development and protection of the marine environment. At Scotland level, it is a positive thing that we have the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010, which has ambitious aims for the protection and—this is crucial—restoration of the marine environment. The 2010 act has broad sectoral support. There are many worrying matters, such as the decline—almost the disappearance—of many fish species in our sea lochs on the west coast. Especially worrying is the decline in runs of migratory wild salmon and sea trout. Such declines are symptoms of something that is wrong with our marine environment or of something that has changed, so it is vital that there be research and development to ascertain the causes of decline and to identify what can be done to resurrect the missing runs of fish. I call on the Government to take action in that regard. I hope that the much-vaunted fresh start for aquaculture will come up with solutions in that respect; if it does not do so, it will be seen to have failed. Many of my constituents who make their living from the sea think that Scotland's vast marine space can satisfy many and varied needs, provided that the Government takes steps to bring the various parties and interests together to produce solutions that ensure that our marine environment is not a battleground but something that can be sustainably utilised by agreement. The 2010 act seeks consent and co-operation; we hope that it will be implemented in that spirit. In that regard, the Clyde Fishermen's Association raised a specific point with me, on which the minister might comment. The association is deeply concerned that there is a lack of clarity about the governance arrangements that take precedence in our inshore coastal waters up to 3 miles. Is the marine strategy framework directive or the European Union water framework directive in charge? Surely they cannot both be in charge of the same area. Marine Scotland has so far been unable to provide the required clarity on  the question, which people who are in the know find alarming. I would be grateful if the minister could clarify the matter in the debate or give me an answer soon on what is becoming a burning issue. I foresee storms on the horizon, if the matter is not sorted out. Whenever I debate aquaculture in the Parliament, I talk about the need for us all to seek sustainable coexistence between the wild fish and farmed fish sectors. That is vital to the health of our oceans, especially our coastal waters: it would be disastrous if the wild salmon and sea trout angling tourism for which Scotland has become famous over hundreds of years were to be plagued by sea lice or diseases. It is also vital that the shellfish farms—especially the mussel farms, which have progressed so well—have clean enough water to ensure the viability of their valuable products. I am pleased that the United Nations has designated a day for our oceans because it raises awareness at an international governmental level. I wish it success and hope that we will hold further such debates in our Parliament. This morning, I listened on Radio 4 to a man who has swum in the sea at the north pole and in a lake on Mount Everest at more than 17,000ft. When he was asked why he did not wear a wet or dry suit, he said that using such devices would eliminate the impact of the contribution that he is making to recognition of the environment's importance. I congratulate him on his bravery and hope that people continue to make waves.

While we are on the subject of routes, has the minister any news on the Campbeltown to Ballycastle link?

I, too, congratulate my good friend and Highlands and Islands MSP colleague Mary Scanlon on securing an important debate. I put on record my thanks to Andrew Banks and all his team at Pentland Ferries and my appreciation for the excellent service that they provide to my constituents. He comes from an ancient line of marine pilots who have navigated the Pentland Firth, which is one of the most dangerous sea channels in the world, for generations. As I say, his company provides an excellent service. My constituents are fortunate indeed that Pentland Ferries offers a fast, frequent, reliable, efficient and competitively priced service that provides the choice of an alternative to the NorthLink service and increased capacity. Andrew Banks also provides an invaluable service to farmers and crofters in the transport of their livestock. He does all that at no cost to the taxpayer. His ferry service runs through one of the most challenging areas of sea in the marine world. It is the type of business that we should be commending and promoting in today's Scotland. I was delighted to attend the recent book launch of "Pentland Hero", which is published by the leading Scottish publisher Birlinn, and I recommend it to all my MSP colleagues, because it is a very good read, and to anyone who has an interest in how we can support free enterprise and improve ferry services in Scotland. The book sets out just how many obstacles Andrew Banks faced in trying to establish his service and compete with NorthLink, with its multimillion-pound Government subsidy. His success is all the more remarkable, given that he overcame those obstacles and won on what would appear to be an unfair playing field. Policy makers need to understand what enables his company to operate so successfully that, had it received subsidy equivalent to that which is received by NorthLink, it would have been able to offer a free service on the lifeline Scrabster to Stromness route, which would have saved the taxpayer around £20 million a year.

I need to make some progress.  I believe that Andrew Banks offered to do much the same on the Campbeltown to Ballycastle route for no subsidy but was again ignored by the Scottish Government. Although the debate focuses on Pentland Ferries, I commend Western Ferries, which operates, without subsidy, in my native Argyll and Bute and provides a first-class and customer-responsive service on the Gourock to Dunoon route. Western Ferries, too, offers an alternative option at no cost to the taxpayer. The successful operations of Pentland Ferries and Western Ferries surely demonstrate that the private sector has much to offer the ferry sector in Scotland. We await with great interest the results of the Government's ferries review. We will continue to argue strongly that enterprising businessmen, such as Andrew Banks, who provide good ferry services should be able to compete fairly for more routes around Scotland's coastline. I will end with a quote: "This book tells the story of one man fighting an industrial bully. It amplifies the lone voice of the consumer against the battalions of 'we-know-best' government monopolists, who have never turned in anything approaching a profit." Those are not my words, but the words of Lord Robertson.

Thank you, old Etonian—I mean, Presiding Officer.  To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it is taking to improve the Argyll and Bute road network. (S3O-10561)

Despite that, the headline in today's edition of The Oban Times & West Highland Times states "Argyll and Bute has the worst roads in Scotland". The annual road conditions survey shows Argyll and Bute Council as 32nd out of the 32 councils and suggests that councils' road budgets would need to rise by £45 million just to keep the roads in their present condition. Argyll and Bute Council's transport spokesman Councillor Duncan MacIntyre said: "The council needs £100 million ... just to get the roads up to an acceptable standard." Quite apart from the discomfort and danger suffered by local people, the tourism industry is suffering, especially in areas such as the Isle of Mull where the local joke—

Presiding Officer, my question is this. Will the Scottish Government accept that Argyll and Bute is a special case and do something about it?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member agree that if we are to make crofting more viable, productive and profitable, it would be wise of the Government to consider ways of making land management options, for example, relevant to crofts and of encouraging crofters to go into small food production businesses, such as the making of cheese? [ Laughter .]

Does the member accept that the reason for the neglect of crofts is often the financial viability of crofting rather than the fact that people are not present?

On the case to which the member refers, I remember that the Crofters Commission turned up without a lawyer, but the developer was represented by Queen's counsel.

I refer members to my farming interests in the register of members' interests and inform them that I am a member and vice-convener of the cross-party group on crofting.  I thank Rural Affairs and Environment Committee members, including my friend John Scott, and the committee's clerking team for producing a thorough, balanced and useful stage 1 report. In recent weeks, I have spoken to many crofters on visits to Shetland, the Western Isles and Caithness and Sutherland. Many of their concerns are—rightly—highlighted in the committee's report. Views on the bill are varied and strongly held, and major anxieties remain. This week, a crofter from Kinlochbervie wrote to me to appeal for the bill to be withdrawn. The crofters rights emergency action group shares that view, but it is not the position of the Scottish Crofting Federation or the committee. Others have asked me where the need for crofting legislation came from. I believe that it might have emanated from one line in a long-forgotten Lib Dem manifesto. However, we are where we are, and we must use the rare opportunity in Parliament to make it easier for crofters to run their crofts. Like the SCF, I am particularly pleased that the committee's report makes it clear that regulation alone will not ensure crofting's survival, as the minister said. Crofters want practical measures that are designed to aid their good work, which is why I have fought hard over the years to retain measures such as the bull hire scheme, to ensure the high quality of crofters' breeding stock, and proper support for croft housing—inflation has eroded that support in recent years. As my friends Norman Leask and Patrick Krause of the Scottish Crofting Federation have argued for many years, crofters need carrots as well as sticks. That is very true. Many crofters and farmers are concerned about predation by sea eagles on their lambs, which are their livelihood. The Government must listen to their concerns—they would not say that they were suffering predation if it were not happening. If the SNP Government really wants crofting to continue, it should listen to the practical points that crofters make. I have looked at the list of land managers options, hardly any of which seem relevant or helpful to a crofter's basic needs. LMOs are available to everyone who has an agricultural holding. Unlike other agri-environmental schemes, LMOs are not competitive, so surely it would be just and fair to have priorities in the menu of LMOs that would serve crofters well in practical terms. Crofters might be able to use the options on vernacular buildings and rush management, but not many options are relevant to them. As we have heard, the crofting register has been a difficult issue. Crofters are right to fear the extra cost that they might incur and the further bureaucracy that will be involved. The estimated costs have been revised downwards, but £130 per  registration is still a significant expense for many crofters—that is the profit on anywhere between six and 10 lambs gone. The SCF says that it is pleased with the broad agreement on its voluntary community-led mapping initiative, which it believes is a positive initiative, in contrast to the Government's suggested compulsory trigger-point mapping. I would be interested to hear more in the minister's closing remarks about the Government's response to the initiative; I was encouraged by her opening remarks. The Scottish Rural Property and Business Association has said that it is "not convinced" that a new register is justified in terms of costs and benefits. It has made a sensible suggestion that crofting communities should be able to get together to map their areas on the register and that that activity should be free of charge for a period of 10 years from the implementation of the bill. In a previous speech, I suggested that integrated administration and control system maps could be used for registration purposes, but that was before I learned that only between 5,000 and 6,000 IACS forms have been completed by crofters. A new mapping system might encourage more IACS applications, leading to better downloading of subsidies for crofters in the future. That is one positive aspect of the system. I agree with the committee's acceptance that the commission should continue as the main body with responsibility for regulating crofting. We believe that only crofters should have a vote in elections to the commission and that, at the moment, first past the post is the simplest system of election. Further work needs to be done on the contentious issues that are connected with absenteeism, such as the limit within which a crofter is deemed to be ordinarily resident. The committee is right to say that we need to have a clear strategic plan to address neglect, based on the factors that would determine why an apparent case of neglect would not be tackled. I emphasise that the Scottish Conservatives remain wholly supportive of crofters and the crofting sector. We want the sector to thrive and to continue to produce environmental benefits for all our people, while helping to sustain local communities in some of our most remote and fragile rural and island areas. I know that in Stornoway, for example, crofting filters through the whole urban environment and makes people who live there aware of the importance of being self-sufficient in foodstuffs. I point out that the Scottish Conservatives have a proud record of legislating in the interests of our crofters, from the Crofters Holdings (Scotland) Acts of 1886 and 1887 to the Transfer of Crofting Estates (Scotland) Act 1997. If the SNP is able in the bill to produce anything as useful as those  acts, it will be doing well. All of us are praying that the bill is nothing like the chaotic Crofting Reform etc Bill of 2007, which was a prime example of bad legislation.

The minister is aware of the importance of red deer herds to the rural economies of many areas of the Highlands and Islands, such as the Helmsdale strath in Sutherland. Will she ensure that Scottish Government policy acknowledges the value and importance of red deer and gives our wild red deer herds the status that they deserve as an important part of Scotland's natural heritage rather than the status of vermin? Agencies have sometimes treated them as vermin in recent years.

Does the minister agree that many vacant urban sites are ideal for affordable housing developments? What specific measures can he take to encourage such developments on vacant land?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it in order for a question to be withdrawn that appears in today's Business Bulletin ?

It does—I am talking about question 4.

It is in the Business Bulletin that I just picked up at the back of the chamber.

To ask the Scottish Executive what it has done to encourage the efforts of the Machrihanish Airbase Community Company to buy out the ex-Royal Air Force base at Machrihanish near Campbeltown for the community. (S3O-10166)

I thank the minister for that answer, but he will know that £20 million of negative equity is ensnared in the airbase's aged infrastructure, including sewerage, electricity and water, and that 140 home owners who have bought ex-RAF houses and depend on all this now have no factor to contact to address those issues. He will also be aware of the airbase's huge importance as an asset of fantastic potential to the communities of Campbeltown and Kintyre. As a result, will he ensure that the airbase becomes an asset to the community rather than a liability that a Scottish Government might have to settle at some point in the future? Will he also investigate worrying reports on the For Argyll website of possible radioactive contamination on part of the site?

My point about the choirs is that they are still popular, but they should in no way be used as a social engineering tool to meet targets for Gaelic speakers.

I am pleased to close the debate for the Scottish Conservatives, as it is of real interest to many of my constituents in the Highlands and Islands. I am proud of the excellent record of previous Conservative Governments in helping to sustain the Gaelic language. The first time that I stood in an election was in the Western Isles. I insisted that part of my electoral address be written in Gaelic, and in it I pointed out that the Conservative party had put £16 million into Gaelic broadcasting. Unfortunately, my translator got one word wrong, which resulted in a daily newspaper saying that the Conservatives were putting £16 billion into Gaelic. That did me no harm, because our votes went up, although I had to admit my mistake. My colleague Ted Brocklebank said that the Scottish Conservatives broadly welcome Bòrd na Gàidhlig's action plan for Gaelic. I pay tribute to all those who have worked to produce the action plan. We are clear that the best way in which to maintain and strengthen Gaelic is through broadcasting and education. A good supply of books, such as is available in Ireland, would also be a good idea. I am impressed by the tourist information office in Tyndrum, which has poems by the famous local poet Duncan Ban MacIntyre on the walls. That is a good idea. Many members have rightly raised the subject of the availability of BBC Alba on Freeview, for which I have argued many times. My constituents in the Highlands and Islands are understandably disappointed that the BBC trust has postponed its decision on the matter. The Parliament should  send out a strong and united message that there should be no further delay. My constituent Allan Campbell, who is the chairman of the Gaelic Society of Inverness, has written to the chairman of the BBC trust. As Mr Campbell points out in his letter, the society believes that the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005 and the resulting national plan for Gaelic give significant cause for optimism, but a Gaelic digital service is fundamental to that optimism. He also highlights the strong sense of injustice among Gaelic users at being required to pay more to access publicly funded programmes in their language. That issue should be remedied as soon as possible. A lot of good work takes place in education. The action plan is right to focus on support for parents and adult learning. I commend innovative projects such as the link between pupils of the bun-sgoil on Sleat and Tollcross primary school in Edinburgh, which has resulted in the wonderful Air Iomlaid exhibition of artwork by pupils that is currently on show at the Fruitmarket Gallery in Edinburgh. That is on until 9 May, and I suggest that as many members as possible go. In preparing for today's debate, I consulted the Gaelic expert in Argyll, Brigadier John MacFarlane, who sings in a Gaelic choir along with my wife Emma. He made several good points. He emphasised the importance of Radio nan Gàidheal as well as the need to develop and support what he called the Gaelic diaspora of potential new learners in Europe, Australia and New Zealand. As I was in the USA last week for Scotland week, I am even more keenly aware of the interest in all things Scottish, including our Gaelic language. We must encourage that important aspect of bringing people to Scotland. The action plan is right when it talks about "national pride, a sense of history" and "a desire to better understand the place-names of Scotland". Those play a part in making the learning of Gaelic accessible. That applies in Scotland and among the Gaelic diaspora. I agree with John MacFarlane's desire for a better structured approach to adult part-time learning with the development of a modern national curriculum for adult Gaelic learning. He also suggests that we should have a Sabhal Mòr Ostaig for the central belt. I am interested in what the minister might say on that. I must raise one negative point in connection with Gaelic choirs. I have recently discovered that An Comunn Gàidhealach has raised the required level of passes in Gaelic language speaking among members of choirs. Apparently, if a choir does not have the required number of passes, it  cannot compete in certain competitions in the national Mod. That seems to me to be counterproductive in all kinds of ways. We have already said that it is the Gaelic arts and culture that keep Gaelic going, so we want to encourage as many people as possible to sing the songs and read the poetry. However, people have told me that, if their choir is not allowed to take part in the national Mod, they will not bother to take part in the choir. If someone is in full-time employment or looking after children, they might have time to sing in the choir once a week but not have time to study the language. On the other hand, their very proximity to the language while singing it will almost certainly interest them in trying to learn what the words and place names mean. In that regard, I congratulate An Comunn Gàidhealach on sponsoring Gaelic lessons for members of Gaelic choirs. However, as I said, it is entirely counterproductive to put up barriers to people who are willing to take part in those choirs or to insist on any academic qualifications. After all, one need not learn German, French or Italian to sing an opera in those languages, so why on earth should people need to learn the Gaelic language? If someone has a beautiful voice, that is all that is needed. I do not suppose that the Italian maestro Luciano Pavarotti had to take German lessons to sing "Die Fledermaus" and I doubt that the great Swedish tenor Jussi Björling had to take Italian lessons to sing "Carmen", so why should people need to have Gaelic lessons to sing in a Gaelic choir? Gaelic music is free and inspirational. It comes from the sounds of the sea, the sounds of the wind, the sounds of the skylark, the curlew, the oystercatcher. It is about a beautiful sound and freedom of the mind and spirit. It is nothing whatever to do with academic passes and linguistic skills, and I humbly beg An Comunn Gàidhealach to take the requirements away. Surely it is musical merit that defines a good choir rather than a grasp of the grammar of the language.

As the member says, choirs have to have a certain number of passes in order to take part in certain competitions in the Mod. I am saying that that is not necessary and that the requirement should be done away with.  We recognise the investment that has gone into Gaelic but we share the concern that, although much good work is going on, it has not yet been matched by a corresponding increase in the number of Gaelic speakers. The action plan plots a way forward to address that, so I support the Government's motion. We Conservatives will support it along with the amendment in the name of my friend Ted Brocklebank, obviously, and the amendment by Pauline McNeill.

Does the minister agree that the Crown Estate's decisions to reduce rents for Scottish shellfish producers by an average of 15 per cent from January 2010 and introduce new leases for the more attractive period of 25 years rather than 15 years will provide a boost for our aquaculture sector?

Will the member give way?

The member is speaking about island communities. This morning, I spoke to my constituents on the Isle of Coll, where the price of petrol is £1.39 per litre.

I have downloaded information from the Energy Saving Trust's website. The trust says: "The Scottish Government wants to make sure that everyone in Scotland who needs help with their energy costs saves money and keeps cosy. If you sometimes struggle when the fuel bills need paid, you're exactly the kind of person this scheme is for." What is the Scottish Government now doing to help people, especially pensioners, with the much higher fuel bills that they will have to face and struggle with due to the exceptionally cold weather this winter? Can the minister save them money and keep them cosy?

This has been an interesting debate. I enjoyed Christopher Harvie's speech about the Loch Ness monster, but I remind him that Loch Morar also has a monster, which he forgot to mention. We also have stories of big cats roaming across Scotland and of great white sharks around the coasts, so our country is becoming even more exciting than people find it already. Since the decline of the primary industries in the Highlands, tourism has become the number 1 industry. That is not necessarily a good thing in any country, but the more we can extend tourism  opportunities outside the normal seasons, the better the situation will be for the people who benefit from those visitors. This winter, although it made things very difficult for some people, the snow boosted Scotland's ski tourism. It is also right that we assess in detail the effectiveness of the year of homecoming 2009, so that we can learn lessons for the future about what was good—and what was perhaps not so good—about that initiative. Like Mary Scanlon, I emphasise that many communities, including those in the more remote rural and island parts of our country, depend on tourism. We have heard mention today of the Royal Society of Edinburgh's excellent report of 2008 on the future of Scotland's hills and islands, which rightly sought to cover tourism to some extent as well as the rural primary industries. The report highlighted: "There are many excellent tourism businesses in the Hills and Islands ... But there are also too many businesses where standards of service are variable". That is why the development of skills within the tourism sector is so critical, as Gavin Brown set out very effectively when he spoke to our amendment. We need to put in more and more effort to ensure that our tourism businesses, and all those who work in the sector, have the best skills and training so that they can compete internationally. Anyone who has visited a brasserie or restaurant in Paris will know the elevated status that is given to the staff and the hugely dignified position of the maître d'. Anyone who is rude to a French waiter is promptly frogmarched out into the street. Working in the tourism sector is considered a proud occupation in France and in other European countries, which we in Scotland should emulate. We should encourage our young people to realise that tourism, from top to bottom, is a greatly respected industry in which people may have long and distinguished careers. The Government's motion refers to a new focus on Scotland's food and drink. I welcome that, as I believe that we have huge potential that could be developed. Obviously, my region has the world's finest distilleries, which are a Mecca for those who are interested in whisky. Scotland also has some of the best sea and freshwater fish and shellfish, and we also have soft fruit. We also have some very fine restaurants, which serve both traditional fare and modern cuisine. During my lifetime, the standard of restaurants has risen out of all recognition. I take my hat off to those who have achieved that transformation. Long may it continue.

I hope that the greatest emphasis possible is put on Scottish products. We have the best raw materials, so we should make the most of them. There are wonderful restaurants in Scotland, some of which are in Edinburgh, although they are normally beyond my budget. Oban, in my native Argyll and Bute, which is marketing itself as the seafood capital of Scotland, boasts some first-class restaurants, including the award-winning Eeusk—which I will visit with Annabel Goldie on Friday—Coast and the Waterfront seafood restaurant. I pay tribute to Oban and Lorn Tourism Association and the Oban forward group for their efforts in marketing the town positively in that way. I will say a few words about the importance of country sports and angling and sea angling tourism to my region and the country more widely. The Scottish country sports tourism group—the industry-led consortium that aims to help country sports tourism businesses in Scotland to develop further by providing expert advice and practical assistance—has done a great deal of work since 2004, but the sector continues to need advertising and support, and needs to be considered an integral part of the Scottish tourism infrastructure. For the rural glens of the Highlands, the income from shooting and stalking, for which there is a niche market, is incredibly significant and plays a huge part in sustaining fragile communities. Such tourism extends the normal months of tourism considerably. Although wild fish numbers are under pressure—I know that the Scottish Government is looking into why that is the case—I am still very proud that anglers from across the world want to come and fish for salmon and trout in our rivers and lochs. The income that comes from that is extremely valuable and spreads itself among local shops and businesses. The people who are involved in the management of angling in Scotland have enormous experience and are highly professional, and that goes for sea angling, too. The Scottish Sea Angling Conservation Network is to be commended for boosting the profile of that sector. More generally, marine tourism, which has been touched on, generates much money for our economy and is an area in which we can look for expansion. I know of Oban Bay Marine's plans to expand its infrastructure for marine tourism, and I wish the company well.

We have heard much about whether the Scottish Government will be able to meet the target that was set in 2005 of growing tourism revenue by 50 per cent by 2015. It is an admirable target but, at the moment, the annual growth rate of 4 per cent that we need to achieve if we are to achieve the 2015 target is not being met.

rose—

It has already been stated that most of the Scottish industry belongs to Norwegian enterprises. Is the member suggesting that different things are being done in Norway, compared with what is being allowed in Scotland?

I refer members to my fishery interests as recorded in the members' register of interests. We all accept that it is difficult to overstate the economic importance of the industry—especially to my region of the Highlands and Islands—and its interconnected social importance to the communities that are sustained by its jobs. That is especially true in our most remote rural and island communities in the Western Isles, Orkney and Shetland, where many economies are very fragile. Scottish salmon production, from the fish egg to the finished product, smoked or fresh, has earned a reputation for exceptional quality, which of course attracts a premium. However, we must remember that Scotland produces only 10 per cent of the world's farmed salmon, so we must strive to keep that distinction at all costs. In that respect, I was worried by Maureen Watt's remarks about PGIs. I understand that the Scottish Government will launch a consultation to discuss a possible amendment, and it is incredibly important that the Scottish Government get it right so that the industry can maintain its reputation and label of excellence. It has been estimated that in areas of the Highlands such as Lewis and Harris, the Uists, Skye and Lochaber, for every £1 that is paid to employees in the sector, a further £4.58 is generated in the local economy, and that 70 per cent of all employees live within 10 miles of their place of work, which makes John Scott's point about housing so important. That demonstrates the importance of the industry. However—I always seek to make this important point in aquaculture debates—wild river and loch fisheries for trout, sea trout and salmon are also important and significant in respect of the image and reputation of Scotland and the Scottish tourist industry. The Scottish Government must therefore strive for successful co-existence between fin-fish farming and the wild fisheries industry.  The issue of escapes of farmed salmon and rainbow trout—big fish and little fish—remains of real concern to many of my constituents in the wild fisheries sector. Despite the efforts of the fish-farming sector, it seems that there are new escapes every other week. I agree with Robin Harper's sentiments on the issue, but not with what he said about closed containment. Surely it should be possible for farmers to check their nets more often and they should be heavily penalised if escapes occur due to negligence. I also echo colleagues who have today mentioned the critical issue of sea lice. Site fallowing is crucial in that regard. Can the minister tell me what is the protocol for fallowing salmon or rainbow trout sites in fresh water as opposed to sea water? In a previous debate on aquaculture, I mentioned halibut farming, which is being pioneered by three farms in Argyll, including Kames Fish Farming Ltd near Oban. Will the minister say whether any progress has been made following my question about setting up the relevant border control inspection at a Scottish airport in order to allow young halibut stock to be imported directly into Scotland rather than into London or Manchester? My constituents believe that that would greatly benefit Scottish businesses, that it would improve the welfare of the young fish in transportation and that it would boost survival rates. The farmed shellfish industry is also very important in my region. One must remember that shellfish farms produce less waste and detritus than their equivalent fin-fish farms. Sustainable co-operation with wild fisheries, which I mentioned earlier and which is so important, can be achieved through good husbandry and a code of good practice, which most fin-fish farms now follow. It is extremely unfortunate that a few still cut corners—it was bad husbandry, after all, that led to the outbreaks of diseases including ISA in Chile, which ironically have given the Scottish industry more opportunities for outlets that, as John Scott said, the Scottish Government must encourage. Our Highland Scottish waters have a reputation for cleanliness and purity that elevates the image of Scottish farmed salmon worldwide and allows shellfish to be farmed, and wild shellfish to be harvested, without pollution risks. I was delighted to hear the minister extolling shellfish farming at last. It is a growing element of aquaculture in which Scotland is already a world leader and can be more so. I pay tribute to my constituents Walter Speirs and Janice McGhee of Loch Etive's Muckairn Mussels Ltd. Established in 1985, this excellent business has increased production substantially and now produces more  than 200 tonnes of mussels per year, largely for the wholesale market. I am also pleased to note that the Crown Estate has reduced rents for Scottish shellfish producers by an average of 15 per cent from January 2010. In addition, new leases will be for a more attractive period of 25 rather than 15 years. I therefore put in a word for the Crown Estate, whose Scottish team has increased its efficiency and improved its image in Scotland, certainly with business operators. I congratulate it on a metamorphosis since devolution that has led to a transformation in its working with Scottish businesses. Lastly, I am aware that the aquaculture industry—Marine Harvest, for example—sponsors events and sports such as shinty in my region. As spokesman on sport for my party, I thank the companies for their on-going support. Their sponsorship is highly important to Highland communities. Given the importance of aquaculture to Scotland, it is right that we debate it regularly in Parliament. There are many challenges ahead, but there are also real opportunities, which we must help the industry to grasp. I support the amendment in John Scott's name.

Will the member take an intervention?

rose—

The new life for urban Scotland projects that I mentioned were highly commended in 1999 by Cambridge Policy Consultants as examples of excellence. Can the member give me one example of anything better that her party has done in the past 10 years?

I am pleased to open for the Scottish Conservatives in the debate. I well remember the HIDB and the good that it did, which was normally under Conservative Governments. It goes without saying that we Scottish Conservatives are committed to the regeneration of deprived communities in rural and urban settings. That is why we successfully persuaded the Scottish Government to adopt our policy of the town centre regeneration fund, which has proved popular and about which I will say more later. We Conservatives would like more of that regeneration but—unfortunately—Labour's mismanagement of the economy means that funding for such projects will be hard to find. Repairing the UK economy is key and fundamental to regenerating our Scottish  communities. Economic growth means not only that more individuals have jobs and thus a sustainable income but that individuals can be more successful in setting up small businesses and that existing small businesses can thrive and become larger enterprises. That is about acorns becoming mighty oaks, rather than the sudden oak death disease that is afflicting our economy UK-wide. Local and national Government must generate adequate resources to help to put in place the infrastructure and other support that help regeneration. Such support must be planned for by a Government with a long-term vision. Improving the British economy is the number 1 priority for the next Conservative Government and will help all communities in Scotland. I am proud of the record of previous Conservative Governments in Scotland in making community regeneration a priority. The new life for urban Scotland initiative, to which our amendment refers, was launched in 1988. Under the initiative, four parts of Scotland were selected for the establishment of new urban regeneration partnerships—Castlemilk in Glasgow, Ferguslie Park in Paisley, Wester Hailes in Edinburgh and Whitfield in Dundee. The new life projects are now—rightly—seen as landmarks in urban regeneration in Scotland. In October 1999, Cambridge Policy Consultants commended them and found that their "pioneering approach" had levered in private sector investment and slowed the rate of depopulation. Surely we all agree that retaining an area's population—whether in an inner city or in a remote or island community—is critical to enhancing and facilitating the regeneration effort there. Under the new life initiative, combined with the right to buy, resident satisfaction increased substantially. The scheme also provided value for money in comparison with other UK regeneration schemes, such as the single regeneration budget challenge fund and the London Docklands Development Corporation. Community involvement was at the heart of the new life initiative and that is how it should be, so I agree with the reference in the Government's motion to the role of community members in delivering regeneration. There is no point in imposing regeneration from on high or from central layers of Government; rather, local people need to have a stake and a say in achieving improvements in their neighbourhoods, in helping—when possible—to design the facilities that they require and in working in conjunction with a range of organisations, including their local authorities, community councils, housing associations, charities and businesses. A good example of a grass-roots community regeneration campaign in my region comes from  the work of international architect John McAslan and his team in Dunoon, who seek to restore the Burgh hall to its former glory so that it can once again be a key cultural destination for the whole community. That campaign has caught the imagination of local residents and engaged local members in open days and public meetings. I wish it every success as it seeks to revive the building as a cultural centre not just for the town, but for the wider region. Often, such projects can act as a catalyst for wider redevelopment and regeneration. The Burgh hall's regeneration is a good example of effective use of limited funds. It now needs revenue funding to expand its cultural amenities for the community's benefit, and a cultural co-ordinator is needed. Good culture plays a big part in regeneration, because it instils pride in population centres. As I said, funding for regeneration is a problem. Could community funding from renewable energy projects such as wind farms and hydroelectric schemes—especially in the Highlands and Islands—be used by community councils for regeneration projects in their areas? The Scottish Conservatives fought hard for the Government to adopt our £60 million town centre fund, which has proved to be a boost for communities. Our town centres are at the heart of community life and it is right that the Government supports communities, residents and businesses in their efforts to re-establish civic pride in our town centres, many of which have been hit by Labour's recent recession. Dowdy and dilapidated town centres do not inspire confidence among investors, whereas regenerated ones can provide the vital spark.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. I am delighted that communities in my region of the Highlands and Islands, including Dunoon, Oban and Bowmore in Argyll and Bute, Stornoway in the Western Isles, Forres, Elgin, Lossiemouth and Buckie in Moray, Lerwick on Shetland, and Wick and Thurso in Caithness, are all benefiting from the implementation of Scottish Conservative policy on regeneration. For instance, in my local town of Oban—the gateway to so many beautiful Scottish islands—the enterprising local people who started the Oban Bay Marine company are benefiting from that Scottish Conservative policy, which has rewarded them with £800,000 towards the creation of short-stay visitor pontoons in Oban bay. Thurso, which is benefiting from signage and access improvements, is another example. The interest in the fund from communities the length  and breadth of Scotland and the innovative ideas and schemes that have been proposed and are going ahead have been very encouraging. It is clear that many Scots are ready to play their part in regenerating their communities. They need the incentive and they need a recovery in our UK economy, which—unfortunately—has been so damaged. As I said, we welcome today's debate. Our constructive and positive actions while in opposition in this Parliament show that we are ready to work with others to increase the opportunities for local communities. Time prevents me from speaking in detail about housing policy, but I reiterate our strong support for the housing association sector, which has helped to transform so many communities. We also strongly believe that councils that have not yet done so should pursue housing stock transfer. That would remove housing debt and unlock investment and would be, in itself, a massive boost to community regeneration. Our amendment recognises the good work that has taken place in the past and looks forward to further progress being made. I move amendment S3M-5852.2, to insert at end: "; acknowledges the success of the New Life for Urban Scotland initiative focused on Castlemilk, Ferguslie Park, Wester Hailes and Whitfield and described as a landmark in the history of urban regeneration in Scotland in the official assessment of the scheme, and welcomes the £60 million Town Centre Regeneration Fund secured in the 2009 budget."

I refer members to my agricultural interests in the register of members' interests. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I am pleased to be able to speak in the debate, which is incredibly important for crofters and farmers in my region. Achieving the most appropriate future agricultural support system from 2013-14 is crucial not only for farmers and crofters but for businesses in some of the most remote and fragile rural and island communities in Europe. Agricultural subsidy is enormously important for three reasons. First, it is important for the industry itself, all those it employs and the subsidiary industries that go with it. Secondly, it is important for the social angle, where it plays an important role in supporting remote rural communities. Thirdly, it is important for the distribution of public goods regarding the environment and our scenic, natural and wildlife heritage. Like other members, I put on record my thanks to Brian Pack and his team for generating much debate within the farming community. It is long  overdue. A review of the cross-compliance rules for farmers and crofters is also long overdue. A draft report that I have seen from the European Parliament's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development suggests that the basic aim of cross-compliance inspections should be to advise farmers and put them on the right track to better meet legislative requirements. The draft report calls for only those who continuously infringe and show reluctance to adhere to those requirements to be punished. It also calls for simplification of the cross-compliance rules and for a telephone helpline for farmers to be set up in each member state. I mention that because farmers have become fearful of breaking rules that they do not fully understand, and the gap between the farming community and the Scottish Government inspectors has unfortunately widened. Those barriers impede progress. When I was a young farmer in the 1970s, the culture in the agriculture department was to advise rather than restrict. Let us hope that a simplification and clarification of the CAP will bring with it a simplification and clarification of the cross-compliance rules, which will instil a better relationship between Scottish Government officials and working farmers. Recent enforcements, such as those on electronic identification, have left farmers terrified of losing their single farm payments through no fault of their own. The Scottish Conservatives are pleased that Brian Pack's report has generated debate. Future support for our crofting and farming sector through direct payment is vital, both for food security—a subject that my friend John Scott has worked effectively to highlight in recent years—and for encouraging a vibrant, working countryside with all the environmental benefits that go with it. Such support is especially important in the peripheral areas of our country, where distances from market, transport costs, land quality and the small-scale nature of many enterprises mean that conditions are even more challenging, not least when markets are volatile and regulations are ever increasing. The single farm payment is simply the bedrock upon which many of the farms and crofts in my region base their continued survival. That must not be forgotten, and I am sure that Brian Pack will not forget it. Any move towards an area-based single farm payment as suggested by Brian Pack needs to achieve an incredibly challenging balance between supporting new entrants, reversing the decline in stock numbers on our hills and not unduly penalising producers in the most densely stocked parts of the country—or, for that matter, the most sparsely stocked areas.  That will be no easy task. For that reason, it is necessary that we have a transition period after 2013 that is as long as possible so that future plans can be properly laid and thought out as we move to a clear and simple CAP solution that is understood by farmers and appreciated by the public. The status quo may not be perfect, but it has sufficed, and 2014 may be too early for a change to the area-based payment. The Scottish Rural Property and Business Association has stated that a "blanket flat rate payment per hectare would not be any fairer than the current historic system". Therefore, Brian Pack's suggestion about an activity requirement, which would require producers on pasture land to maintain stocking density, seems to be a solution that merits support, although it will take much negotiation to get the details right, and achieving consensus will be hard. In the report, Pack suggested a minimum of 0.8 livestock units per hectare, but he went on to suggest a limit of 0.12 units, under the Macaulay land capability for agriculture classification for inactivity. Will the minister clarify which rate he thinks is right? Too high a stocking rate will be difficult for some areas in the Highlands and Islands. Much work will also have to be done on the top-up fund, which, it is suggested, will replace current special provisions through article 68. I am in favour of that, but I do not have much confidence that it will happen, because I do not think that it will be politically acceptable. In the UK, the agreement of three other regions will be required, and I wonder whether that will happen. I am pleased that the report recognises the strong support that exists for the LFASS and its importance to Scotland. The LFASS is crucial to my region, and the European Union rightly remains keen to prevent land abandonment through the LFASS mechanism, although it is likely to become more strictly defined and auditable.

Does the minister agree that some farmers,  especially in the Highlands, have been asked to reduce their stock for environmental reasons?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to improve the A82 and A83. (S3O-9571)

The minister has not given time schedules for that work. On the A82, will the minister give a firm and detailed time commitment on the road widening, climbing lanes and junction improvements that are planned for between Tarbet and Fort William? On the A83, what guarantees can the minister give that the current work that is being undertaken at the Rest and be thankful will prevent a repeat of the closures of that key trunk artery road, which proved to be so damaging to the Argyll economy? Specifically, what action will he take to remedy the appalling physical condition of stretches of the A83 near Tarbet that my constituents feel make it currently very dangerous to drive on?

As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in today's short but important—and very timely—debate. As my friend Ted Brocklebank said, the Scottish Conservatives are proud that we have been consistent supporters of BBC Alba since its inception, and we have consistently argued that it should be available on Freeview. I made that point very strongly to the then Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution, Mike Russell, at question time in the chamber just after the BBC trust announced its review of BBC Alba in late October last year. The Scottish Conservatives' wider record on support for Gaelic has been steadfast and meaningful, and has included support for the establishment of the Gaelic broadcasting fund. I thank Dave Thompson for his recognition of that—members should look at what it has led to. Conservatives in Government delivered tangible benefits for the Gaelic language and Gaelic speakers, and I expect that the next Conservative Government will do the same. BBC Alba's availability on Freeview is important for many reasons. At the basic level, there is the issue of fairness. Many of my constituents in the Highlands and Islands do not want to or cannot afford to pay hundreds of pounds to access the Gaelic channel through satellite television. Given that Irish people can watch the Irish Gaelic channel for free and that people in Wales can watch the Welsh channel for free, surely it is logical that people in Scotland should be able to access BBC Alba for free. In turn, developing and maintaining a critical mass of viewers for BBC Alba require it to be available on Freeview. I want to dispel any concerns that we might lose our access to BBC network radio stations if BBC Alba is added to Freeview in place of some radio stations. Even if that does happen, radio listeners  would still be able to access their stations on Freeview when BBC Alba is not on air. They would also be able to access it at any time on FM, AM, DAB, satellite, cable and online. I share Jeremy Purvis's concerns about people who cannot get coverage under the new digital network. I hope that that will be dealt with at some point. There is also a wider argument, of which I am wholly convinced, that BBC Alba has a vital role in sustaining and expanding the Gaelic language. If members on all sides of the chamber are unanimous that we need to reach out to Gaelic speakers and, crucially, to encourage greater awareness of the language and a greater number of people to become involved in learning it, BBC Alba will be a much more powerful tool in achieving those ends if it is available on Freeview. The medium of TV is critical in reflecting and supporting Gaelic culture, identity and heritage, and that medium must be widely and easily available. BBC Alba has been a success story, with some excellent programming. Everyone should have the opportunity to watch it, which would allow the channel to fulfil its role in assisting the sustenance and future development of the Gaelic language. I, too, watched a fine film on the exceptional comedian Norman Maclean, which prompted me to buy his book, "The Leper's Bell", a sharp and poignant reflection of life in Glasgow and the islands—I recommend it as an excellent read. I hope that today's debate will help to inform further the BBC trust as it prepares to respond to the consultation that it has undertaken—a consultation that I am confident demonstrated a widespread support for the availability of BBC Alba on Freeview. I support the amendment in the name of my friend Ted Brocklebank.

I am pleased to be able to make a short contribution for the Scottish Conservatives in summing up the stage 3 debate. Like others, I pay tribute to the members of the Local Government and Communities Committee, including my good friend David McLetchie, for the excellent work that they have done on the bill, including the stage 1 report that informed our stage 1 debate and the improvements at stage 2, which effectively clarified and simplified elements of the bill. I thank organisations such as Citizens Advice Scotland, which provided useful briefings to me at this stage and previous stages in the legislative process. As David McLetchie indicated, the Scottish Conservatives will vote to pass the bill today. David has already dealt with some of the points of detail in the stage 3 amendments, having himself helped to improve the bill at the committee stage. In general terms, we believe that it is appropriate that existing good practice in the area of repossessions is codified and that previous legislation is built upon. It is right that repossession pre-action is put into statute. One issue that I identified during my contribution in the stage 1 debate, as others did in their contributions, was the widespread concern about the lack of Scotland-specific data on the number of repossessions. Since we are looking for that situation to be addressed, I am disappointed that the minister has not come up with that very important data. Will he make amends for that at some point?

I thought that the minister said earlier that we were going to abolish the FSA, and I would have thought that the SNP might be able to come up with data about Scotland. Cathy Jamieson had some very poignant examples of repossessions, which we all want to see the end of. Unfortunately, as David McLetchie said, it will require a Conservative-led recovery from Labour's recession for something to be done about the economic plight in which people find themselves. I hope that the bill will help improve the current legislative framework and boost the  rights of under-pressure home owners in the short term and in the future.

Will the First Minister echo Scottish Enterprise's call for more Scottish companies to register and complete their profiles for the bidding process so that they have a chance of getting some of the multimillion-pound contracts that are still available?

Has the minister urged local authorities that have not yet done so to consider housing stock transfer, which would wipe out their housing debt and improve local accountability?

Nigel Don mentioned swimming pools. Does the minister agree that, for people immersed in water, one of the most important things is being able to swim? Will he stress the importance of teaching our children to swim in swimming pools throughout Scotland?

Straight away I say that we must never take for granted the efforts of the very brave men and women who turn up to tackle floods and water emergencies throughout Scotland in order to save lives and property—the fire and rescue services, the police and water rescue teams. I believe that it is our duty in the Parliament to facilitate rescue.  I thank the minister, Fergus Ewing, for instructing the review. I pay tribute to Paddy Tomkins QPM, his advisory group and his support team for producing a sensible, thorough and practical report within a tight period of only five months. I was fortunate enough to have a very positive meeting with Mr Tomkins just before he formally started work on his report, and I recognise his professionalism and his commitment to improving matters. The Scottish Government commissioned the review in part because of recent tragedies such as that on Loch Awe, where four anglers—William Carty, Craig Currie, Steven Carty and Thomas Douglas—lost their lives in March through drowning. That tragic incident showed up the difficulties involved in a rescue operation in a freshwater loch in wintry conditions at night and in thick fog. The minister will know that, on that terrible night, the local fireman who first responded heard voices shouting for help—but had no boat. Since 1996, 12 people have drowned in Loch Awe, and anything that can be done to lessen the occurrence of such tragedies, there and elsewhere, will be welcomed by people who live on the loch and by the thousands of visitors who come to fish and for recreation. It is most vital that first responders have access to a boat, or to someone else who has a boat, in order to minimise the time that it takes to rescue people. Cold, deep water has no mercy—it kills very quickly, so speed of rescue is paramount. Any multi-agency approach must be able to trigger a response to a situation at local level as quickly as possible. That would be a worthwhile outcome of the review, as would an identification of the body responsible for marking submerged reefs and other underwater hazards in freshwater lochs. My one disappointment about the report is that there seems to be no reference in it to the marking of underwater hazards in freshwater. I ask the minister to comment on that omission during future consultations. The status quo has not proved adequate, and it needs improvement. As chairman of the Loch Awe Improvement Association since 1992, I have had real concerns for some time that, although we are very well served by the RNLI and the coastguard for coastal rescue services and by our excellent mountain rescue services in the mountains, there can be huge gaps in the system for inshore freshwater lochs. Many people who live in rural areas want to help, by acting as watchers. People want to volunteer. Therefore, local safety organisations or companies should be given basic resources, such as binoculars and gridded maps, so that areas of water can be observed, and such organisations should be encouraged to have a network that can  be called on by the police in an emergency. Ultimately, speed is the essence of rescue. I am pleased to report that after the Loch Awe tragedy a fund was set up under the auspices of the Oban Times & West Highland Times , which has attracted significant support. I pay tribute to the families of the deceased, who have raised most of the money. One of the relatives said to me, "If our effort can save even one life it will have been worth while". In addition, a committee, of which I am a member, has been set up to co-ordinate local efforts, and the Lochawe Safety Company has been established. I congratulate Councillor Donald Macdonald, of Argyll and Bute Council; Iain MacKinnon, senior environmental health officer; Michael Robertson, solicitor; and Donald Wilson of Loch Awe Boats on the progress that has quickly been achieved. A good code of practice has been agreed, which will be circulated widely. It is rightly pointed out in the code that even on the hottest days the loch is very cold, so anyone who ventures out on the water must always wear a correctly functioning and fitted life-jacket or buoyancy aid and anyone who fishes from the shore should consider doing so too. A boat that is used on the loch should be seaworthy and fit for purpose, its outboard engine should be in good working order and should be the right size for the boat, and oars or paddles should be carried. Means of summoning assistance in an emergency should also be carried. Paddy Tomkins concluded that educating the public about what to do in emergencies is a vital part of prevention. I very much agree. As I said, the public should be informed if underwater reefs and hazards are not marked, because such hazards can be deadly. However, volunteer groups can be put off from marking such hazards because of a fear of litigation if all hazards are not marked. The minister must address the situation. I ask him to look into the problem, to see what can be done. Last year, I was impressed by an excellent demonstration by the RNLI on the wearing and maintenance of life-jackets for people who use boats. I was horrified by some of the life-jackets that I was shown, some of which had corroded and useless gas canisters and some of which had no crutch straps, which are crucial to efficient life saving. It is vital that life-saving equipment should be in first-class condition.

May I have a moment to make one more point, please?

Paddy Tomkins said in his report: "Perhaps of greatest concern to me in speaking to a wide range of people working on or having an interest in safety relating to Scotland's waters was the degree to which the idea of 'Health and Safety' has entered the popular consciousness as a hindrance to, for example, making provision for a safety boat or modest rescue facility rather than as facilitating such public-spirited action. An erroneous belief seems to have developed that any well-intentioned provision or action could"—

Do the potential dangers to which the minister refers include the hidden underwater hazards that are found in Scottish lochs? I refer to lochs that are navigable.

To ask the Scottish Executive what value it places on swimming as a way of improving both physical and mental health. (S3O-9060)

Is the minister aware of the threat of closure to the community-owned mid-Argyll swimming pool in Lochgilphead? Does she agree that such a closure would be a disaster for local people? Will she, like me, encourage all stakeholders to do everything possible to secure the swimming pool's future?

I am pleased to be able to speak in the debate, and I pay tribute to the members of the Local Government and Communities Committee, including my good friend David McLetchie, for producing a thorough and extremely useful committee report on the bill, which has informed the debate and correctly highlighted areas that require attention. We all recognise the severe economic pressure that so many of our constituents are under, including those in my region of the Highlands and Islands, as unemployment goes up and disposable incomes are squeezed. The bill's policy memorandum states that the policy intent is "to protect home owners and debtors during a period of recession, and in particular to reduce the risk of homelessness as a result of insolvency." It is interesting, and I have to say rather shaming, that while other European Union countries, notably Italy, are managing to move out of recession, we in Britain are still languishing in such an awful mess. Bob Doris blamed David McLetchie for throwing a spanner in the works—I hardly think that it was him or our party that did that to one of the most successful economies that Europe has ever seen. The credit boom of the past 10 years meant that many people had ready access to mortgage credit, often for the first time in their lives, and we were able to fulfil their perfectly understandable and commendable desire to become property owners. The good economic conditions brought about by the previous Conservative Government, and the right to buy, were willingly taken up by a great many Scots. That scenario was sustainable as long as the British economy did well, but the economic crash and its consequences have led to a situation in which many people are now struggling to keep up with their mortgage repayments, experiencing negative equity and facing the dreadful prospect of repossession. The Council of Mortgage Lenders is still predicting somewhere in the region of 65,000 repossessions across the UK this year, which is significantly more than the 40,000 that took place last year and vastly more than the 8,200 recorded in 2004. We recognise that the repossession of a home is surely one of the most devastating and stressful life events that could possibly befall anybody. I also share the concerns that have been widely expressed in the Parliament and elsewhere with regard to a lack of information about the number of repossessions that take place in Scotland. As with any issue, it is vital that we have a grasp of the  extent of the problem when we seek to tackle it. It is concerning that we have very little evidence that is specific to Scotland in respect of the number of repossessions over the past two years or so; it would have been extremely useful to have had that information when the committee considered the bill. More generally, on a theme that emerged when the committee took evidence at stage 1 and which David McLetchie highlighted, the Government should have been able to present more convincing evidence to show why current legislation was not sufficient and why the new legislation was required. Nevertheless, in these difficult and exceptional economic circumstances, the Scottish Conservatives believe that it is right that Government at all levels considers what action it can take to assist people to cope with the recession and to help prevent repossession, which we have always said should be a measure of last resort—a position, of course, with which lenders agree. That is why we will support the bill today, albeit while seeking improvements in the areas that David McLetchie covered earlier and which he will again address at the end of the debate. I also acknowledge the support that the bill has had from a range of organisations, including Citizens Advice Scotland, which sent me a very useful briefing note. Part 1 of the bill brings Scotland more closely into line with the law in the rest of the UK on repossession and, crucially, it puts into statute a pre-action protocol for repossessions. That will allow the home owner greater opportunity to object to creditors taking repossession of their home. That essentially means codifying the good practice that exists in the rest of the UK and it therefore has our support. There are more areas of concern in part 2 of the bill. The committee's evidence correctly identified that the new route into bankruptcy in section 9 of the bill would potentially mean a significant shift of business from the private sector to the public sector and potential redundancies as a consequence. It was appropriate for the minister to take those concerns on board and to commit to re-examining the role of insolvency practitioners. We look forward to ministers delivering a more acceptable way forward on the matter in full consultation with private sector interests. Today's debate has so far been, on the whole, constructive and useful. We are satisfied that there is enough need out there to justify the bill and enough in the bill to justify our party supporting it. I and my Conservative colleagues stand ready to work constructively with the Scottish Government and others to improve the bill in the next stages of the legislative process, so that we achieve clear and effective legislation that gives support to  Scottish families that are struggling in very difficult economic times. In the football parlance that Duncan McNeil spoke of, those must be our goals, and let us avoid the penalties—the awful penalties—that fall on the unfortunate householders who are shown the red card in their own homes.

Although people might be pleased to get the Avanti service, will the minister reflect on my comment that, apparently, it does not work if it is raining in London or Argyll?

I congratulate my good friend Murdo Fraser on bringing to the chamber today's extremely important debate and on prompting the Government to send an e-mail this afternoon to tell us of 71 upgrades, the first of which will be finished by March 2010. I thought that that e-mail might pre-empt my speech but, having looked at the list, I see that it does not include any of the exchanges that I am going to complain about. The minister will be aware, as the constituency MSP for Argyll and Bute and from the repeated correspondence that he has had with members such as me, that there are far too many rural communities in the Highlands and Islands that still receive an inferior service and poorer value for money in comparison with their urban equivalents. One constituent in rural Argyll told me this week that she is paying a whopping £40.54 per month for broadband through Avanti, which she finds does not work half the time. When she rings Avanti to complain, the company tells her that, because it is raining either in London or in Argyll—which is quite often—the satellite is not working. Furthermore, she receives no refund for any lack of service, she is bound into a minimum one-year contract, and even when the system is working it is often so slow that sometimes the service times out before things download. Watching BBC iPlayer, which people in the cities take for granted, can be a frustrating experience that leaves people tearing their hair out. That is surely unacceptable, and sadly—judging from my mailbag—such an occurrence is not an isolated case. I am led to believe that the cheapest Avanti option is £23.50 per month, which is much more expensive than many of the competitive city broadband packages and an amount that means that the package is out of reach for many people on low incomes. Indeed, the fact that the uptake of Avanti broadband by those who previously indicated an interest is only around 50 per cent suggests that cost is putting people off. Another constituent in Argyll tells me that, despite the fact that he lives only 100m from the BT exchange, his broadband provider can only give him 2 megabits per second. His neighbour, who is with a different provider and thus uses a different line from the exchange, can get 8 megabits per second. Such inconsistency understandably annoys and dismays people; they just feel conned. I will briefly mention the continuing and passionate campaign of my constituents in  Northbay on the island of Barra to secure a better broadband service for their community than the one that is currently provided by the connected communities broadband network, which is owned and managed by Highlands and Islands Enterprise. My constituents on Barra continue to make the case to me that the con com wireless solution has just not worked for them; they want the local BT exchange to be upgraded. One of my constituents said to me, "What kind of con is con com?" My constituents in the rural and island parts of my region want efforts redoubled to secure affordable, fast and reliable broadband for all. That must mean working with BT and urging it at every opportunity to renew and upgrade the BT telephone exchanges. I am glad that 71 exchanges are being upgraded, but there are still many more. Upgrading the exchanges will enable BT to cope with the demand that exists in communities throughout rural Scotland. BT seems to be saving money by getting rid of rural telephone boxes, which it says there is no longer any need for. The upgrading of rural exchanges is a new, modern need that BT can fulfil, and I hope that the Government will encourage it to do so.

I, too, congratulate Sandra White on securing this debate, which is important. I respect and acknowledge her sincerity and recognise and sympathise with the widely held concerns that have been powerfully expressed by her and many others of all parties over the years and by many elements of civic Scotland. That includes the Church of Scotland. The Rev Liz Gibson of Dalmally, who is a constituent of mine, is a member of its church and society council, which has worked hard to highlight the issues involved. In general, the Scottish Conservatives believe that the UK Government and Parliament must retain reserved powers over asylum and immigration so that a consistent approach is taken throughout the UK. However, a civilised approach must be taken. The detention of young children is the problem that surrounds Dungavel. Surely nobody is comfortable with young children being detained in detention centres, especially for long periods of time. They should be in detention centres only  while they await deportation or for an initial check. The fact that families spend so long in such centres is indicative of the chaos that the UK Government has created in the asylum system. I hope that, if we are fortunate enough to win the next general election, a Conservative Government will tackle the problem effectively. The motion correctly refers to "efforts of the previous administration and the current Scottish Government to end the practice of the detention of children at Dungavel". I look forward to the minister updating members on the situation. The Scottish Government has, of course, been exploring alternatives to detention, including the three-year pilot in Glasgow that is aimed at reducing the number of children who are held in Dungavel, and encouraging and assisting the voluntary return of families, which has been mentioned. We all hope that the pilot is successful. I recall the debate that we had in the chamber on the subject in September 2005, in which my friend James Douglas-Hamilton, who famously declared an interest in Dungavel as a former resident, albeit in completely different circumstances, spoke extremely well. He correctly said that it is important that children's issues are addressed with sensitivity and that the views of our Scottish experts in the education and social work inspectorates are listened to. He concluded: "The Home Office must be reminded of the key point, which is that, whatever the parents may or may not have done to cause them to be in Dungavel or in reception centres, children are there through no fault of their own."— [ Official Report , 22 September 2005; c 19377.]  The needs of the children and their welfare are paramount. The detention of children should be exceptional and for the shortest period possible. We really must have some progress on the issue.

Although we all want to see Glasgow hosting the best ever Commonwealth games in 2014, what specific guarantee can the First Minister give to council tax payers in Glasgow and all other taxpayers throughout Scotland that the increase of £81 million will be the final such increase?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it in order for any other MSP to ask that question?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am pleased to be winding up for the Conservatives in what has largely been a positive and useful debate. I was interested in Nigel Don's remarks about Duthie park in Aberdeen. I declare an interest, in that the pink granite obelisk that overshadows that park is a monument to my ancestor James McGrigor, who founded the Royal Army Medical Corps. For me, that is an important part of the Scottish built environment.  They say that east never goes west, but my family did. My present region of the Highlands and Islands encapsulates so much of the very best of Scotland's historic built environment, from the globally important neolithic magic of Skara Brae and Maeshowe in Orkney, to the French-renaissance-meets-Scots-baronial splendour of Dunrobin castle in Sutherland. There is also the emotive romanticism of Eilean Donan castle, which is surely one of the most photographed castles in world; the unusual combination of baroque, Palladian and Gothic architecture in Inveraray castle in my native Argyll and Bute; the ruined Kilchurn castle on Loch Awe; Castle Tioram at Acharacle; and Urquhart castle on Loch Ness. There are, of course, many more. Above all that, however, Scotland also has a wonderfully high concentration of Adam houses, which I believe makes us internationally important.

My colleague Jamie Stone mentioned Tain museum, which I believe is a museum to the clearances. Of course, that was one of the Lib Dem's original social engineering experiments. I was talking about Adam houses. We have many of them, despite the fact that, as one of my Argyll constituents says, "nearly 50 per cent of Robert Adam's buildings in Scotland, the nation's greatest architect, have been destroyed in the last 100 years, including several of his masterpieces. Destroyed of course by the stupidity of politicians and local councillors. I hope this will make a few people sit up and realise how precious and how threatened our built heritage is!" I know that the Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution will be aware of that, but what about his colleagues? As an aside, let me say that I am delighted that interest in William and Robert Adam remains so great. Tonight sees the launch of Roderick Graham's new biography of Robert Adam, which is being published by the excellent Edinburgh publisher Birlinn. I wish the book well. In preparing for today's debate, I was contacted by a lady constituent who has huge experience in the historic houses sector. She agreed with the debate title, that our historic environment is a "Unique Resource for Our Economy", but she pointed out that the historic environment can also be expensive to look after. As others have mentioned, we need only consider the recent funding woes of the National Trust for Scotland to see a powerful demonstration of that point.  Notwithstanding the mostly good work of the National Trust for Scotland and Historic Scotland, it remains the case that the private ownership of much of Scotland's heritage—two thirds is the figure that is usually quoted—is a cost-effective way of preserving the nation's heritage without ruining the public purse. Of course, private owners need to make things work. Many of them use their houses for all sorts of things, from venues for music and dancing events to much smaller-scale niche-marketing opportunities, such as weddings, concerts, up-market accommodation, sporting lets and educational activities. Sadly, the people who work at the coalface trying to make our historic houses function on a financially viable basis say that it is becoming increasingly more difficult to operate due to burdensome regulations—such as licensing laws—that are simply not designed for smaller, part-time businesses. The expert on historic houses that I mentioned warns that, unless excessive and costly regulations and bureaucracy are checked, fewer privately owned houses will have a future involving public use so there will be more calls on public funding as a last resort. On the issue of the National Trust for Scotland, I was pleased to be involved in the successful campaign to prevent the closure of Arduaine garden, which is a key part of Argyll's historic environment. I pay tribute to all those who fought so hard to preserve the garden, including the friends of Arduaine and the various generous benefactors who donated money to secure the garden's future. My constituents want to see that world-class garden being promoted as effectively as possible. Indeed, one constituent suggested to me yesterday that a specific heritage body should exist to promote Scotland's wonderful gardens. I would be interested to hear the minister's view on that. Horticultural tourism surely has the potential to be a real growth area. While I am on the subject of Argyll and important tourist facilities, I have been asked to voice the concern of constituents about council plans to remove business signs on the A85 and A828 trunk roads. Many of those signs are for historic environment businesses. There are real worries that removing the signs could seriously harm some 30 local businesses in Argyll. That should not be happening, especially in the middle of a recession and under a Scottish Government that seeks a 50 per cent increase in tourism. Although this is outside my region, I was asked at a recent reception in Parliament by a lady from Kinross to highlight the appalling plight of that town. Kinross is a fine old county town whose 16 th century heart features a clock steeple, a mercat cross, a fountain, an 18 th century county building designed by Robert Adam as well as a fine early 19 th century county building and high school. The town is a conservation area, but that has not  prevented it from being neglected by Perth and Kinross Council, which now owns all the buildings concerned. Quite rightly, the lady wants to know, "What is the overall strategy to preserve the historic stone buildings of Kinross?" I am sure that the same question could be asked of so many of our smaller towns and villages. Recently, the enthusiasm and energy of the architect John McAslan have restored the historic burgh hall in Dunoon. That effort should be recognised and followed by our leaders in Scotland. Each place has its own gem. Look at Rennie Mackintosh's wonderful Hill house in Helensburgh. Look at Scotland's other Edwardian houses whose interiors were created by architects such as Lorimer. I conclude by emphasising just how culturally and economically important our built and historic environment is to my region and to the whole country. It underpins to a massive extent the £1 billion that we take in from our tourism sector and all the associated jobs that go with that, which are often vital in some of our more remote and rural communities. I am pleased that the minister recognises the enthusiasm, passion and co-operation that exist in the sector; the Scottish Conservatives recognise it, too.

I am just winding up now. I never knew that Mike Russell had driven a steam engine. I hope that his fat controller congratulated him on doing so and that he will be a really useful engine for the historic environment in the future.

Does the member agree that the monuments and remains to which he refers should be better signposted?

I apologise for my absence at the start of the debate. I congratulate Willie Coffey on securing a members' business debate, and I am pleased to have this opportunity to speak on a subject that is of paramount importance to my Highlands and Islands region. The need for a proper discussion on safety at level crossings was highlighted by the awful deaths last month of Angus and Margaret MacKay and Mr MacKay's younger brother. All three of them died when their car was struck by a train at the Halkirk level crossing. The incident has shown more specifically that we need to consider whether it is appropriate for ungated level crossings to  continue. There have been other accidents and many near misses at level crossings in places such as—to name but a few—Invergordon, Garve, Bunchrew and Forsinard. Almost a third of level crossing accidents happen where there is no gate in place, even though such crossings make up only 2 per cent of crossings in the UK. Such evidence speaks for itself. As Mr Thompson mentioned, the fact that 21 out of the 23 open crossings in Scotland are located in the Highlands means that the region is especially vulnerable. Therefore, I feel that I have a duty to my constituents to emphasise the importance of the problem. We must remember that the most recent incident was not an isolated case. Cost should not be an issue where valuable life is at stake. I am told that it is not uncommon for the warning lights at level crossings in the Highlands to flash incorrectly due to, for instance, an animal such as a red deer or a cattle beast walking on the line further down the track. That can breed frustration for drivers, because no train appears when the lights are flashing. It can also breed complacency, because people might think that the lights are faulty so they can cross without danger. It is obviously imperative to bring in a system that negates problems of that kind. However, a thorough investigation is needed into why the most recent and other crashes have occurred. That will enable the Government to work out precisely what measures need to be taken to increase safety at all road-rail junctions in Scotland. When I met the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change recently following the dreadful tragedy—a meeting for which I am grateful—I welcomed his suggestion that the Government look into the possibility of installing barriers at such junctions. However, my constituents and I would appreciate more concrete assurances that the issue will be dealt with adequately. I also agreed with his suggestion that there should be more warning notices to tell drivers what is ahead of them. Of course it is crucial that the inquiry system be modernised, but we must also work out how the crossings can be improved. The Government should take swift and positive action to prevent similar accidents from happening in future. I hope that the minister will do that.

One of my fishermen constituents to whom I spoke in preparing for the debate reflected on the recent UK fisheries stakeholder event at Murrayfield. Huw Irranca-Davies, the UK fisheries minister, asked the industry what it could offer in the way of conservation measures to offset the proposed cuts in the total allowable catch. The Scottish industry, quite correctly, replied with one voice that it has already done a massive amount—more than any other fishing industry anywhere in Europe—through increased mesh sizes, 120 real-time closures to protect cod, closed boxes, moving away from juvenile fish, a kilowatt days scheme that has cut effort and many other practical measures. It was frustrating to our Scottish  fishermen that Mr Irranca-Davies did not seem to acknowledge all that work and still demanded further pain to be inflicted on them. That is a disgrace. The Commission's proposals for TAC cuts in North Sea haddock, whiting and saith have caused alarm throughout the sector and are hardly offset by the increase—albeit a welcome one—in the cod TAC. How are businesses to remain viable with cuts of that magnitude? Many fishermen continue to tell me that the stocks in the North Sea are in good health and ask how it could be otherwise when the majority of Scottish producer organisations have already had an uptake of 90 per cent of their allocated quota. I must also highlight the particular plight that west coast fishermen face. Last year's proposals, which would essentially have shut down all fishing in the area, have not been repeated, but a 25 per cent cut in west coast cod and a 54 per cent cut in west coast haddock are still draconian. Will the cabinet secretary assure me that he will work as hard as possible to mitigate those proposed cuts? Does the cabinet secretary recognise that prawn fishermen question the scientific basis of ICES's evidence? They point to healthy stocks of nephrops. Indeed, the Stornoway nephrops trawl, which is located within ICES division VIa, is certified as a sustainable fishery by no less than the Marine Stewardship Council. I think that it was Winston Churchill who said that we need science on tap, not science on top. The Scottish fishing industry would agree with him. The Clyde Fishermen's Association has pointed out that the cod recovery plan was designed to help cod stocks to recover and to allow vessels that are not catching cod to be exempted from effort restrictions. The European Commission and the scientific, technical and economic committee for fisheries are not following the plan and are ignoring those parts of it that would allow our prawn-catching vessels to be exempted. Our prawn fishermen believe that they cannot be governed by a regulator that does not follow its own rules, and they question the legality of those rules. What will the cabinet secretary do to help the Clyde Fishermen's Association's hard-pressed members to get a fair deal? I will finish by quoting the wise words of Bertie Armstrong of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation. He has said on behalf of the whole Scottish industry: "We have played a leading role in meeting the management aim of sustainable fishing; we must fight to still be here to harvest the benefits" of that pain. We look to the cabinet secretary to help our fishermen to win that fight. The future of  many of our coastal communities depends on him. I wish him luck and best wishes in his endeavours.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it will make with regard to the BBC Trust's review of BBC Alba. (S3O-8339)

The minister will be aware that the Scottish Conservatives have consistently argued that BBC Alba should be available on Freeview. Many of my constituents in the Highlands and Islands believe that the issue is one of fairness. Does the minister agree? Will he continue to make the strongest possible case for the availability of BBC Alba on Freeview, given the importance of the channel in sustaining and encouraging our Gaelic culture and heritage?

I want more affordable housing, but the requirement for 50 per cent of housing to be affordable is counterproductive.

Does Jackie Baillie agree that the byelaws on Loch Lomond could be used on other lochs in Scotland as a good management proposal?

I am pleased to be able to take part in today's debate. Our two national parks, the Cairngorms and Loch Lomond and the Trossachs, play a large part in the life of my Highlands and Islands region. Echoing my friend John Scott, I agree with the broad thrust of the recommendations of the national park review, including the plans to reduce the number of members of national park authority  boards. Over the years, the concern has been put to me repeatedly as an MSP that some elements of the administration have been overly bureaucratic; I see that Neil Kay also makes that point. Anything that streamlines and increases efficiency is to be welcomed. One constituent suggested to me that the high staff turnover in the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park is also of concern. The minister may wish to examine the reasons for that coming and going. I believe strongly that the future of rural Scotland, including our national parks, depends not just on preserving our environment and sustaining existing communities and livelihoods but on allowing and, indeed, encouraging some new development of both businesses and housing and the appropriate sustainable use of our natural resources. Some of my constituents remain concerned that, sadly, our national parks have stifled development that would otherwise have been given the go-ahead and would have boosted local economies. In the Highlands and Islands, economic opportunities can be rare and must be grasped firmly with both hands. I am communities and housing spokesman for my party, so the provision of affordable rural housing is an issue close to my heart. One issue of concern, which I raised in the previous debate on the subject, is the requirement that the Cairngorms National Park Authority places on developers for 50 per cent of new homes in a development to be affordable, if they are in the national park, as opposed to 25 per cent elsewhere. We all share the aim of providing more affordable housing, but it has been put to me that the restriction is deterring developers from building in the national park area, which may, therefore, be missing out on affordable housing being built. Basically, it is doubling a tax that is sometimes seen as counterproductive in respect of affordable housing.

Absolutely—that is marvellous. Consideration should be given to using the rural empty properties grant for that purpose. Constituents in the Cairngorms national park have asked me to raise a further specific development issue—the proposed new community of An Camas Mòr, near Aviemore. Outline permission was applied for in May. Naturally, the applicants would like a timely decision, so that they can start detailed work next year. I say to the minister that the time that it takes to get planning decisions is an important issue—more so than  usual in the current financial climate. The innovative master plan for the development is a community vision that goes all the way back to a proposal by the community council in 1989, when the problem of Aviemore's affordable housing shortage was discussed. It is interesting to note that housing was seen as a problem 20 years ago. Since then, far too little has been done to improve the situation. The vision that is proposed has exciting possibilities for the future. I say to those who are against this type of development in the Cairngorms national park that, given the park's enormous size, it is vital that there are sustainable, vibrant communities within its boundaries to ensure that there is a nucleus of productive activity and job creation. Environmentally sound and attractive developments in which people can make their homes will be infinitely superior to a situation of continued housing shortages that lead to a stifling of objectives. Such developments offer huge opportunities to local companies and the prospect of many extra jobs. I want to touch on some of the good work that has been done in our national parks. I remain especially interested in the work that the Cairngorms National Park Authority is doing to offer training to land-based businesses in the Cairngorms area. That training is benefiting any business that is related to the management or use of the land in the park: estates, farms, crofts, forestry, fishing, horticulture, nurseries and outdoor recreation providers. Environmental courses in deerstalking, black grouse management, mole control, water margin management and dry-stone dyking are all vital in maintaining the traditional skills in the area. I liked Christopher Harvie's speech very much. Public benefit courses that have been delivered through the training programme include ones on the Scottish outdoor access code, Cairngorms wildlife, tick control—which is very important, both healthwise and economically—heather management and catering for the less able visitor. The comments from businesses and organisations within the park about the training that has been received have been very positive. In the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park, a community training programme runs courses in a range of subjects including how community organisations can better access funding streams. That is important. I am impressed by the work that the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority has done to increase the number of apprenticeships in the area of the park and to encourage businesses in the park to make use of the latest information technology. I was also pleased to see the park encouraging barn owls, with some success.  Christopher Harvie mentioned people blasting things, and I was horrified to hear about the indiscriminate slaughter of too many red deer, which constitute an important part of our national heritage. Now that sheep have been found not to have been detrimental to the water supply from Loch Katrine, I ask for consideration to be given to restocking the sheep farms and bringing back the tenancies that were removed several years ago. In conclusion—

Do you want me to go on?

I wish the minister's national parks strategy group every success, and I hope that any further sensible recommendations can be implemented quickly in the interests of my constituents and, for that matter, in the interests of Scotland as a whole.

During the first parliamentary session, I think that Ross Finnie, who was a minister, mentioned the possibility of a seal commission. Has the minister given any more thought to that possibility?

I refer members to my fishery interests in the members' register of interests. As my friend John Scott indicated in his opening speech, we strongly welcome the Scottish Government's intention to consolidate current marine legislation. We believe that the Scottish Government's legislation must be complementary to the Marine and Coastal Access Bill that is going through Westminster. That is a crucial requirement, which ministers must recognise. Scotland's marine environment is of huge importance to our country, especially my region of the Highlands and Islands. It is right that we take every possible step to protect and enhance our marine biosphere while recognising that people's livelihoods—and, thus, the future of many of our coastal communities—depend on sustainable utilisation of the marine resources. It is crucial that at all stages we involve key stakeholders, such as fishermen's associations and the representatives not only of conservation bodies but of the aquaculture and marine tourism sectors. They must all work together. Given that many members have mentioned marine protected areas, I want to raise a connected issue that relates to a proposed special area of conservation that is of huge concern to my constituents. I refer to the proposal to establish a marine SAC around east Mingulay and the Sound of Barra, which has been mentioned already. After I secured a members' business debate on a similarly controversial proposal in a nearby area during the first session of the Parliament, the idea was dropped at that time. I seem to remember standing shoulder to shoulder with the well-known SNP councillor from Barra, Donald Manford, in opposition to that proposal. Local people had enormous—and, I think, genuine—fears that the SAC could remove their ability to make a living from what they and other independent  organisations believed to be a sustainable fishery. Ministers rightly want decisions to be taken on the basis of science, but what happens when the constituents who have direct experience of conditions at sea question the accuracy of the science? What options are open to hard-pressed constituents who face the loss of income and livelihood? I agree with the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's stage 1 report, which recommends "that provision be inserted into the Bill requiring the Scottish Ministers, when drawing up a marine conservation order for an MPA ... to have regard ... to social and economic factors", which are the factors that affect people. That is a crucial point. I would also be interested to hear what lessons ministers believe they have learned from their experience of SACs that will improve the consultation on, and implementation of, MPAs. On the issue of seals, which other members have mentioned, let me repeat the comments that I made in the aquaculture debate. No one wants to see such beautiful mammals culled unnecessarily, but we need to respond to the fact that each year approximately 20,000 to 30,000 seal attacks take place on Scottish salmon farms. Last year, the industry admits that it was forced to shoot 489 seals—the estimated figure from some lobbying groups has perhaps been exaggerated. Although the industry makes it clear that it wants to bring down that number by making significant investment in more sophisticated acoustic deterrents, it maintains that, from time to time, as a last resort, it needs to shoot persistent rogue seals that attack the nets. Of course, there are also seal attacks on our valuable wild salmon. The welfare of the salmon must surely be considered as well as that of the seal, and we should also consider the welfare of the people whose jobs depend on the fish farms and the wild fisheries. I support the fact that the bill will allow the culling of seals but only in particular circumstances and under strict licensing. On an issue of detail, aquaculture representatives have identified a small but, they believe, important technical omission from section 98(f) of the bill, where there is a need to insert a phrase that allows the humane killing of seals to protect the health and welfare of farmed fish, because that protection is a requirement on farmers under the Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Act 2006. The minister will know that 58,000 young salmon escaped recently from a farm in Loch Striven in Argyll. That single escape, which was apparently caused by a hole in the net, is larger than all the escapes of last year, and it could be an ecological  disaster for wild fish. The chief executive of the fish farm is quoted as saying: "As the fish are very small and young, it is unlikely they would survive in the wild." However, what will happen if some of them do survive and they breed with the wild fish? They will surely introduce a weaker strain to our wild stock, which is already under pressure, as we have seen from the poor runs this year. Roger Brook of Rivers and Fisheries Trusts of Scotland said: "This is yet more proof that escapes, both major and minor, will persist until such time as the companies put the necessary resources into robust equipment and training ... If the cages are located in open waters to which the natural wildlife ... has access, then they must be capable of withstanding any attack." Jon Gibb of the Lochaber district salmon fishery board, said: "After 20 years of serial escapes, the industry has proven that it is incapable of containing its fish." I know that fish farming is important to Scotland, but it is also important that a proper code of good practice is law and that lessons are learned from the infectious salmon anaemia crisis in Shetland, which almost wiped out our indigenous salmon and smolt production industry. That industry is equally important to many of my constituents. It is vital that a code of good practice is followed and there should be severe penalties for any fish farmer who breaks it. Why should a few spoil the reputation of a good industry?

On the subject of aquaculture, one other concern that industry representatives have put to me is that the bill proposes to introduce a universal licensing system for all marine activities except aquaculture. Why? There are worries that the proposal will result in additional complexity—

—and inconsistency. Thank you, Presiding Officer.

Hear, hear.

I am pleased to wind up for the Conservatives in a debate that, for the most part, has been constructive and useful. Like other speakers, I pay tribute to the members, clerks and support staff of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee for their hard work in preparing a thorough report. The committee was right to identify rural housing as a priority subject after the 2007 election. It is a massive issue for the Highlands and Islands because, to put it simply, it is still far too difficult for too many families to access an affordable home. That has major implications for attracting and retaining the key workers and young families we need for the sustainability of our rural communities, particularly in the most remote places. I welcome the broad thrust of the committee's report, namely that many more houses need to be built in rural Scotland, both in small towns and villages and in the countryside. To achieve that, we must see a cultural change away from a presumption against development in the countryside—the minister mentioned that. It seems to me that there is also a presumption by some rural community councils to be contra instead of pro at the outset of planning applications for building, when the presumption should surely be the other way round. We have long put forward the view that planning guidelines in rural areas can be too restrictive. In our 2007 manifesto, we specifically identified the requirement to service the accommodation needs of retiring farmers, which remains an important issue, and especially to increase opportunities for young farmers. Jamie Stone mentioned empty houses staring at the sky. As my party's spokesman on housing and communities for the past two years, I have constantly and consistently argued that more priority should be given to the rural empty property grant scheme. The committee said in its report  that the take-up of that scheme has been extremely disappointing. Housing ministers have been saying the same thing for the past few years.

I do not know whether the member means the tax regime for developers, builders or what, but I am happy to discuss that with him afterwards. The Government needs to learn the lessons from the rural empty property grant scheme as it implements the very welcome rural homes for rent scheme, with which I agree. I am aware that the Government is conducting a review of the rural empty property grant scheme along with the rural home ownership grant scheme, and I look forward to seeing the results of that as soon as possible. The REPG scheme has potential but, sadly, it has not achieved large enough numbers. All of us who represent rural constituencies know only too well of empty houses. However, I recently visited an impressive steading renovation at Cladich in Argyll, which took advantage of the REPG scheme to create five cottages for affordable letting to local people. I am keen to see the REPG scheme publicised more effectively and made as attractive as possible to private individuals, farmers, estates and housing trusts. Concerns have also been raised with me about the length of time an application takes. I trust that the Government is considering that and other operational factors in its review of the scheme. Landowners and farmers need to be given adequate incentives to bring properties back into a state of good repair in order to rent to locals, rather than to sell them off. The report is rightly positive about the role that the private sector, including landowners, can play in providing affordable homes. We urge ministers to engage fully with the private rented sector in rural areas and to build up relationships that are currently underutilised. Some good work has been done, but we must build on that and expand the examples of best practice. A number of members raised the issue of the provision of land for housing in rural areas. Understandably, that issue features largely in the report. I agree strongly with the suggestion that the responsibility to free up land for housing should lie not solely with private landowners but with the public sector as well. That point was well made by Alastair MacGregor, the chairman of my local housing association, Argyll Community  Housing Association, who said in his evidence to the committee: "If central Government, the Ministry of Defence, local government and agencies such as the Forestry Commission were brought into the picture and were able to release land from their land banks, that, along with our current resources, would assist us dramatically."—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 11 June 2008; c 811.] I am aware that the Forestry Commission has made some good progress in that direction under the national forest land scheme. The Scottish Conservatives would like to see that extended to all our other public agencies. We take the view that there should be no difference between the public and private sectors in that regard. The public sector should receive the same encouragement as the private sector to consider the appropriateness of land for the development of affordable houses. Peter Peacock rightly mentioned croft housing. The croft house grant and loan scheme has been an excellent provider of affordable rural housing. It should be updated now so that it can be so again. Time prevents me from covering other issues in the report, but I am pleased that the committee emphasised that the Scottish Government should "investigate the widespread concern" about "the assumptions behind proposed changes to housing association grant". In many cases, rural housing associations need to develop small projects that do not benefit from the economies of scale that can accrue for urban housing associations.

As Karen Gillon mentioned, some legislation seems to prevent local people from reaching the top of the housing ladder. I utterly agree with the point that she made. Today's debate has been very welcome. We look forward to the minister's response.

Can the minister give a guarantee that the value at a later date will be higher?

The minister talks a great deal about pipers and piping, but does he agree that the drummers, including the snare drummers, are an important element of such bands and that they should not be forgotten?

I congratulate Stuart McMillan on securing the debate on a motion that I was pleased to sign when he lodged it in August. I, too, congratulate the Simon Fraser University pipe band from Vancouver on winning this year's world pipe band championships and the Strathclyde Police pipe band on being the highest-placed home band. I pay tribute to the organisers of that major event, which has become an important part of our tourism events in Scotland and injects a significant amount of money into Glasgow and the wider Scottish economy. I hope that my Scottish Register of Tartans Bill ensured that Scotland is regarded as the centre of tartan. As we have heard, piping is also an intrinsic and emotive part of Scotland's heritage. It is right that we host the world championships and do all that we can to encourage piping here and abroad. There are a number of first-class pipe bands in my region, including Kirkwall City pipe band, Thurso pipe band, Wick pipe band, Mull and Iona pipe band, Campbeltown pipe band and, of course, the Oban pipe band, which is led by Angus MacColl, who is himself a world champion. In 2007, I lodged a motion—not dissimilar to Stuart McMillan's—that commended the success of the Inveraray and District pipe band from my native Argyll and Bute. Despite being reformed only in 2005 after a break of 70 years, the band has achieved amazing success under the leadership of renowned soloist piper and pipe major Stuart Liddell—whose grandfather was the famous Ronnie McCallum, the piper to the Argylls—and the excellent band manager, who is also the bank manager, Jim McMillan. I cannot praise enough Stuart Liddell, Jim McMillan, Robert Stewart, Dougie Campbell, Steve McWhirter, Kate Paton and all the other organisers and members of the band. Within two years, competing at novice juvenile level, the band had won four major championships and become world champion and champions of champions. In 2008, competing at juvenile grade, it repeated that outstanding success. This season, the band, which is currently competing at grade 2, has won all five major championships: the Scottish championships at Dumbarton, the British championships at Banbridge, the European championships at Greenock, the Cowal championships at Dunoon and the world championships in Glasgow. The overall winner of  those world championships is commended in the motion that we are debating. Inveraray and District pipe band has religiously backed the Strathclyde Police pipe band in everything it has done—and I think everybody else should, too. I wish Inveraray pipe band every success at grade 1—it will be at that level next year—and I am sure that it will once again reap a large harvest of competition successes. It is good to know that the junior pipe band is following in its footsteps: the junior band also did well, at the first attempt, in the European and world championships this year. It is run by Robert Stewart, who I have already mentioned. Robert Stewart, Stuart Liddell and others give piping and drumming lessons in Inveraray primary school. The students are asked to contribute £2.50 per session, which is hardly a large amount for half an hour's one-to-one teaching by top pipers and drummers. The money goes towards equipment and clothing. The results of that tuition have been quite stupendous. I ask the minister to study Inveraray's example and to contemplate what might happen if there were such regular teaching of piping and drumming at more schools. The success of Inveraray and District pipe band has given a huge lift to the area. The band was cheered all the way through the streets of Inveraray; it gives people pride and a sense of elation—especially at this time of credit crunch and financial doldrums. The effect of success on the youngsters at other local primary schools such as Dalmally has been that they have thrown away their Game Boys to take up the pipes and drums so that they, too, will be able to march with pride and discipline and play the rousing music that is so much a tradition of the Highlands, and indeed all Scotland. Incidentally, Inveraray won shinty's Macaulay cup, so it has been a very good year for them. The motion refers to "planned cuts to Strathclyde Police Pipe Band". I recognise the strongly felt concerns of members and supporters of that band. We all recognise the pressure on police board expenditure, but I hope that the leadership of Strathclyde Police will take note of what is said in the chamber today and do all in its power to ensure that the excellence that has been built up in one of the oldest and most prestigious pipe bands in the world is preserved for future generations.

Will the cabinet secretary ensure that the concerns of our nephrops fishermen are adequately expressed and heard in Brussels? Despite being committed to sustainable fisheries, our fishermen question the International Council  for the Exploration of the Sea's statistics on nephrops, which are behind the proposed cuts to the prawn fishery.

Like other members, I pay tribute to the members, clerking team and support staff of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, who worked so hard to produce a comprehensive report. The Scottish Conservatives have consistently argued that, in future, Scotland's energy needs will be met by having a diverse and balanced range of energy sources. Much of the evidence that was submitted to the committee during its inquiry backed up that approach. The Scottish Chambers of Commerce hit the nail on the head when it said in its submission: "there must be a recognition that our future energy needs will not be supplied by a single source rather by an energy mix". I believe that wind and hydro should be looked at in tandem. Within that mix, my region of the Highlands and Islands is already playing a major role in the development of renewables—particularly in onshore wind—and can be expected to play an even greater role in future. Scotland has 25 per cent of Europe's offshore wind power and 25 per cent of Europe's tidal power potential. It is estimated that 21.5GW of commercial capacity is available from the waters around Scotland. There  is particular potential around the northern isles and in the Pentland Firth. In its useful briefing to members for today's debate, the Crown Estate says that the first stage of the Pentland Firth and Orkney waters wave and tidal leasing round should be completed by early next year. The Crown Estate received a total of 42 applications from 20 bidders for wave and tidal energy leases that will deliver at least 700MW of power by 2020. The Crown Estate is also doing good work in enabling the expansion of offshore wind energy and by investing in research and in carbon capture and storage. As every MSP will know from their mailbag, onshore wind energy remains controversial. With every planning application, there are strongly held opinions on both sides. Now that some wind farms have been built, it might be interesting to conduct a survey of reactions to them. Onshore wind farms are not appropriate for every site but are suitable for some and, in those instances, should be supported appropriately as one part of the diverse bag of energy sources. Ministers could help matters by providing the guidance on the siting of wind farms, for which we have called for a long time. That would offer clarity to local authorities, developers and communities. On the issue of offshore wind, I recently met a businessman constituent of mine who is involved in the renewables sector and believes strongly that Scotland should establish an onshore test facility for the offshore turbines that are currently under development and which need to undergo testing before commercial deployment in the North Sea. There is an existing site at Bremerhaven in Germany, but having such a site in Scotland would keep us at the cutting edge of the expertise and support services that are emerging for offshore wind and would help to ensure that the assembly and manufacture of as many elements of the offshore turbines as possible could take place in Scotland. I hope that ministers and other agencies can take up this idea and work with the industry to make it a reality. We must not forget that the construction of wind turbines in Scotland could be a good source of employment. It is currently a good source of employment in Machrihanish, and it could supply jobs in other areas as well. Although Glendoe, which I have visited—and which, as we all know, has been temporarily closed by an internal rock fall in the water tunnel, which I hope will soon be remedied—will probably be the last hydro power station of that scale, the Scottish Conservatives are positive about the role of small-scale hydro schemes. I am therefore encouraged that the Minister for Environment recently said that our publicly owned Scottish  forests will be opened up to encourage small-scale hydro-electric developments. It has always surprised me that the Forestry Commission has not done that before, given the potential that exists in burns and river tributaries in its land. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I must also mention the Beauly to Denny transmission line. Although we all recognise the need to put in place an infrastructure system that will allow us to get the power generated in the north of the country to the south, the construction of the overhead line remains a real concern for many of my constituents. I continue to take the position that the Government must consider all the latest evidence on the Beauly to Denny power line that has arisen since the inquiry finished, including evidence on the possibility of alternative options to the pylons. Why is it that the interconnector line from Ayrshire to Ireland does not have to carry the same spare capacity as the lines that are in central and northern Scotland? I would like an answer to that question, if the minister can give it to me. Today's debate is important, as it concerns the putting in place of a framework that allows for a secure supply of energy for our people and our businesses, which is one of the key responsibilities of any Government. Scotland has massive potential as a provider of renewable energy, but no responsible Government would argue that renewables can provide all the answers. The committee's report contains many useful recommendations, and we look to ministers, working in partnership with the energy industry, to implement them as we deal with the challenges and grasp the opportunities that are presented by our low-carbon future.

Is the minister aware of the excellent work of Highland Disabled Ramblers? Access to public footpaths is a key issue for that group. What can the minister do to ensure that the interests of disabled ramblers who use scooters as well as the interests of able-bodied ramblers are considered when new footpaths are constructed?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will provide an update on the rules regarding vaccination for bluetongue disease in sheep. (S3O-7892)

Is the minister saying that vaccination will not be compulsory after 25 October? If that is so, will he agree that it is far more convenient for the jab to take place in the months that precede winter—September, October or November—rather than waiting until January, when the ewes will be in lamb and there will be extra stress?

I am pleased to sum up for the Scottish Conservatives. Like others, I pay tribute to the committee members, the clerks and other committee support staff, all of whom played their part in producing the positive, comprehensive and pragmatic report that we are debating. As the minister and others said, the Parliament's Public Petitions Committee has been one of the real success stories of devolution. The fact that other Parliaments and countries have looked into replicating our model speaks volumes about its success. I am not surprised that the report points out that the committee provides a real and effective route into the Parliament for a wide range of organisations and individuals. Members have mentioned many individual success stories that arose from particular petitions. Constituents and groups in my region, the Highlands and Islands, have made significant use of the committee, submitting petitions on a diverse range of issues including the cost of ferries, the costs that students in the Highlands face in travelling to events in the central belt, public transport costs for students, residential care places for the elderly, and the campaign to upgrade the A82. I regret to say that the petition on the latter has produced a few words but not much action from the Government. Many have spoken positively about their experience of the Public Petitions Committee. Jim Hume mentioned the electronic identification of sheep, which is an important issue for people who live in rural areas. The public petitions process is a great way of getting across issues that greatly affect people's everyday lives. People like getting their voices heard in the Parliament, especially on such important issues. At the same time, it is right for our committees—and indeed for all parts of the Parliament—to keep thinking about how we might provide a better service to the people of Scotland and how we can reach out to and engage all sections of the community, including those who have not yet become involved. The Public Petitions Committee gives ordinary people confidence that issues of importance to their daily lives and localities will be articulated in the Parliament.  I am particularly pleased with some of the report's many and varied conclusions. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I am delighted that it commits the committee to holding a further series of external meetings in various parts of Scotland and, where possible, in locations that no other parliamentary committee has visited. I hope that some of those meetings can be held in the remote, rural and island parts of my region, where constituents can feel that Edinburgh is another world—or, indeed, on a different planet. I was interested to read about the efforts to reach out to individuals and groups from sections of our society, such as some of our ethnic minority communities, who have not yet made as much use of the Public Petitions Committee as others have. Although I know that ensuring greater black and ethnic minority political involvement is an issue not just for individual committees but for all of us, at all levels, across the Scottish political sector, I think that it is right that leaflets about the committee should be readily available in Arabic, traditional Chinese, Bengali, Urdu and Punjabi and I look forward to their publication later this year. As many will agree, the public petitions process could be a route for minority communities to gain what one would hope would be a positive and constructive taster in the Scottish parliamentary process and to become even more engaged and take more of a part. We certainly want our minority communities to make full use of what should be one of the most accessible avenues into the Scottish Parliament. Nanette Milne admirably outlined the committee's important role in outreaching to young people and local communities, and Marlyn Glen's point about a council petitions system was well made. Although council meetings are open to the public, people cannot contribute to them or ask questions, and a petitions system would allow for more democracy. Nigel Don made a good speech, although I do not believe that having a reporter system for committees would necessarily be a good thing. Helen Eadie highlighted the welcome fact that debates in the Parliament had been initiated by petitions on cancer drugs and knife crime, while Anne McLaughlin was correct to mention the increasing importance of new technology and blogs. However, I wonder whether having cross-party surgeries would not simply lead to cross politicians. With regard to our disabled citizens, I am pleased that a new British Sign Language version of the committee video will be produced in consultation with the Scottish Council on Deafness and others and launched later this year. That is another important and very positive addition. The committee is right to state very clearly that it will make whatever arrangements are necessary to  accommodate the submission of a petition in BSL and to meet the needs of deaf and blind constituents, who will welcome the new leaflet in Braille. The report, which will be welcomed by and beyond the chamber, contains many practical and sensible recommendations that I look forward to being implemented as we seek to build on the very real progress and success that have been achieved. We must ensure that more people can get involved in the public petitions process and raise the kind of real concerns to themselves and their communities that would struggle to be raised if we did not have the Public Petitions Committee.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will provide an update on the consequences of the closure of the A83 at the Rest and Be Thankful. (S3O-7791)

Does the minister recognise the anger and concern in my region that, less than two years after the previous landslide, the key artery into Argyll and Bute was again closed at  exactly the same place? Does he understand the fear of people waiting at that traffic light below that mountain, where they are potentially in the path of a landslide? What specific action will the Scottish Government take to prevent future closures and tackle the long-term problem of potential landslides? Other European countries seem perfectly able to deal with that problem.

The Scottish Sports Association suggests that upskilling primary teachers is one way to get young people involved in sport. What is the Government doing on that?

I am pleased to speak in the debate. As other members have done, I commend the members of the Health and Sport Committee, the committee clerks and their support staff for producing a comprehensive and positive report that sets out practical options for the way forward. We all recognise the scale of the challenge that we face in getting more of our citizens of all ages involved in sport and, crucially, in keeping them involved. We face a particular problem with getting teenage girls active. Obesity is a ticking time bomb for our population and is one of the major issues in public health. However, the Commonwealth games in Glasgow in 2014 offer us an unprecedented opportunity that we must make every effort to grasp. Opportunities arise from the new sports infrastructure that is being developed and from the inspiration that such a mega-event can provide for people of all ages and backgrounds. The debate in Parliament in April on the 2014 legacy was constructive and important and has been followed up by the Scottish Government's detailed legacy plan. I hope that the plan will help to prevent a repeat of previous missed opportunities from world games. For example, after the Olympics in Sydney in 2000, many children in Australia who wanted to try new sports found clubs to be ill-equipped to handle the influx, and there simply were not enough coaches. Investment in coaching is of huge importance. The health benefits of participation in sport are well known and have been referred to by many members in the debate. I am especially pleased that some members have also referred to the tangible benefits of sport to individuals' mental health, as well as to their physical health. I agree with the point that was made by the committee—and by others in their submissions, including Scottish Rugby and the Scottish Sports Association—about the need for school sports facilities to be accessible, especially after school hours and at weekends. Scottish Rugby believes that the single greatest barrier to universal access to sport is the fact that sports clubs are not part and parcel of what schools do. Sport should be seen as a vehicle through which to educate pupils and, in many cases, to engage with the disengaged. I have a lot of sympathy with that.

Sometimes those playing fields are excellent and sometimes they are not. The issue of school facilities has been raised with me repeatedly in my role as a Highlands and Islands MSP. Excellent new facilities are constructed, but parents, youngsters and sports clubs are frustrated that those facilities are closed outwith school hours. The brand new Lochgilphead high school was built without a running track—the nearest running track is in Glasgow, which is 100 miles away. We need the closest possible links and co-ordination. I commend the many thousands of volunteers throughout Scotland who give their time to support our youngsters in sports clubs. We need to build on and expand that volunteerism. I welcome the committee's recommendation that local authority sports strategies should identify capacity building in local sports clubs. Although local facilities and, specifically, access to them are a huge part of the debate, I was pleased that the committee report noted that Scotland has a number of world-class facilities, including mountain bike tracks in my region, although those tracks make me feel quite sick when I look at them. Members will know that angling is one of the biggest participation sports in the UK. It is a sport that I try to enjoy when I get the time. Angling can teach young people many transferable skills that are of real value, and I commend the Scottish Countryside Alliance for its work in getting young people involved in the sport. I also pay tribute to the work of Angling for Youth Development, which has managed to get a new angling course accredited by the Scottish Qualifications Authority, and I commend the Scottish country sports tourism group for highlighting the importance of shooting and deer stalking as recreational sports that draw down considerable income for rural Scotland and promote healthy lifestyles. Scotland is world famous for country sports, so we should advertise them rather than try to hide them. Where better to walk hills than the Scottish Highlands?

Angling makes one fit through casting those huge weights. We have wonderful outdoor recreations in Scotland. On that subject, I am delighted that the Scottish Conservatives have advocated a clear policy that all children from primary 7 to secondary 3 should be entitled to a one-week residential course in outdoor education. What a fantastic idea that is. My colleague Liz Smith has very ably  suggested that policy in recent months. I believe that it would make a real difference to many young people by giving them a taste of something new, exciting and different outwith the normal school environment. Today's debate is important not just because of the opportunity that it gives us to discuss the committee's useful report, but because it gives us a chance to hear the Scottish Government's response. I hope that ministers will be able to take on board many of the committee's recommendations. I look forward to delivery of those recommendations, so that every young person in Scotland has a genuine opportunity to participate in the sport of their choice, whether for leisure, for health or even for competition.

Does the minister agree that as well as focusing on anti-racism education, the best approach is positive encouragement for ethnic minorities to participate in the organising of the games?

I am glad to be able to wind up in today's important debate. I echo others in the Parliament when I say that we must never take for granted the efforts of the very brave men and women who turn up to fight fire and flood to save lives and property. Anyone who has been through a fire will know the lasting effects of the grime, the soot, the pervading smell of smoke and the shock at that amazingly destructive force of nature that can not only kill in minutes but up-end the entire infrastructure of people's lives. That is why the men and women of the fire brigades who fight fire and flood must be given the utmost respect, and their practical experience must be listened to in the consultation. It is they who know first hand the facets of the service that need improvement. Peter Peacock mentioned the effects of flooding in Elgin and Fochabers in my region. I know full well how bad those effects are. I hope that members will forgive me for focusing a good part of my remarks on our inland water rescue services in light of the tragic drowning of four fishermen in Loch Awe in my native Argyll, which Jim Tolson also mentioned. I have been closely involved with the wishes of the community to do anything possible to save people from drowning in Scottish lochs and rivers. For some years now I have been concerned about the effectiveness of inshore water rescue and who exactly is responsible for that service on lochs such as Loch Awe and Loch Maree, where another two people recently were tragically drowned. Following the drowning tragedy in March, I asked the Scottish Government questions relating to Loch Awe. A subsequent answer revealed that 12 people have drowned in the loch since 1996. That caused local concern and prompted the Scottish Government to launch a review of Scotland's water rescue capability. I am grateful to the minister for doing that. Page 18 of the draft fire and rescue consultation document states that "co-ordinating flooding incidents needs to be improved" and that a review into Scotland's water rescue capability, led by Paddy Tomkins QPM, the former chief inspector of constabulary in Scotland, is taking place. His group will report its recommendations by December 2009. He attended a meeting of stakeholders in Oban—which I also attended—such as the police, the fire and rescue services, the mountain rescue services, the Royal National Lifeboat Institution,  councillors and community councillors who thrashed out what could best be done to save lives in different areas. The fire brigade plays an enormous role at the moment. If a person reports an incident, such as someone being in trouble in the water, they are put in touch with the police, but in general the police do not have the rescue training that is given to the fire service and they often do not have the resources to deal immediately with such incidents. They pass the incident to the fire service, which in many instances, for example the incident on Loch Awe, makes it the first responder. In the case of Loch Awe, the police chief informed me that she could not telephone local people to ask for their help and their boats, and in that case the fire brigade had no boat. Although I fully understand that not every loch can be equipped with a rescue boat, it is vital that a boat is in reach of the rescue services in what I would call black-spot water-death areas that should be identified by the local rescue services as soon as possible. I am sure that the Health and Safety Executive in Scotland would wish to do everything possible to save life rather than put hurdles in front of would-be rescuers, as that might have the opposite effect. It is vital to find an appropriate balance between saving people in trouble and protecting the lives of those who go to their aid. That will be something for Mr Tomkins's review to work out. Having spoken to him, I have every confidence that whatever the recommendations are in December, they will improve our rescue services in Scotland. Many people living in rural areas would like to help as observers. Local safety clubs should be given basic resources, such as binoculars, to observe areas of water, and they should be encouraged to have a network that can be called on by the police in an emergency. Fire and water have one thing in common—both kill quickly and are no respecters of time. Ultimate speed is one of the main essences of rescue.

That would certainly need to be looked into. I thank the member for her point. Educating the public about what to do in emergencies is a vital part of prevention. I was mightily impressed by the video that the fire service showed me of a small fire becoming a raging inferno in less than three minutes. I was also impressed by the excellent demonstration by  the RNLI on the wearing and maintenance of life jackets by people using boats. I was horrified by some of the examples of life jackets and buoyancy aids without crutch straps and with corroded and utterly useless gas canisters. It is obviously vital that life-saving equipment is in first-class condition and that attention is paid to the recommendations of the RNLI with regard to life jackets. I mentioned that to Mr Tomkins, who said that he will take an interest in the subject. Before concluding, I raise a worrying issue. Last weekend, an article in Scotland on Sunday pointed out the financial difficulties that private caterers and accommodation providers might face in relation to the enforcement of new fire regulations. Will the minister make certain not only that new regulations are fit for purpose but that they are enforced in a way that allows those providers to accommodate the extra burden of expense without going bust? I welcome today's debate and the consultation, and I look forward to progress being made as we see the most effective possible co-ordination within our fire and rescue framework.

Will the minister do all that she can to support the agri-environmental schemes that suggest that late harvesting of crops in parts of Scotland is a good idea because that provides a lot of extra feeding for birds as they come into the winter?

I am very pleased to introduce this members' debate this evening. I think that it is the first debate that we have had on songbirds. I thank members of all parties for signing my motion. The level of cross-party support and the number of signatories demonstrate the real interest in and concern about this subject. I declare an interest as a member of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and am glad to see its representatives in the gallery for the debate. I also welcome to the Parliament a number of supporters of the excellent campaigning charity Songbird Survival, including its Scottish trustee John Haddington. At the outset, I will set out the scale of the problem that we face following the decline in most of our key song and garden bird populations over the past 30 to 40 years. The evidence is frightening. Over that period, Songbird Survival suggests that bullfinch and yellowhammer numbers have gone down by 50 per cent and the song thrush—the "wise thrush" that sang its "careless rapture" in Robert Browning's famous poem "Home Thoughts, from Abroad"—is down by more than 50 per cent. Indeed, the situation for some species is worse than that. The melodious and incredibly distinctive song of the skylark is heard less often these days—skylark numbers are down by 59 per cent. Like the yellowhammer and linnet, which are also in decline, the skylark is on the RSPB's red list of species. Likewise house sparrows and tree sparrows, which in my youth were considered to be common birds, are on that endangered list with declines of 69 and 80 per cent respectively.  Starling numbers are down by 82 per cent and corn bunting numbers are down by 84 per cent. Worst of all, the lesser redpoll has seen a decline of a staggering 90 per cent. In many parts of the Highlands and Islands, which I represent, farmers and crofters and those who have worked on the land for generations complain to me about not only the decline of the peewit, curlew and golden plover but, in some areas, their very extinction. When I started farming in Argyll in 1974, the song of lambing time was that of the curlew, peewit and golden plover. They would wheel around one's head in flocks, trying to lead one away from their nests. Later in the year, one would see them in even greater numbers with their young. Farming methods in my area have hardly changed since those times, but the birds are virtually gone. My motion refers to a number of factors that have led to these declines. I will address one factor that many of my constituents have raised: the increase in predator numbers. I refer not only to mammals but to birds of prey and other birds such as crows and magpies. I am absolutely against any wildlife crime such as the indiscriminate poisoning of raptors. The subject is one of real controversy, but I make no apology for raising an issue that merits an open and balanced debate and full consideration by policy makers. Most people will accept that, due to the agri-environmental schemes of the past 10 years, the farming, crofting and land management sectors have seen an increase in the type of habitat that our songbirds need. However, at the same time, the decline in species numbers has not been halted. Indeed, in many cases, the decline is more pronounced. We have to look at other contributory factors. What is the reason for the decline in species numbers if not predation by hawks, crows and ground mammals? We have to find out. I commend to members the 2006 "Review of the Impact of Mammalian Predators on Farm Songbird Population Dynamics" by Professor Roy Brown of the University of London. Professor Brown concludes that predator activity, whether taking young or adult birds or destroying their eggs and nests, has a significant negative impact on songbird and other farm bird populations. Indeed, he found that mammal predation may be the "dominant" factor. Among other predators, he refers to domestic and feral cats, grey squirrels, brown rats, hedgehogs, stoats, weasels, foxes and mink. Today, I received a message that Arctic terns have returned to long-abandoned nests in the Hebrides following the cull of alien mink. As is obvious, that is a good thing.  The 2006 report also suggests that, where there are high levels of sparrow-hawk and kestrel activity, up to 85 per cent of all songbird nests may be predated. I remember that, when I was a boy, my mother found an unconscious sparrow-hawk that had flown into the telephone wires. She and I nursed it back to health over some weeks and then we let it go. Much to my mother's chagrin, she later saw it emerging from a honeysuckle bush with a fully grown blackbird in its talons, which it had taken off a nest of young blackbirds. She wondered whether she had done the right thing by rescuing it. Nobody who has witnessed, as I have, the speed and stealth with which a sparrow-hawk can attack the residents of a bird-table would not be amazed by that B-52 of the bird world. The reintroduction of other bird of prey species such as sea eagles and red kites means that there is even greater predator pressure on our declining songbird populations than there was in previous decades. Some species of raptors are now at historically high levels, beyond anything previously recorded. Constituents have questioned whether the threat to our songbird species, which are a key part of our biosphere and culture, is given enough or indeed any consideration by those who campaign so vigorously and successfully for the reintroduction of birds of prey. I have sympathy with their concerns and believe that the interests of all our bird species, and not just birds of prey, need to be fully taken into account. Are ministers prepared to look further into the issue of raptors and respond to the concerns of bird lovers throughout the country? On mammal predation, I suggest that we could all play our part in preventing cats from taking songbirds by keeping our cats in at night or perhaps even attaching bells to them to make them more obvious. I point out that I have a cat—I am a great cat lover. I am fascinated by the latest experiment at Langholm, where the feeding of predators and raptors is taking place, especially at times when songbirds are nesting. I have witnessed areas where, thanks to that practice, raptors and songbirds can live side by side. It is extraordinary how properly managed estates produce a far greater variety of songbird life than areas that are not managed at all. As I have said, I utterly condemn any wildlife crime or indiscriminate poisoning. However, I say to the RSPB that it is the trade union for birds and I ask it to please support all its members, not just the cannibal ones. I hope that today's debate can provoke discussion on how we can halt, and reverse, the decline in our songbird populations before it is too  late and we lose the critical mass necessary to sustain healthy populations. The Scottish Government has a key role to play, working with the voluntary sector and individual birdwatchers who care so much about our smaller birds. We must strive to achieve a diverse and balanced biosphere that ensures appropriate protection for the songbirds that have played such a key part in our environment, culture and history for so many generations and which, if we act now, can continue to do so in future.

Does the minister agree that housing associations are best placed to deliver affordable homes? In view of the fact that by 2030 there will  be an estimated 81 per cent increase in people over 85, will he tell me what is being done to allow housing associations to deliver the extra provision needed for the increasing number of elderly clients? For example, what will he do to encourage the very sheltered housing concept that housing associations now envisage?

Is the minister aware that, despite what he said, businesses and residents in Kintyre have concerns about the state of some sections of the A83, which is the key artery to their economy? So bad is the road that in some places people must drive in the middle to avoid the potholes at the sides. Will he step up his efforts to repair the whole road? If that means trunking the section between Kennacraig and Campbeltown, will he do so?

I am sure that ticket sales are up because the minister is performing in the festival. I am pleased to be winding up for the Scottish Conservatives in this short but useful debate. The Highlands and Islands are blessed with a wonderful array of festivals of all varieties and sizes, from the Islay Festival of Malt and Music to Cowalfest, the Cowal walking and arts festival. I have attended a good many of them and will continue to do so. They make a big contribution to the economy of my region. I have to issue a warning, though. Only this morning I was contacted urgently by constituents in Oban who run the Dunollie museum and are involved with "The Hidden Jewel", one of the 56 core events and festivals for the 2009 year of homecoming; 2009 should be a special year for festivals, but those constituents expressed dismay that a young lady of MacDougall descent, one of our Scottish diaspora who was coming to help, in a voluntary capacity, with this core EventScotland-funded event, has been refused entry into Scotland and is to be ignominiously flown home to America. I have spoken to the chief immigration officer in Scotland, who was most courteous and helpful and informed me that the situation I have described is the result of a change of immigration rules in November—yet volunteers for the Edinburgh festival are exempt. Perhaps the minister can tell me what the Scottish Government has done to organise immigration clearance for genuine volunteers such as Rachel Rogerson, who wants to help with the homecoming. Such incidents send out the wrong message to the diaspora, who have been invited to come home in 2009, not to go home. Festivals are brilliant for the Highlands and Islands. The Hebridean Celtic festival is a brilliant example of how something that starts out relatively small can become an international favourite. In 1996 it attracted 1,500 people to Stornoway; now, 14,000 go. That festival is hugely important not just to the local economies of Lewis and Harris but to those of the Uists, Benbecula, Eriskay, Barra and Vatersay. There is so much local talent from the Western Isles, inspired by the hills, the wind, the beaches and the sea. Highland festivals offer a window for people to experience not just the music but the beauty that inspired it. I attended the original RockNess festival, dee-jayed by Fatboy Slim. There was a particularly enjoyable moment when What's that coming over the hill? Is it a monster? was played. RockNess is inspirational and has gone from strength to strength. Its line-up this year included the Flaming Lips, Dizzee's Rascals, Basement Jaxx and Orbital. Orkney's folk festival—a different kind of festival—passed successfully last month despite an economic climate that has made sponsorship harder to find. The festival's organisers do a very good job of combining well-established folk musicians and emerging talent from outside with the multitalented local musicians in a celebration of storytelling, ceilidhs, song-writing workshops, concerts and musical pub crawls. Orkney is of course famed for its hospitality, as well as for its music and its brilliant branding of foods, from crab to cheese and ice cream. Looking ahead, the Tartan Heart festival at Belladrum, which was the inspiration of Highland impresario Joe Gibbs, has the Editors and Ocean Colour Scene headlining, with British Sea Power, Shed Seven and many more on the bill. It is so important for the Highlands and Islands to offer a diverse mix of tourist attractions. Tartan Heart certainly offers a varied mix, and it truly ranks alongside international music festivals. A recent added bonus to festivals has been the interest in local foods and the ensuing change from a burger culture to home-made mutton stovies and delicious fresh local products. An innovative partnership founded by Fergus Younger of the Argyll and Bute agricultural forum takes a large tent with foods from Argyll to many of the festivals, and it is an eye-opener to see how people flock to the "Food from Argyll" tent, where quality reigns supreme at a reasonable cost. Those large music festivals have allowed such small businesses to prosper, which is a good thing for both the producer and the consumer, and it has heightened the profile of Highland food culture for visitors. Festivals will feel the icy blast of recession, but the Scottish Government should remember how important they are to local Scottish economies and to so many small businesses. Scotland provides a perfect natural stage; people just need an excuse to go. The Outsider at Aviemore and the Connect festival at Inveraray, which I attended last year, are now not going ahead. Local businesses will miss them very much. As other members have said, the Edinburgh festival and fringe is the largest festival of its kind in the world. I had direct involvement with the fringe last year, to help my daughter, Sarah McGrigor, put on a play that she had written at school—a religious comedy that, for some reason, is entitled "Forgive Me Father". My point in  mentioning that is that friends and relatives travelled to Edinburgh to see the play, some of them from across Europe, and they stayed in local hotels, used the restaurants and travelled the Highlands and Islands. That emphasises how important the fringe is as a magnet to Scotland. Like Elaine Murray, I very much enjoyed performing at the Edinburgh festival. I have done it twice, albeit in a very modest way—like the minister. The Scottish Conservatives are happy to put on record our gratitude to all the individuals in Scotland who do so much good in organising so diverse a range of festivals. We recognise the massive importance of the sector to Scotland's economy and we look to the Scottish Government to do what it can to underpin its future success. I am looking forward to attending the new festival at Kelburn castle in Largs, which opens this weekend.

How can the Scottish Government ensure that new-build schools offer top-quality sports infrastructure that includes running tracks to encourage athletics?

I thank the cabinet secretary for advance sight of her statement. I am amazed by her information that the mortgage rescue scheme that is being run by the Labour Government in England has helped only two families. That is extraordinary. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that repossession is the end of the world for many hard-working families, wherever they happen to live, and so must always be a last resort. I note that the cabinet secretary said that she is flexible in relation to the home owners support fund, especially in relation to disabled people who do not meet the price threshold. I am glad about that. However, does the cabinet secretary note the information from Citizens Advice Scotland that four out of five people whom are affected think that the changed scheme has worsened the situation because it appears to be based on postcodes rather than on actual need. It is impossible for many people who are in genuine need to access the scheme. Will she therefore consider re-evaluating the arbitrary property price ceiling of £100,000?

In the Highlands and Islands, it is normal practice to express stocking rates in hectares per sheep, rather than the other way round. I welcome the news of an increase in the LFASS payments, for 2009-10, which will give an average sheep farmer in a fragile area an extra £1,300. However, does the cabinet secretary accept that that falls far short of the extra £8 per ewe that the NFU Scotland wanted and that the money will be wiped out by the cost of electronic identification tagging in sheep if it is implemented?

I refer to my agricultural interest, which appears in the register of members' interests. I thank Liam McArthur and all those who have been campaigning to ensure that the issue has remained at the forefront of politicians' minds. They include the Scottish Crofting Foundation, the NFUS and the National Sheep Association in Scotland; people such as George Milne, and Sybil and John Macpherson, from my native Argyll and Bute; and The Scottish Farmer newspaper. They are all fighting hard for our sheep industry. As my colleague John Scott said, EID offers no real benefit in relation to traceability in Scotland. We in Scotland need to be able to move sheep on a batch basis through markets and between farms, and a tag that includes the UK herd number should be sufficient. The current system is simple, efficient and—crucially—cost effective. The whole concept of EID for sheep is a classic example of how a one-size-fits-all policy can be disastrous for particular European Union member states, and of the real lack of understanding in the EU about the nature of the sheep flock in the UK and Scotland, which will be more affected by these plans than the flock of any other state. Indeed, 16 EU member states will not have to introduce EID, as their national flocks comprise fewer than 600,000 sheep. Given the rate at which we are losing sheep from Scotland's hills, the  number of states that will not have to introduce EID could soon rise to 17. It is hardly surprising that many of those 16 states are voting for compulsory EID, as it helps their sheep industries by putting extra constraints on ours.

I cannot. The extra costs that farmers and crofters will face are significant. As we have heard today, the set-up costs are estimated at £1,000 to £2,000 per farmer, with the cost of tagging one sheep put at £3. That is an extra £3,000 per year for a farmer who has 1,000 sheep, at a time when there is real financial pressure on sheep farmers and when everyone is rightly concerned about the serious decline in sheep numbers. My biggest concern is that EID will simply increase the rate of decline. I point out to members that the microchip in the proposed tag does not contain the same number as the tag itself, and therefore information from the reader has to be transferred to a computer to ensure that the different numbers coincide with the actual number on the tag. If members find that confusing, they should consider how many items do not register on a supermarket reader when they are doing their shopping. What happens when a sheep does not register? Should we just call for the manager? What happens when the tag falls off? How can a lost tag be traced? We have no objection to EID as a voluntary scheme for those who like it, but most of those are small farmers, whereas many Scottish flocks consist of hundreds—if not thousands—of sheep. The scheme is simply not practical for Scotland. A constituent of mine from Sutherland, Mrs Gow, who has been a sheep farmer for 45 years, wrote to me earlier this year to say that electronic tagging would bring "death to the industry". She warned that, if the measure goes ahead, "I will certainly get rid of my sheep and most likely the shepherd as well"— although I do not think that she means to kill the shepherd. Many other farmers have the same intentions. Mrs Gow is right. This year, the NFUS carried out a detailed survey of sheep producers and found that 73 per cent would reduce their flock if EID and individual recording were introduced. One in three of those who said they would reduce their numbers said that they might get rid of their flock altogether. That is the stark and frightening reality of the situation.

I agree. This is not just about sheep. It is about people. We are looking for ways to keep Scotland's sheep on Scotland's hills for food and environmental reasons, and we have seen a light at the end of the tunnel for the sheep industry. Let us not blow it out now. Even at this late stage, ministers must put pressure on ministers at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs to raise the issue again in Europe as a matter of extreme urgency. The future of our sheep sector and the people and communities that depend on it is at stake. We look to the minister.

Will the bill stop people ghosting criminal memoirs?

I have a point to make about expansion. The minister has not so far mentioned the new species in this regard, such as halibut. One of the advantages of halibut is that they do not get, and are not hosts for, sea lice.

I thank the minister for expressing the Parliament's sympathy over the tragic deaths of Robert MacDonald and Maarten Pieter den Heijer while they were working on Loch Creran. It is indeed a dreadful loss for their families and for the whole fish farming community in Argyll. I welcome today's debate, which has been largely constructive and useful. As a Highlands and Islands MSP and a one-time trout farmer in Argyll, I am hugely conscious of the importance of aquaculture to the region's economy, especially in the more remote and rural parts. However, wild river fisheries, too, are significant and important,  so we must strive for successful co-existence between the sectors. The minister mentioned the crucial issues of sea lice and ISA, which are even more crucial in the light of yesterday's sad news of a further outbreak in Shetland. The Scottish Government has correctly recognised that an integrated sea lice control strategy is essential for the health and welfare of farmed fish, and to limit the spread of infection to our valuable wild fish populations of salmon and sea trout. However, I gather that some fish farms are still rotten with sea lice—those fish are heavily stressed, and are therefore more likely to get ISA, which many believe is endemic in the water. The code of good practice that is set out by the SSPO for Scottish fin fish aquaculture is excellent if it is adhered to, but a small minority of fish farmers are still able to drive a coach and horses through the regulations. That is unfair on the rule-abiding majority, and I urge the Government to use the new powers under the Agriculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Act 2007 to ensure 100 per cent compliance with the rules of the code. The rules are on parasites, containment and record keeping, and they must be enforced. Site fallowing plans are also vital for a clean industry. Tripartite working groups have generally been successful in the areas in which they operate on the west coast, but they do not apply in Orkney and Shetland, where river boards do not exist. Could that be significant, given that the recent outbreaks of ISA have all been in Shetland? Does the minister agree that the tripartite umbrella could cover Orkney and Shetland as a guard against bad practice? Norway seems to be ahead of Scotland with regard to the publication of data on sea lice. Will our Scottish Government publish data about farm sites in Scotland in the way that Norway does on the Lusedata website? It is unfortunate that 90 per cent of the Scottish industry is owned by its main competitor. That is perhaps one reason why our native Scottish industry has waned in recent years. The most important priority is to find out why ISA has struck particular farms in Shetland because, until we have the answer to that, the threat of ISA will continue to hang over the industry like the sword of Damocles, and confidence in the future of fish farming may falter. We all want anything that is possible to be done to prevent ISA from taking hold in Scotland—it is an obvious priority—but do ministers accept that huge losses have already been incurred by independent Scottish smolt and egg producers? The Government says that there can be no compensation for the sector, while at the same  time vaccines against ISA cannot be used. What is the Scottish Government doing to promote confidence? Does it accept that the Faroe Islands has already used vaccination as part of its eradication programme and that, among our major competitors, Chile is using vaccines and Norway is likely to follow suit? Does the Government accept, furthermore, that the use of vaccines in carefully restricted areas and circumstances need not necessarily change our ISA status within the European Union? Will ministers continue to engage with the independent smolt and egg producers on the issue? Unfortunately, some of those producers have already been forced to leave the industry. In the previous debate on aquaculture in the Parliament, my colleague John Scott—on my behalf—raised the issue of halibut farming, which is being pioneered by three farms in Argyll, including Kames Fish Farming Ltd near Oban. Will the minister indicate whether any progress has been made in setting up the relevant border control inspection at a Scottish airport to allow young halibut stock to be imported directly into Scotland, rather than into London or Manchester? That would greatly benefit Scottish businesses, and it would improve the welfare of the young fish in transportation and boost survival rates. Although I am aware that Scottish halibut farmers are keen to be able to breed their own stock in hatcheries in a few years—and I wish them every success with that—Scotland might well want to import other species in the future, and a dedicated Scottish airport of entry might therefore be a real boon. With regard to seals, I agree with other members that we have to approach the issue in an unemotional way. No one here wants to see those beautiful mammals culled unnecessarily, but we need to respond to the fact that each year approximately 20,000 to 30,000 seal attacks take place on Scottish salmon farms. Last year, the industry was forced to shoot 489 seals. Although the industry makes it very clear that it wants to bring down that number by making significant investment in more sophisticated acoustic deterrents, trialling different nets, working with the sea mammal research unit at St Andrews and supporting research through the Scottish Aquaculture Research Forum, it maintains that, from time to time and as an act of last resort, it needs to shoot any persistent rogue seals that attack its nets. I remember that, in the first parliamentary session, Ross Finnie proposed the establishment of a seal commission that would be similar to the Red Deer Commission. What happened to that idea and what does the Scottish National Party think of it?  Time prevents me from talking on some of the other subjects that have been raised, but the mussel industry—

Right. I just want to say that the mussel industry is also extremely important to Scotland.

I appreciate Robin Harper's concerns about chemicals, but how would he do away with the sea lice problem?

I welcome the fact that the Scottish National Party Government is pushing ahead with another Scottish Tory policy through the bill. Does the cabinet secretary agree that local parents and pupils at the junior secondary schools in the Western Isles greatly value the quality of education that those schools provide? Is she aware that those parents will welcome the extra safeguards against closure that the bill offers?

I well remember my mother keeping bees during my childhood, and I recall being fascinated looking at the hives and watching the activity as the workers relentlessly went about their business—business that is essential to the sustainability of mankind. Bees are one of nature's miracles. They are famous not just for their delicious honey; we also owe the bee a debt for the pollination process that ensures the production of the food on which we depend for our survival. Scottish Highland heather honey and wildflower honey are surely among the finest tasting in the world, and have so many health benefits. Two years ago, when I was conducting a surgery at Bonar Bridge in Sutherland, I was visited by Hamish Robertson, who runs Struan Apiaries, which was mentioned earlier by Peter Peacock. Mr Robertson alerted me to the significant losses of honey-bees that Scottish beekeepers were suffering. It was not a gradual decline, but a very sudden one—I remind members that I am talking about two years ago. I am most grateful to Dr Beryll Stevenson, a well-known Sutherland lady, for encouraging him to raise the issue with me. I subsequently lodged a written parliamentary question on the subject, and I was concerned to read the answer from Michael Russell, which said: "No research is being carried out at present. Where beekeepers have suffered larger than normal post winter losses, in the vast majority of cases the loss was due to poor husbandry".— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 15 May 2008; S3W-12732.]  I thought that that was a bit of an insult to our hard-working Scottish beekeepers, and I feel that the former Minister for Environment perhaps ought to be stung by a bee to make him understand that. Why is the UK now spending £10 million, including £500,000 from the Scottish Government, to identify the threat two years too late? Beekeepers in Scotland want more support from central Government. There is only one bee adviser, based at Auchincruive, to cover the whole of Scotland. Although he does an excellent job, beekeepers believe that more support staff are required to cover such a huge area. Peter Peacock referred to Einstein's comments on the importance of bees to biodiversity and human sustainability. Einstein suggested that mankind would be doomed without the work of the bee. He gave us four years, which is a pretty sobering thought, especially as the BBKA survey of its members shows that bee numbers declined by 30 per cent during the winter and early spring of 2007-08. Beekeepers are waiting to see how their bees have fared this winter. I congratulate Peter Peacock on raising an issue of singular importance and on highlighting a problem that screams for an answer. If we are to believe Einstein, we should put the situation in the same category as the problem that is caused by nuclear waste: a solution must be found, and we ignore it at our peril.

Will the minister ensure that the available money goes to Scotland's housing association sector, which is well placed to deliver good-quality and affordable homes?

I thank the minister for that answer and hope that what he says will come to pass. However, does he share my concern that the most recent data show that 25 per cent of addicts who want treatment have to wait for more than a year before they are assessed and that 30 per cent have to wait for more than a year for the actual treatment? Does he agree that, when an addict is ready to accept help, the help must be given within days rather than years? Will he assure me that the support system will be delivered?

Does the minister accept that the council tax is still a huge worry and expense for many Scots pensioners? If so, will the Government look to implement Scottish Tory proposals for a 50 per cent discount for pensioners?

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it will give to NHS Highland and other key agencies in the Highlands and Islands to help them respond to the needs of a predicted increasingly ageing population. (S3O-6666)

Is the minister aware of the recent comments of the respected University of Stirling academic Professor David Bell about the difficulties that my region of the Highlands and Islands faces as a result of the increasing number of elderly people in the area? Does the minister agree with his statement that "In an era of static, or possibly declining, public spending, Highland communities need to work together to confront the demographic challenge"? If so, will she consider factoring in demographic trends when determining how health sector funds are allocated in the Highlands and Islands?

The Scottish Conservatives always welcome the opportunity to discuss housing, and we are therefore pleased to take part in today's debate. I congratulate the new Minister for Housing and Communities on his first housing debate as a minister. The dire state of the economy due to Labour's recession means that housing has, understandably, shot up the political agenda. Figures that have been provided to me by the National House Building Council indicate the extent of the problems that we are facing. In the period to February 2009, there were only 303 registered new homes in Scotland—a decline of no less than 78 per cent compared with the same period in the previous year. The number of actual completions decreased by 54 per cent in the period to February 2009 compared with the same period in the previous year. The decline in the private house building sector also cuts the number of affordable homes that are available, given the requirement by local authorities for a certain percentage of each private development to be made up of affordable homes. Against that backdrop, the Scottish Government has been right to bring forward money from future years to deliver affordable housing now. However, how confident are ministers that the money that is being frontloaded into this financial year will be replaced in subsequent years, when money will also be needed to deliver the affordable homes that we all want to be delivered? Can ministers explain how much of the money that was announced in last week's UK budget as additional support for homeowners and homebuyers and for housing supply will be earmarked for those purposes in Scotland? Given the tightness of public spending, which will only get tighter in the next few years, we want all available Government money for affordable housing to be spent in the most efficient way possible. In that context, we question the Scottish National Party Government's much-trumpeted decision to develop a new generation of council houses. Surely Government policy should be  evidence based. Many local authorities admit that they are not the most professional developers and managers of properties, whereas Scotland's housing associations have shown that they have the necessary skill and expertise to build and manage good-quality housing in successful and sustainable communities across the country. Housing associations have been let down by the SNP Government's changes in the HAG, which should be the priority recipient of Government support for affordable housing. While we are on the subject of the SNP Government getting it slightly wrong on housing policy, let me be clear that we will oppose moves to end the right to buy in relation to new-build social housing in Scotland, as our amendment makes clear. David McLetchie will say more on that later in the debate but I can say that we will never be anything but extremely proud of the unparalleled choice and opportunities that Conservative Governments gave hundreds of thousands of Scots through the right to buy. Why should today's hard-working young families be denied the rights and opportunities that their parents or grandparents enjoyed thanks to the right to buy? Why should this generation have their rights taken away by an SNP Government?

I want to make a little more progress. Our amendment also makes it clear that we continue to believe that any debate about the future of our social housing in Scotland must also consider stock transfer. Again, David McLetchie will say more about that later in the debate. The local authorities that have gone through the stock-transfer process are reaping the benefits, while those that have not are generally seeing only minimal investment in their council housing stock. Last year, the then Minister for Communities and Sport, the intelligent Stewart Maxwell, to his credit welcomed the result of the successful second-stage transfer in Glasgow. Will Alex Neil or Nicola Sturgeon now follow that logic and engage with Scotland's local authorities to allow tenants from across Scotland to vote for first-stage transfer, with all the benefits that come with it? Given the worsening state of public finances, every right-thinking person in Scotland would expect no less from their Government. The money that HM Treasury has on the table should be accessed without any further delay or obfuscation by the Scottish Government. Perhaps, however the Government will return to the dismal past of left-wing socialist dogma. John Swinney took that approach on tax, and now ministers appear to be taking that approach on housing.

I do not think that I have time, I am sorry. Before I conclude, I wish to raise a further important issue that is of significance for the future delivery of affordable housing in Scotland. Private sector housing stakeholders have recently raised with me their concerns that the lead developer model that emerges from the Scottish Government's investment reform consultation excludes private sector input. However, private sector input was envisaged when the lead developer model was proposed in the discussion document, "Firm Foundations: the future of housing in Scotland", so I would be grateful if ministers could explain the apparent change in tack and address the concerns of private sector stakeholders, who have a massive amount of expertise and a real desire to help registered social landlords and others deliver houses through the proposed new regime. Why does the Government want to isolate the private sector? What possible advantage will be gained from doing so? Will the minister also say when the outcome of the consultation will be published? I could take an intervention now, Presiding Officer, but I think that I am in the final minute of my speech.

No member would deny that ministers face challenging circumstances as they seek to deliver on the affordable housing targets. However, they could do more. They could take a lead on housing stock transfer throughout Scotland, which could help the situation. We look to ministers to get on with doing that and we are ready to support them, but we do not support further restrictions on the right to buy. I hope that Labour will support the amendment in my name, given that it reflects Labour's stated policy when it was in office. I move amendment S3M-3994.1, to leave out from "10 years" to end and insert: "30 years; urges the Scottish Government to engage proactively with the 26 local authorities yet to transfer their housing stock with a view to effecting stock transfers to community-based housing associations with the consent of the tenants of these homes, thus achieving the write-off of Scotland's estimated £2 billion housing debt and facilitating further investment in affordable housing in Scotland, and rejects the further restrictions on the right to buy proposed in the draft Housing (Scotland) Bill as being unfair and failing to meet the aspirations of many of today's tenants."

I return to the minister's previous point. He said that the changes that were made in February brought HAG back to its level under the previous Administration. Why did that level fall initially under the current Administration?

The Scottish Conservatives welcome the opportunity to take part in today's important debate. We were 100 per cent behind the successful campaign to secure the 2014 games for Glasgow and Scotland and are now ready and willing to play a constructive part in ensuring that Scotland can reap benefits from their staging, which is truly a mega-event for our country. We would all agree that, if we consider historical examples—which is a logical and appropriate  approach—we see that other cities and countries have gained varying degrees of legacy from hosting major sporting events. Barcelona, which hosted the 1992 Olympics, famously built an estimated 50 years-worth of infrastructure in only eight years. At the opposite end of the scale, the funding legacy of the 1976 Montreal Olympics gave the circular Olympic stadium the moniker of the Big Owe, after the debt owing from the financing of the games took 30 years to pay off. On a cautionary note, it may be worth remembering the near disaster of the run-up to the previous Commonwealth games in Scotland, when the funding got into such disarray that Robert Maxwell—Captain Bob, the sometime employer of Helen Liddell, our ex-Secretary of State for Scotland—had to come to the rescue although, in retrospect, perhaps it would have been better if he had rescued the people in the Mirror group pension fund. Especially in the circumstances of the savage and disturbing cuts that were announced yesterday, it is vital that the Scottish Government and Glasgow City Council have all the finances watertight in the lead-up to the games. Some academics would even say that no mega-event sporting competition has ever achieved the legacy that was hoped for. The much-respected Professor Fred Coalter of the University of Stirling's department of sports studies, who—as other members will no doubt mention—gave evidence to the Health and Sport Committee, has spoken of the substantial scepticism about the claims that are made for the direct and indirect economic impact of such events. Therefore, we should all be ambitious for what Scotland can gain while also being realistic. We need to be able to determine between and measure the tangible and intangible benefits. Examples of those are, on the one hand, the new physical sports infrastructure—I am sure that my friend Bill Aitken will talk about that—and, on the other, the boost in national confidence and spirit, particularly among Scottish youth. Both are important. It would be fair to hope that Scotland could build on and exceed the successes that were achieved in the 2002 Manchester Commonwealth games. The evaluation report on the seven-year legacy of those games concluded that 220 people gained employment, 3,092 obtained a recognised qualification, 8,473 businesses benefited, 913 voluntary organisations were supported and 2,637 people became involved in voluntary work. I welcome and support the strong recognition of the hugely important role of the voluntary sector that emerged from the consultation on our legacy plan, and I look forward to that being developed. Several national agencies and voluntary organisations suggested helpful ways in which  they could support the implementation of a volunteering programme. I look forward to the ministers responding to that point. Regarding business, I am keen to hear from ministers what steps the Scottish Government can take to ensure that our small and medium-sized companies, which are the backbone of our economy, get a fair crack of the whip on contracts. I am positive about all the communities of Scotland—rather than just those in the direct vicinity of the Glasgow games—working on their own legacy plans, so I welcome the suggestion in Labour's amendment that the Government should work with local authority stakeholders to set local aims and aspirations. I know that Frank McAveety, for example, wants free swimming, which is a fine aspiration, especially since his party seems to be well and truly up the creek without a paddle. Seriously, though, free swimming would be a fine legacy for children, especially in light of the wonderful toll of medals that our Scottish swimmers achieved during the Melbourne games. Of course, credit for that must go to the former Scottish Institute of Sport in Stirling, which the Administration has seen fit to merge, perhaps unwisely, with sportscotland.

Complacency is something that I am never big on, as the member knows. Ramblers Scotland sent me a useful briefing for today's debate. I agree with it that, as well as sport, walking and rambling should play a key role in delivering a lasting legacy throughout Scotland from 2014. In that respect, I declare an interest as honorary president of the Highland Disabled Ramblers Association. The excitement around the games must ultimately be a catalyst to get more people active and enjoy the health benefits that exercise brings. Encouraging walking is one of the most cost-effective ways of getting people of all ages involved in physical activity. The open and accessible, well-grazed hills of the Scottish countryside are a perfect stage for that activity, which can be undertaken by all age groups. Before I conclude, I will touch on the aspect of lottery funding for the 2014 legacy. In the plenary debate on funding community sport last September, I said: "Although the Conservatives are happy to be 100 per cent behind the London 2012 games and want everything to be done that will make them a British success story, it is legitimate to argue that some additional lottery funding should, as a consequence, be allocated to grass-roots  sports development in Scotland, especially as no lottery money is directly involved in funding the 2014 Commonwealth games in Glasgow, which should also be a British success story."— [ Official Report , 25 September 2008; c 11167.]  That remains our position and we would urge ministers to approach the forthcoming meeting in Glasgow in a positive way. We do not want the issue to become a sterile disagreement between London and Holyrood, with the fundamental point that we need to invest in community sport development and facilities possibly being lost. That is why we will support Labour's amendment tonight, even though Labour itself is a culprit when it comes to purloining billions of pounds of lottery money that should have gone to the original five good causes, including grass-roots sport, rather than to the Labour Government's pet projects. I remind members that it was the Conservative Government that started the lottery, which has helped many throughout our land. The Scottish Conservatives recognise the once-in-a-generation opportunity that the Commonwealth games provide us with. We acknowledge the work that has been done in developing an achievable and ambitious legacy plan and pay tribute to all those who have worked so hard to create it. We look forward to the final plan, which will be published in the summer. In the interests of our economy and, crucially, the improved health and wellbeing of citizens of all ages across the country, we stand ready to do our bit in encouraging all sectors and all individuals to become involved in the people, the place and the passion of Glasgow 2014.

Is the minister aware of the huge drop in the number of sheep and cattle in the Highlands and Islands during the past five years?

GM is not part of that—

I will make an extremely brief contribution. I refer to my agricultural interests, which are declared in the register of interests. I congratulate Rob Gibson on raising an all-important issue. However, as a sheep and cattle farmer in the Highlands and Islands, I, like many other hill farmers and crofters, despair of new measures such as double and electronic tagging, which will add yet more disincentives to an industry that is already grossly overregulated. In the Highlands and Islands, farmers have had to suffer desperately low prices for lambs and calves for the past 10 years. Many of them have given up, and many more are considering simply abandoning their holdings. How can that be, when the price of food is doubling? I am very worried for producers of seed potatoes. I spoke to some on the Black Isle who said that the proposed new EU directive to ban a vast amount of pesticides would make growing seed potatoes very difficult indeed. Those people have spent fortunes developing seed potatoes over centuries, and they supply many potato growers in the north-east of Scotland. The World Bank estimates that food producers will need to grow 50 per cent more food by 2030 and an incredible 85 per cent more meat. Will the Scottish Government take note of those figures and encourage Scottish farmers to play their part in solving a global problem?

In the light of last Saturday's dreadful tragedy on Loch Awe, where two men from Glasgow lost their lives and two more are sadly still missing, and considering the high number of deaths by drowning in Loch Awe in recent years, will the First Minister or his relevant representatives respond to the wishes of local people by meeting me and other politicians, local Royal National Lifeboat Institution representatives, community councillors and members of other relevant bodies around Loch Awe to create a framework to improve safety and aid rescue operations on Scotland's longest freshwater loch?

Is the minister aware of the concerns of pensioners in rural Argyll, who faced days of continuous freezing weather but did not receive cold weather payments? One of my constituents has a sister who lives in the midlands and received £100 in cold weather payments. However, the pension service told my constituent that people in the Paisley postcode area, which covers Argyll, would not receive any payments, because they were not affected by cold weather. Would the minister like to comment on that?

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent contact or discussions it has had with parent councils in Argyll and Bute concerning the possible closure of primary school kitchens. (S3O-6165)

I welcome the fact that, since my question was lodged and after a determined campaign by parent councils, which I supported, Argyll and Bute Council has withdrawn its decision to close six rural primary school kitchens, including those at Glenbarr, Skipness and Rhunahaorine. Does the minister share my concern that the dinner ladies first learned of the threat by reading the local press? Does he agree that the provision of healthy and nutritious school meals for our primary school children is an important priority for local authorities?

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it is giving to housing associations in the west Highlands. (S3O-5863)

Can the cabinet secretary confirm that Argyll Community Housing Association is measured against a housing association grant benchmark of £73,000 but that the corresponding figure for Lochaber Housing Association is £108,000 per unit? If that is correct, does she agree that the matter needs to be revisited? Surely two neighbouring housing associations that operate in similar geography and housing markets should not have such different benchmarks.

What is the cabinet secretary doing to encourage uptake of the rural empty properties grant, which can create good-quality affordable housing in rural Scotland?

Will the member give way?

I, too, congratulate Alex Neil on his new position. I look forward to debating with him in the future. The Scottish Conservatives welcome today's debate. We have been consistent in that we have opposed the SNP Government's decision to sanction a new generation of council houses. We continue to believe that what funding is available to build new social housing for rent in Scotland should go to our housing associations. Housing associations have demonstrated that they have the expertise and experience to create good new housing in sustainable mixed communities. Their  record often stands in sharp contrast to that of councils. That is surely backed up by the recent second-stage stock transfer from the Glasgow Housing Association to smaller associations, which was voted for almost to a man and woman. The SNP Government may be playing to its left-wing supporters by talking about taking over the mantle of John Wheatley, but I point out that, under the Conservative Government of Harold Macmillan, we built more council houses than almost anyone. However, those were different times; we do not now believe that that would be in the interest of people in Scotland who are waiting for a good-quality social home to rent. The people in former council houses in Glasgow have demonstrated by their votes that they prefer local housing associations. Just for the record, in the past 25 years, the only year when more than 6,000 homes for rent were built by social landlords was 1995, under a Conservative Government. I have listened to the concerns of housing associations about the negative impact that changes to the housing association grant are having on their ability to provide affordable homes. Indeed, on behalf of housing associations in the Highlands and Islands, I corresponded with the former minister repeatedly. It seems, judging by the cabinet secretary's announcements yesterday, that ministers have gone some way towards addressing some of the worries that exist—albeit at a very late stage for many housing associations, when many have already made financial decisions for the coming year, and for a temporary period only. I will be interested in the reaction of housing associations. Our concern was to ensure that any changes in the HAG must result in more houses being built, not fewer, as seems to be the case. Ministers have yet to present a convincing case as to how housing associations will be able to find the estimated extra £5,000 or £6,000 private loan per unit—which they will still need even after yesterday's announcement—when the availability and costs of borrowing are more restricted and more expensive than when the changes were introduced. I note the SFHA's concern that Scottish Government thinking is wrong to blame the housing associations for being inefficient developers and for rising HAG levels over the past five years when, in fact, housing associations, just like private developers, have had to deal with sharply rising land prices and higher construction costs. We always strive for efficiency and we welcome the void assumption being reduced from 2 per cent to 1 per cent, as we all want as few houses as possible to be empty, but we also understand that housing associations have to  compete with the private sector for available land. Ministers need to work as closely as possible with the housing association sector to deliver the affordable housing units that we all want to see. The housing association sector stands ready to help the Government deliver its housing targets, but it needs the appropriate support to do that. The briefing that I received from Construction Skills Scotland was extremely useful. I am glad that it is undertaking a detailed analysis of the house-building sector's skills and training requirements as well as planning reform. As our amendment makes clear, we believe that any debate about the future of our social housing in Scotland must also consider stock transfer. David McLetchie will say more about that later in the debate. As I noted in December, the very high percentage of tenants in all five areas of Glasgow who voted in favour of second-stage transfer—83.8 per cent was the lowest figure and 95.2 per cent the highest—demonstrates the genuine public support that exists for locally accountable housing associations that are rooted in our communities. The local authorities that have gone through the stock transfer process are reaping the benefits while those that have not are generally seeing only minimal investment in their council housing stock. At the time, the Minister for Communities and Sport welcomed the result of the second-stage transfer in Glasgow. Will the new minister and the cabinet secretary follow the logic and allow tenants from across Scotland to vote for first-stage transfer with all the benefit that comes from it? It is surely a no-brainer financially to see housing debt wiped out by the Treasury, and at a time of pressure on public expenditure—which the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth spoke about yesterday—most people in Scotland would expect their Government to pursue that with every effort. I move amendment S3M-3427.1, to insert at end: "; welcomes the second-stage stock transfer to local housing associations in Glasgow; notes that housing stock transfer in Scotland would achieve £2 billion of debt write-off from HM Treasury, and therefore urges the Scottish Government to engage proactively with the 26 local authorities yet to transfer their stock with a view to effecting stock transfers to community-based housing associations and facilitating further investment in affordable housing in Scotland."

The minister might be aware that I initiated a members' business debate when a similar special area of conservation proposal for those areas emerged some years ago. That proposal was subsequently dropped. Does the minister agree that, although we must seek to protect features such as coral reefs, a total ban on all fishing would be disproportionate and would certainly not be justified by science? After all, the reefs in question have outlived many generations of fishermen. A ban on fishing would have serious financial implications for the already fragile economies of Barra, Vatersay, Eriskay and Uist.

In relation to the point that I raised earlier about broadcasting, what does the minister feel about the fact that BBC Alba is not shown on Freeview? Does she think that it would be better if it was, as more people would have access to it? Would she be prepared to lobby the BBC trust on that point?

My great-great-grandfather was a Gaelic speaker, but I regret to say that he failed to pass it on. I am really sad that I do not speak Gaelic, but this immersion thing sounds very good. I have visions of sitting in a hot tub at Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, looking down the Sound of Sleat and singing Gaelic songs. We cannot mention Sabhal Mòr Ostaig without paying tribute to Sir Iain Noble, who has devoted a great deal of his life to Gaelic, and without whom that wonderful college might never have existed. As members have said, it is right and proper that Scotland's Government has a Gaelic language plan. I am pleased to say that our Parliament has a plan—the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body's very good plan. That sends out the message that we are serious about Gaelic and committed to its continued development in Scotland. I am pleased that the council in my native Argyll and Bute is one of the organisations that are leading the way, by implementing its own Gaelic language plan, which Bòrd na Gàidhlig approved in June last year. When he launched the consultation on that plan, the council's leader Dick Walsh said: "Historically, Argyll and Bute is the heartland of Scots Gaelic and ... The Royal National Mod ... was first held in Oban in 1892." I welcome the council's commitment to host the Mod in Argyll and Bute every three years and I urge members to visit this year's Mod—in the year of homecoming—which will be held in Oban from 9 to 17 October. I do not know whether Sir Sean Connery will be there, but there is always a good  chance of that. In any case, people will receive a wonderful welcome in Oban, which is the gateway to the Hebrides. The Mod is one of the best examples of the vibrancy of our Gaelic sector. The number of talented young Gaelic singers and musicians is extremely encouraging. I declare an interest, as my wife, Emma, sings in the excellent Taynuilt Gaelic choir. I take the opportunity to wish that choir every success. The music and poetry of the Gael mean so much. Two members have already mentioned Murdo Macfarlane—the Melbost bard. On his return from Canada, he said, "There are no ceilidhs on the prairies." Recently, I spoke with another MacFarlane—Brigadier John MacFarlane—with whom listeners to Radio nan Gaidheal will be familiar because of his broadcasts with Donald Morrison. He told me that, as a native of Tobermory, where his family had long-established businesses in whisky and chandlery, he spoke nothing but Gaelic in his childhood and in the 1950s, when most conversations were about crofting, fishing, boating and local gossip. He says that the news and current affairs programmes on the Gaelic media now have greatly increased not only his but many others' vocabulary. Brigadier MacFarlane also said that the Gaelic media have provoked great interest in Gaelic novels, films and poetry, and that the BBC iPlayer keeps Gaelic programmes for a week, which is useful for people who have missed a programme. He emphasised that the Gaelic of Radio nan Gaidheal is beamed to the diaspora in South Africa and Canada. He has even received fan letters from Gaelic speakers in Australia. On a more negative note, one can lose FM coverage in many places in the Highlands, so increasing the station's footprint would be important progress. Brigadier MacFarlane expressed his dismay that BBC Alba is not available on Freeview. Many of my constituents in the Highlands and Islands do not want to pay hundreds of pounds to access the Gaelic channel on Sky. Given that Irish people can watch their Irish Gaelic channel free and that Wales can watch its Welsh channel, why cannot the Scots watch their Scots Gaelic channel on Freeview? That is unfair, and I appeal to others to lobby the BBC trust on the issue. That subject was raised emphatically last night at the meeting of the cross-party group on Gaelic. Stress was placed on the importance of the media and on the difficulty in sourcing Gaelic teachers, which is key to encouraging the use of the Gaelic language in Scotland, as my friend Liz Smith eloquently and strongly pointed out. She made the key point that, although progress is being made on  the number of children who learn Gaelic through Gaelic-medium education, we need to do more to ensure that they can develop their skills at secondary school. We look to ministers to address that. More must also be done to promote the speaking of Gaelic in our universities and further education colleges. Otherwise, the language will break down. Ted Brocklebank spoke passionately about the role of broadcasting in sustaining and promoting Gaelic. I am proud of the Scottish Conservatives' record on that. In a speech in the first parliamentary session, the former Labour MSP for the Western Isles, Alasdair Morrison, effusively thanked the Conservatives for igniting the Gaelic revival by funding Gaelic media and education. In fact, that was the only time that I heard him being grateful or polite to the Conservatives—even Mrs Thatcher's name sounded all right in Gaelic. Alasdair Morrison was right. I am proud of previous Conservative ministers, such as Malcolm Rifkind and Michael Forsyth, who knew the value of the Gaelic heritage and wanted not to lose it but to encourage it. Like many others, including Alasdair Allan, whose motion on the subject I was pleased to sign, I was very pleased to learn that the famous Dwelly's Gaelic dictionary is now available online—I shall certainly use it. I pay tribute to the site's creators, William Robertson and Michael Bauer, for their hard work. The dictionary, which has 77,989 entries, is by far the most comprehensive dictionary of the Gaelic language ever published. The pilot project was personally funded by its co-creators, and I understand that since it went live on the internet on 14 January there have been almost 60,000 searches. The dictionary has been designed so that it can be easily expanded and updated online, and the creators plan to appoint a team of editors to continue to expand, modernise and update the dictionary's content by adding new words, full information about word usage and grammar, and spoken examples of word usage. The dictionary is a valuable tool for Gaelic speakers and for those who wish to learn the language, and I commend it to all those who are interested in the language. VisitScotland has a part to play. I sometimes visit the tourist office in Tyndrum and see on the wall the poems of Duncan Ban MacIntyre and the translations. As he came from the Dalmally area, there is a monument to him there. It is very good that those Gaelic poets are shown in their areas. Tyndrum tourist office has set an example that others would do well to follow. We have talked about Gaelic signs. Is it all right for me to continue, Presiding Officer?

You will cut me off at some point.

I enjoy seeing Gaelic signs in Argyll, but I sometimes wonder whether they could be translated into English. Underneath the Gaelic sign is the English Gaelic version—the pidgin Gaelic—but I do not know whether three versions could be fitted on to one sign, so I dare say that it is probably not a very good idea. It is marvellous for people who come to Scotland to see on maps the English translations of Gaelic names, because they can understand what the place names mean. For example, Cameron means "crooked nose" and Campbell means "crooked mouth". There are all kinds of strange but relevant translations. Finally, we have a very good Gaelic parliamentary unit, but I would like it to be strengthened, so that we can receive English translations of Gaelic documents. Last night, at the cross-party group on Gaelic, I received a document in Gaelic that I have not been able to have translated yet. We get a very good verbal service, but we do not get a written one. I wonder whether someone in the Parliament could address that issue. In conclusion, the Scottish Conservatives are pleased to support the motion. We welcome the Scottish Government's draft Gaelic language plan and we look forward to a productive consultation exercise that draws in all the Gaelic expertise and input from as wide a range of organisations and individuals as possible.

I have been contacted by a housing association that has been given Scottish Government approval for a scheme along with a grant of £88,000 per unit, but only if the rest of the balance can be obtained from the local authority. Meanwhile, a neighbouring housing association has been assessed and awarded a grant of £107,000 per unit. Is the minister aware of that? Can he tell me why such varying grant levels apply in two neighbouring parts of the west Highlands and whether he supports that?

I congratulate Christine Grahame on securing today's debate. I recognise the good work that Fields in Trust Scotland does to highlight the threat to our school playing fields, and I pay tribute to all those who are involved in that organisation. Given that, as Christine Grahame notes in her motion, no central data on most aspects of school playing fields is collated by the Scottish Government, FIT Scotland's work is particularly important. The Scottish Conservatives recognise the vital and valuable role that school playing fields make in providing our children with places to take part in physical activity, including competitive sport, through PE when they are at school, and through extracurricular activities outwith school time. More than that, school playing fields are often genuine community facilities that are used by people of all ages and can provide pleasant green spaces in urban areas. As Julia Bracewell, the chair of sportscotland, said: "Playing fields are an important part of the school estate. They are an essential resource for many of our most popular sports and can help children adopt a more active lifestyle, and through their extended use for extra-curricular activity and for community use, they play a role in sustaining such a lifestyle beyond the schools curriculum." The school in my local village in Argyll, Dalmally primary, has no playing field, but for many years it has managed wonderfully well—thanks to its staff—with a tarmac playground and a small area of grass around it. It cannot use the local Dalmally shinty pitch, which is next to the livestock market, because of worries about animal manure on the field. The teachers and pupils of the school are therefore hugely excited by the progress that has been made by the Dalmally Community Company, which has secured funding for stage 1 of the community hall project. I congratulate the company officials, Kenny Black and John Burke, for the staggering amount of work that they have done and the enormous amount of money that they have raised to achieve the building of what will be a community and indoor sports centre. Phase 2, which is the playing field that is nicknamed locally the field of dreams—

I will refrain from talking any more about Dalmally, although it is relevant to my speech. I hope that the field of dreams will become a reality for that village. Having spoken about the progress in Dalmally, I must say that I share the concerns of communities throughout Scotland that have faced, or which currently face, the loss of school playing fields. It is a real concern that playing fields are still being lost despite SPP 11, which makes clear the exceptional circumstances that must exist before a school playing field can be sold off for development. Those sales are taking place, despite the fact that local communities such as Cuiken in Penicuik are united in their opposition to local authority plans to sell off their playing fields. Given the focus of the Government—and members of all parties—on encouraging our young people to live more active lives, and on tackling the increasing problem of child obesity, Christine Grahame's suggestion that sportscotland should become a additional mandatory consultee has great merit and should be explored. Sportscotland has already done great work in that area, through the helpful document that it published in early 2007, "School Playing Fields: Planning and Design Guidance", which recognises that there is little up-to-date design advice on school playing fields. I hope that the minister will address that issue when she sums up in tonight's debate. Her party raised hopes in its 2007 manifesto when it promised "a moratorium on the loss ... of school playing fields", and communities throughout Scotland will expect ministers to deliver on that.

I congratulate Mary Mulligan on securing this important debate on an important organisation. I pay tribute to Shelter for the great work that it has done for the past 40 years and continues to do today—first and foremost for the homeless and, more generally, on all other aspects of housing in Scotland. Despite Shelter's work, homelessness is still a major problem for Scotland: the official figures are rising and the real figure is estimated to be higher still, as many people who are sleeping rough make no appearance in the official statistics. However, thanks to Shelter and other homelessness organisations, there is now some positive news as, over the past couple of years, the proportion of local authority lets to homeless applicants has increased. Another issue on which my party has campaigned is the hidden number of households who are parked in temporary accommodation.  Since 1999 they have increased by 146 per cent and the number in bed-and-breakfast accommodation has increased by nearly four times. That is particularly hard and unsettling for children in the families concerned. Children need security; insecurity will affect their confidence later on. I ask the minister to comment on those points, as the SNP Government desperately needs to tackle them. Earlier this afternoon, I asked him whether he would review homelessness policy; I invite him to respond on that point. The Scottish Conservatives are in favour of the goal of ending homelessness and realise that the problem is likely to grow as we enter the recession, but in our view aspects of the Government's current homelessness policy were introduced without proper examination of the impact they would have on local authority waiting lists. As a result, many councils are struggling to balance an obligation to house the homeless with meeting the needs of other tenants. For that reason, we believe that the operation of the policy needs to be reviewed. I pay tribute to Shelter for its instrumental involvement in the establishment of housing associations in Scotland. The housing association movement is one of Scotland's greatest success stories. For 35 years it has delivered affordable homes in Scotland. We believe that, by encouraging the building of council houses rather than allowing the experts in housing associations to get on with the delivery of affordable housing, the SNP is returning to the policies of the past. On the whole, councils have proved themselves to be poor landlords. We would prefer housing associations to be given all available funding to build new social housing for rent in Scotland. Another vital service that Shelter provides is its online housing service, which is an invaluable source of information on a large array of issues, ranging from the rights of those who live in mobile homes to issues relating to repossession and eviction. It is a really valuable service for many people. The economic reality that is being felt in Scotland more and more as the year progresses and job losses begin to bite means that Shelter will become increasingly relevant and valuable. I take this opportunity to thank all of Shelter's staff for the hard work that they do for the homeless and for all of us in Scotland today.

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

I refer to my agricultural interests and memberships in the register of members' interests. As my colleague John Scott indicated, the Scottish Conservatives share the view of the NFUS and most farmers in Scotland that the deal that has been achieved represents a generally fair outcome for Scottish farming; it is certainly better than many of us feared when we debated the issue last May. However, will the minister address Lantra's concern that there is now hardly any provision for supporting the training of youngsters in farming skills?  On modulation—or agricultural clawback tax, as I prefer to call it—I welcome the fact that the sliding scale of progressive modulation, which would have penalised our most efficient farms and food producers, has been dropped in favour of only one threshold. Overall, the proposals on compulsory modulation will mean that, as we move towards 2012, other EU member states will move towards our modulation levels, which will help to create a level playing field—if members will forgive the cliché. However, it is appalling that Scotland's rural development pillar 2 funding has dropped to £7 per hectare of utilised farm land per year, the lowest in the EU, while Austria's is £122. I accept that much of that discrepancy is down to history, but why on earth has more not been done over the past 15 years to lessen it? I am pleased that we have avoided any moves towards dropping the historic basis for payments. The current single farm payment is the bedrock of support for farmers and crofters the length and breadth of Scotland and we should be extremely cautious about tampering with it. Modulation is fair only to those whose SRDP schemes are accepted—at least, that is how it seems to farmers and crofters. Farmers have generally welcomed the fact that Scotland has received permission to continue the Scottish beef calf scheme until 2012. All of us are concerned about the fall in stock numbers, which is set out vividly in two recent reports, and the decline that we are witnessing in the remote and rural areas of my region of the Highlands and Islands. The retention of quality sheep and cattle in the marginal and remote areas of the country is crucial for the agriculture sector. Farmers and crofters in those areas supply the stock that is fattened and processed elsewhere in Scotland, which is important. There are real worries that critical mass is being lost. The SBCS has the potential to make a difference in supporting the beef sector. I would be interested to hear how the cabinet secretary sees the scheme developing between now and 2012. I was pleased to take part in the meeting that was held on Monday this week in Oban to discuss the findings of the RSE report. Sadly, the mood of the farmers and crofters present was still gloomy; it had not been helped by the reaction of the Minister for Environment to my members' business debate last week on the bull hire scheme. I welcome Sarah Boyack's amendment, which calls for the scheme to continue, and was encouraged by the cabinet secretary's earlier remarks, if I heard him right. Ministers need to act with urgency and to do all that they can to restore confidence in the hill farming sector. There are many positive and useful proposals in the reports of both the RSE and the Scottish  Agricultural College, and I look to ministers to act imaginatively. For example, will they consider restoring grants for liming and slagging, to encourage tired pasture and to improve grazing in marginal areas? Can more support be given for bracken clearance, drainage and control of rushes—all measures that help to improve the quality of livestock? In last May's debate on the CAP health check, I spoke about the Scottish Conservatives' complete opposition to compulsory electronic sheep tagging, and I make no apology for going back to that issue. Like my sheep farming and crofting constituents, I am deeply concerned that, despite efforts by the NFUS and others—including, I concede, the Scottish Government—the EU has decided to press ahead with compulsory electronic tagging from 1 January 2011. A constituent from Sutherland, who has been a sheep farmer for 45 years, wrote to me last week. She fears that electronic tagging will bring "death to the industry"— and I do not think that she meant death from electrocution. She warned that, if the measure goes ahead, "I will certainly get rid of my sheep and most likely the shepherd as well, and there are many more farmers with the same intentions." What can the cabinet secretary say in response to my constituent and the rest of the sheep farming sector? Will he continue to try to persuade the EU to drop what NFUS has rightly referred to as a scheme that is "impractical, costly and delivers nothing new in terms of traceability", and which the Aylward report into the EU sheep sector called "ill thought out, illogical and unworkable"? NFUS's current survey to determine the impact that electronic tagging will have on farmers' intentions to keep sheep in the future will, I am sure, provide further evidence as to why we need to fight a bureaucratic idea that shows no understanding of the actual circumstances of sheep farming in Scotland. Before I conclude, I will emphasise the concerns of many farmers and growers about last week's EU vote on pesticides. If it is implemented, the pesticide ban will significantly reduce the ability of many of my constituents to grow healthy crops, and it could lead to significant production problems, which, in turn, would raise food prices. That is a serious matter. The CAP health check deal that has been achieved should give our farming sector some hope that an appropriate support system will be in place between now and 2012. In addition,  however, ministers must support hill farming in its hour of need and tackle the dreadful decline in livestock numbers in our hills. I support the amendment in John Scott's name.

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. I welcome the news that a mortgage to shared equity scheme is to be introduced alongside the existing mortgage to rent scheme, and that the Scottish Government is keen  to address many of the points that are contained in the evaluation report. Can the minister set out more details on how he will improve the administration of the mortgage to rent scheme and cut down on processing delays? In the current circumstances, time is of the essence for hard-pressed families. Referring to those people who cannot be reached by the schemes, and who face homelessness, is the minister confident that, as the economic slowdown continues, local authorities will be able to deal adequately with the additional pressures that will come on top of the significant existing homelessness problems? We have long called for a review of homelessness policy in Scotland. Now, it is more crucial than ever. Will the minister review homelessness policy as a priority, in light of the current economic downturn?

rose—

The minister made the point that only 433 crofters benefited from the scheme. Does he accept that several thousand cows benefited?

The member said that the scheme was no longer viable, but it has always been subsidised and has always been part of a subsidy to crofters. Why should things be so different now?

Little did I think, in 2004, when I secured a debate on a similar motion, that I would be required to seek another debate on the subject less than five years later. I thank members of all parties for supporting my motion on a scheme that virtually all of us still know as the bull hire scheme, which has been around since 1897. Peter Peacock has lodged a similar, useful motion on the issue, which I have supported. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, it is my job to speak out about the concerns of my constituents, so I make no apology for seeking a debate on an issue that is legitimately of great concern to many hundreds of my crofting constituents. A crucial point that I want to emphasise to the minister is that the current bull hire scheme has helped greatly to maintain stock quality and health in the Highlands and Islands. The debate is not just about animals; it is about helping people to stay in remote areas. The former chairman of the Scottish Crofting Foundation, Norman Leask, who comes from Shetland, impressed that point on me, and Jim Lugton from the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations said that a lack of quality improvement would lead to a fall in numbers, which would result in a smaller gene pool and a drop in future quality. The future of crofting depends on having the best possible produce for the marketplace. Rather than diminish that aim, the Government should do all in its power to support it. Many crofters say that sheep quality has suffered since the tup hire scheme came to an end. We cannot allow that experience to be repeated in the beef sector, especially when the reports of the Scottish Agricultural College and the Royal Society of  Edinburgh both highlight the worrying decline in stock numbers. Why does the Government want to withdraw a proven and successful scheme? The scheme does not benefit crofters alone. Many of the female calves of well-bred bulls in crofting communities go on to supplement the breeding herds of farmers across Scotland, thus ensuring quality from a clean, disease-free source. Many arable farmers fatten the crofters' bullock calves. Cattle enhance the rural habitat and environment and enable crofters to enter environmental schemes to maximise income; under the less favoured areas scheme, mixed livestock units are favoured. Ministers seem to think that some sort of private hire scheme will replace the current scheme, but my crofting constituents are certainly not convinced and have legitimate fears about the future, which I share. As the Lewis and Harris cattle producers group has pointed out, there is no feasible private hire provision for Lewis and Harris. The alternative, which would result in crofters having to buy bulls and to provide winter housing facilities for them, is cost prohibitive for most crofters, even with the grants that may or may not be forthcoming through the highly competitive Scottish rural development programme. The Lewis and Harris group suggests that a typical 30ft by 40ft shed would cost about £25,000 without pens. The cost of buying bedding and feed to winter bulls on Lewis and Harris is at least 25 per cent higher than it is in Inverness. Does the minister know how much bales of straw and hay cost on Lewis and Harris? A bale of straw costs £25 and a bale of hay costs £35. Ministers seem to use two reasons—jointly or singly, depending on the spokesman—for justifying their plan to abolish the scheme: its cost and its legality under European Union rules. I would like briefly to deal with those two points, and I hope that other members will expand on them. The 2007-08 annual report of the Crofters Commission shows an overall loss of £140,000. That is £100,000 less than the loss in 2006-07, and it was achieved through increased receipts and lower running costs. Many crofters have suggested to me that receipts could have been even greater if more flexibility had been allowed in relation to the timescale for crofters applying to the scheme. The scheme makes a small loss each year, but I ask the minister to tell us what percentage of overall support to the crofting sector it amounts to. Would not most sensible people think that it is a small price worth paying to ensure that healthy and quality cattle thrive throughout the Highlands and Islands? I would be amazed if the minister can guarantee that his alternatives will not  inconvenience crofters, and that they will cost the taxpayer less. The Crofters Commission's website makes it clear that the scheme is permissible under de minimus state aid. What has changed? Has the legal advice that was given to the previous Scottish Executive, which specifically said that the scheme could continue perfectly well under those rules, suddenly altered? If so, will the minister publish it? I asked my colleague Struan Stevenson MEP about it. He was very clear: in that regard, nothing has changed since 2004. I ask the minister whether he agrees with this quotation from a previous debate on the matter: "In similar situations, other Governments, such as those in Ireland or France, would fight tooth and nail for their producers, especially when the case is there to be made."— [ Official Report , 19 May 2004; c 8572.]  Those are not my words, but the words of Mr Russell's now fellow minister, Argyll and Bute MSP Jim Mather, in the 2004 debate. Mr Mather also argued that the treaty of Rome allowed the scheme to continue, as it promoted the economic development of the Highlands and Islands. Surely what was good enough for the Lib-Lab goose in 2004 is just as good for the Scottish National Party gander now. Speaking of geese, it is considered worthwhile—rightly—to spend many hundreds of thousands of pounds on a goose project, so surely £140,000 on improving the bull hire scheme is money well spent. Mr Mather made a key point in 2004: the issue is about fighting for our producers, as every other country in Europe does. There is a strong case to be made for that. The minister has a reputation for being clever, which I agree with, and politics is the art of the possible. It cannot be beyond his and his officials' abilities to come up with some form of continued centrally run bull hire scheme that meets any EU objections—assuming any exist—maintains stock quality and retains the support of the vast majority of crofters, the Scottish Crofting Foundation and environmental organisations such as the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds. If the minister is not able to do that, many of my constituents will, I fear, continue to suspect that some ulterior motive is involved, perhaps to do with how much money might be released from the sale of the two remaining stud farms. I look forward to the minister's response to this important debate. I am sure that he will know that this is the Chinese year of the ox; it should also be the Scottish year of the bull. The eyes of crofters from Argyll to Wester Ross and from the Western Isles to Shetland are on him now, and I ask him not to let them down.

Does the minister accept that housing associations in Scotland are finding it difficult to deliver the affordable housing units that we all want, due to confusion about how housing association grant is applied? I have been contacted by a housing association in Argyll. The association has been given Scottish Government grant approval for a scheme at £88,000 per unit, which will be awarded only if it gets the balance from the local authority. However, a neighbouring association is being assessed at £107,000 per unit. Can the minister explain the discrepancy?

Due to the very cold weather this winter, my constituents in the Highlands and Islands have been using more heating and are now worried about how to pay for it. Why is the cost of gas and electricity rising in Scotland when oil prices have reduced from $140 to $40?

I am glad to hear that homecoming will be properly advertised. However, has the minister taken into account the fact that people make their holiday plans now? Is homecoming being publicised enough abroad at the moment?

The economic crisis that we face means that the year of the homecoming has an importance now that few could have envisaged when plans for 2009 were first put in place. However, like my colleague Gavin Brown, I am optimistic and upbeat about it. Presiding Officer, "Let me tell you that I love you and I think about you all the time." Those are famous words from a famous song that are spoken, not sung, by Sir Sean Connery—007—possibly the most famous man in the world, in a good VisitScotland advertisement that should have stirred and shaken the emotions of women all over the world and sent them rushing to Scotland for a chance to see Sir Sean's knees during the year of homecoming. However, it was surely ironic that the ad was shown in Scotland and not elsewhere. In response to a written question from me, the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism told me: "the advert is not being played on television or in cinemas beyond Scotland at this stage."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 18 December 2008; S3W-18519.]  I am therefore glad that the First Minister was able to boast only four days later about his delight that the advert would be seen after all by many millions of Americans, Canadians and others, as it would be screened on a number of key North American television channels, including PBS, CNBC, the History Channel and the Discovery Channel. I hope that my written question helped that outcome. However, none of my American friends to whom I have spoken recently has yet seen the advert. I therefore ask the minister which channels are showing it and at what times. Michael Fry has certainly been publicising the homecoming. He said that Burns was an alcoholic, racist misogynist. I am sure that Michael Fry was being public spirited and that he simply wants to publicise the year of homecoming through this controversy. I really admire Burns, who, like so many other Scottish heroes, was active during the Scottish enlightenment, which led the world between 1740 and 1800. In 1760, Voltaire said: "To see real civilisation you must now go to Edinburgh." I believe that everyone should read the excellent book "The Scottish Enlightenment" by the Jewish New York professor, Arthur Herman, a man  without a drop of Scottish blood in his veins, who simply says that the Scots invented the modern world. There were Scots like Robert Adam, the greatest ever British architect, who designed the White House; David Hume, the philosopher; John McAdam; George Stephenson; Thomas Telford—if only we had him today to build us a new Forth road bridge; John Witherspoon, who founded Princeton University, the greatest university of the English speaking world, which was based on the University of Edinburgh; Andrew Carnegie, the steel magnate who gave the world 1,000 libraries; and great inventors like Alexander Bell and James Watt. We should never forget that the River Clyde in its heyday built one fifth of the world's shipping tonnage and that Paisley was the largest cotton manufacturer in the world. We should remember, too, that the American constitution was written by a Scot, typeset by another Scot and printed by Scots because they were the best—Audubon's "Birds of America", the most valuable book ever printed, was printed in Edinburgh. Last but not least, of course, is the hero Adam Smith, the great Conservative and founder of modern economic theory. However, the mythical, romantic heart of Scotland that is longed for by the diaspora is in the Highlands. I will highlight some of the varied events that visitors can look forward to, including the westering home to Islay weekends; the roots and boughs, summer in the straths events that are being organised by the communities of the Mackay country; and the clan Ross gathering. World-famous events such as the Connect music festival at Inveraray and the Hebridean Celtic festival will also be very important in 2009. I must also advertise the family history centre in the National Archives of Scotland on Princes Street, which is a wonderful facility in a beautifully restored Georgian building that contains the very latest information technology. Anyone can go in there to trace their roots. I pay tribute to George Mackenzie, the keeper of the records of Scotland for initiating—

Is that the end? Thank you, Presiding Officer.

Does the minister acknowledge the concerns among residents of Argyll and Bute's 12 sheltered housing schemes, run by Argyll Community Housing Association, who have recently seen their warden services cut as a result of funding problems? Do those residents not deserve better services, rather than a diminution of services, from the Scottish National Party Government?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will provide an update on how the new liquor licensing laws are affecting businesses. (S3O-5159)

Yes, but does the minister accept that many small guest houses, bed and  breakfasts and small retail units throughout my region of the Highlands and Islands—and, I dare say, elsewhere in Scotland—face crippling rises in licensing fees as a result of the Licensing (Fees) (Scotland) Regulations 2007, and that many of those businesses have either closed down or stopped serving alcoholic refreshments as a result? Given his Government's much-trumpeted desire to boost tourism in Scotland, what action will the minister take to stop even more tourism enterprises being driven out of business because of the level of the fees?

Yes I do, but we did that.

While I am totally against the indiscriminate poisoning of raptors, what is the minister doing to address the on-going problem of introduced sea eagles killing and eating the lambs of crofters and farmers in the Highlands and Islands?

rose—

Will the member take an intervention?

When I spoke in a previous Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee debate, I was wrongly accused of having let myself be "got at". I trust that I will not have to endure such an attack today. I am pleased to speak in this short debate about changes to the title and remit of the Audit Committee. I believe that the proposed changes are positive and that the clarity that they will create will be welcomed both by members of the public and by those who are involved in the vital audit process throughout public spending in Scotland. The changes were recommended by the session 2 Audit Committee in its legacy paper, in which members understandably expressed concern about the perceived function of the Audit Committee being one only of internal parliamentary audit. I am pleased that the  Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee was able to act on the previous Audit Committee's suggestion and that it found consensus among those who gave evidence. Changing the both title of the Audit Committee, so that it will become the public audit committee, and its remit will ensure that members of the public are left in no doubt that the committee has a locus in wider audit issues relating to public spending within the devolved remit of the Parliament. I agree with the Auditor General for Scotland that the public will understand the title—the public audit committee—and I commend to my fellow members the changes to both the title and the remit, which will mean that the committee will be able to consider reports that are referred to it by the bureau or the Auditor General. The changes will be good for the public audit committee, good for the committee system and good for the reputation of the Parliament as a whole.

With regard to the committee's report on the period of time for elections to the SPCB, the committee is agreed on a commonsense and pragmatic recommendation that has attracted general support. A period of 20 sitting days after a general election will allow for more flexibility, which the Parliament might require after future general elections. Most of us would agree that the neatest arrangement would be for the selection of a First Minister to precede elections to the SPCB, as the selection of a First Minister has a ripple-down effect on the selection of ministerial and shadow ministerial teams and on parties' choice of representatives for the SPCB. I trust that all members of the Parliament will concur with the committee's proposal, which is essentially a tidying-up exercise. Before I sit down, I record my thanks to the committee's clerking team for its assistance in preparing the two reports.

I apologise to Johann Lamont. The figure of 38 per cent that I cited for male victims was incorrect—the true figure is 15 per cent, which is still highly significant. The Scottish Conservatives welcome today's debate and the launch of the consultation on this important issue. Following the passage of the United Kingdom Government's Forced Marriage (Civil Protection) Act 2007, it is right for Scotland to consider whether legislative measures are required here to tackle the problem and, if so, what the most appropriate measures might be. Politicians here must be measured and take a gradual approach in coming to judgments on this extremely sensitive and complex issue. The Scottish Conservatives agree strongly with the distinction that the motion makes between forced marriage—in which one or both members of the marriage are forced to marry against their free will, and which often involves abduction, abuse or imprisonment—and arranged marriages, to which both parties give their free consent. We recognise and respect the fact that arranged marriages have played and continue to play a significant role in the culture of some of our religious and ethnic minority communities. We  support strongly the right of people in those communities, for whom arranged marriages are a cultural norm, to continue to use that model, which we recognise has operated successfully for families and individuals for many generations. As I said, our judgments must be measured. The Scottish Parliament can send a strong and unified message today that forced marriage violates basic human rights. Any British citizen should be able to look to their legislators and Government to protect them against such fundamental infringements of their human rights. When doing research for my speech, I found it difficult to discover hard statistical information on the extent of forced marriages in Scotland. Since its establishment a few years ago, the Foreign Office's dedicated forced marriage unit has tended to deal with about 300 cases a year in the UK. I am aware of alarming evidence that suggests that that number has risen significantly in the past year, but I do not know the reason for that. I share the opinion of many campaigners that forced marriage is likely to be massively underreported, as many people are too scared or are unable to report it to the authorities. The research that the Council of British Pakistanis (Scotland) did in 2004 for its incompatible marriages project suggests that the incidence of forced marriage is much higher and that it accounts for half the marriages that involve an Asian who lives in Scotland and a partner from outside the UK. It is clear that forced marriage affects children, teenagers and adults from all races and religions, including Christians, Hindus, Jews, Muslims and Sikhs. We all need to make it clear that although the problem is significant in the Indian, Pakistani and Bangladeshi communities, it is not just a problem for our Asian communities. Every year, cases in the UK involve the middle east, the western Balkans and Africa, as well as other places. About 90 per cent of forced marriages that involve a UK citizen take place abroad. Many who look at the issue from the outside see it as a problem that affects women, but it affects men, too. The Foreign Office's forced marriage unit calculates that about 15 per cent of the cases that it deals with involve reports by male victims. The Council of British Pakistanis (Scotland) suggested in 2004 that no less than 38 per cent of victims were male—that is where I got the figure that I cited to Johann Lamont. We need to bear in mind that factor at all times and to ensure that the solutions that are offered suit women and men. I suspect that underreporting by men is even greater, because of stigma and fear among male victims. Awareness raising is important, not least so that  victims—who often have little formal education and might have no English or poor English—know their rights and what help is available. In 2006, the UK Government ran the you have a right to choose campaign, which used a series of radio and press adverts, television fillers and posters. It usefully involved two well-known Asian actors—Meera Syal and Ameet Chana. We need to be imaginative about communicating most effectively on this sensitive subject and to take different approaches that are tailored to different communities' needs. I commend the BBC documentary producers who created this week's excellent "This World" programme, entitled "Forced to Marry". It brought vividly to the screen the human misery that is involved, which we must all work to eradicate. For anyone who did not see it, it is available on the BBC iPlayer, and I recommend it. The Scottish Conservatives acknowledge the good work of the forced marriage network, which the previous Scottish Executive established, in bringing people together. We pay tribute to the charities and individuals who campaign to raise awareness of forced marriage and to support victims. We hope that the forced marriage network will continue to play a positive role throughout the consultation and beyond. The Scottish Conservatives are pleased to contribute to the debate. We are happy to support the Government's motion, as it is right to deal with this difficult subject on a cross-party basis. We look forward to many individuals and organisations taking part in the consultation and to the consultation's results. If, after taking account of the UK Government's Forced Marriage (Civil Protection) Act 2007, the Scottish Government decides that legislation is required, we will of course seek to work constructively to ensure that the legislation is as effective as possible, in the interests of all victims and potential victims of forced marriage.

Does the member acknowledge that 38 per cent of the victims in forced marriages are male?

It is interesting to note that the public school near Slough, which was attended by our Presiding Officer; David Cameron, the leader of the Tories; and me, and which endeavoured to teach me to speak properly, always celebrated St Andrew's day as a holiday. It did so out of respect for Scotland, which it considered to be a very important part of the United Kingdom. Many thanks are due to Dennis Canavan for all the work that he did to get the St Andrew's Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Bill on the statute book. I am happy to see him sitting in the public gallery today. The debate has been useful and interesting. The Conservatives have long argued that extending tourism throughout the year is crucial to the future of Scotland's tourism sector and more general economic success, not least in my region of the Highlands and Islands, where tourism is the largest source of income and provider of employment. We are very successful at attracting visitors in summer, but less successful in winter when, relatively speaking, tourism spend is even more important. We welcome the opportunity that St Andrew's day provides as part of a winter festival and an introduction to the year of homecoming, of which we are wholly supportive. However, we feel that more could have been done to link St Andrew's day 2008 to the beginning of the year of homecoming in 2009. We are not going to have such a valuable opportunity very often. I think that we would all agree that we cannot underestimate the potential for Scotland of the year of homecoming. We heard yesterday about the vast nature of the Scottish diaspora and I agree with the speakers who have highlighted its importance. Professor Tom Devine summed it up effectively when he said: "The effect of the Scottish Diaspora was total—economic, political, cultural, social, scientific and educational—and on a massive scale from the medieval period onwards."  The result is a market of millions of people throughout the world who instinctively feel warmth and some kind of loyalty towards this country. The audience of those across the globe who have some appreciation of Robert Burns—surely one of the greatest poetic talents the world has ever produced—is greater still. It is vital that opportunities are grasped to reach out to those who are related to the Scots pioneers who travelled all over the world and to tell them that they and their families are warmly invited to come and visit modern Scotland to rediscover their familial roots while enjoying what Scotland has to offer to the visitor. People will always enjoy Scotland when they get here; we must give them more reasons to come. Genealogical and historical tourism is important to Scotland, and I am glad to see an eminent and familiar Scottish historian, Michael Fry, sitting in the public gallery. The recently opened family history centre at the National Archives of Scotland on Princes Street is a wonderful facility. I pay tribute to George Mackenzie, the keeper of the records of Scotland, and his team who secured that development in time for the year of homecoming. The centre will be well used by people from all over the planet who are researching their Scottish family trees. Following the enactment of the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill, which I introduced, George Mackenzie is now also the keeper of tartans. The Scottish register of tartans is neatly located within the National Archives of Scotland, so that people who are researching their Scottish family roots can find out about their tartan at the same time and, hopefully, invest in some quality, Scottish-made tartan. That was one of the driving aims behind my bill, and I hope that the Scottish register of tartans will be heavily promoted by ministers throughout the year of homecoming. I will do my bit whenever I can. I encourage anyone who would like to indulge in a bit of patriotism to don their kilt for St Andrew's day. If they do not yet own a kilt, there would be no better day to go out and invest in one—as long as it is made by one of our fine Scottish kilt manufacturers. Yesterday, I asked the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, Jim Mather, what he was doing to promote the wearing of the kilt during the year of homecoming. He said that he was turning his mind to that. I was interested to hear about the plans for the homecoming in the Highlands, and I welcome the co-ordinated relationship between the Scottish Government and Highland Council on that. Robbie Burns spoke for many of us when he said: "My heart's in the Highlands, wherever I go."  On St Andrew's day in the Highlands, the street party that is planned for Inverness, with the Red Hot Chilli Pipers, will, I am sure, prove popular—as will the visit-for-free day that John Farquhar Munro mentioned. That initiative will extend to some of the Highlands' tourism gems, including the Blackhouse on Lewis, the Highland wildlife park at Kincraig, Fort George and Urquhart castle. The Highlands epitomise Scotland in so many ways. They are Scotland's heartland and its heartbeat. I hope that the events that are planned for the Highlands are successful and demonstrate to the world the modern, vibrant, dynamic country that Scotland is—a country that has some of the best mountain, land and seascapes in the whole world. We should not forget that St Andrew was the first of the apostles and also a fisherman. There is something appropriate about Scotland having a patron saint who was a fisherman. The Scottish Conservatives are positive about St Andrew's day, especially the role that it can play in kick-starting winter tourism. As unionists, we are proud to celebrate St Andrew's day, which is a Scottish national holiday, not a Scottish National Party holiday—let us not forget that. We look to the Scottish Government and all its agencies to do everything in their power to ensure that we reap the full benefits of the year of homecoming in 2009. It is of massive importance to the future of tourism in this country and the future success of our economy. I support the amendment in the name of my colleague, Ted Brocklebank.

To ask the First Minister what recent discussions the Scottish Government has had on the future of the forestry sector. (S3F-1219)

The Scottish Conservatives have long argued that the private sector has a big part to play in ensuring that Scotland has a dynamic forestry sector. Therefore, we welcome the Government's plans to consider leasing off around 25 per cent of forests. That said, we recognise the legitimate concerns that exist among Forestry Commission staff in Scotland. Will the First Minister state clearly today that, if his Government goes ahead with the proposal, he will guarantee that there will be no compulsory redundancies, that the terms and conditions of transferred workers will remain the same, and that current arrangements for access to Scotland's forests will remain in force?

Does Ross Finnie agree that it is possible to improve the square-mesh panel so that it is better than the grid, which the fishermen do not seem to want?

I am grateful for the chance to speak once again in a fisheries debate. However, rather than speak about fish, I wish to speak about the people who fish for them and the people on the mainland whose jobs depend on the industry: we should never forget that for every job at sea there are four on land. Fishing is one of Scotland's most important primary industries, so it is absurd that the Scottish fishing fleet, which has done more for conservation measures than any other fleet in Europe, has continually to bear more pain than any other fleet in the EU. I am well aware of the impact that the meteoric rise in fuel prices—which doubled between 2007 and 2008 from 30p to 60p a litre for marine diesel—had on the fishing industry, particularly on smaller vessels, many of which simply had to stop fishing. Fuel prices have since reduced, but we must ensure that our Government is better prepared should that happen again, especially as fishermen from other member states received direct help with their fuel costs through de minimis aid payments, which also put our fishing people at a competitive disadvantage. Others have mentioned the appalling waste and the damage to the marine environment that are caused by discards. Can anyone member justify throwing dead fish back into the sea? It makes a mockery of the CFP. I would like to concentrate on the problems on the west coast and sector VI A. In the north-west, we still have 10 large boats fishing for white fish off the edge of the shelf on the 100 fathom contour line. The Commission proposes to close all fishing for white fish inside the line and to make boats that fish for prawns inside the line use grids to stop any white fish from going into the net. I am sure that the minister will have talked to prawn fishermen who will have told him that it is pretty much  impossible for the smaller boats that use power blocks to use those grids. As the minister knows, those 10 large vessels in the north-west will be tied to days next year, which means that, when the kilowatt days that those boats have saved in the past run out, they will have insufficient days to make a living. Ironically, French and Spanish boats that are fishing in sector VI A will not be tied to days because their catch of cod is under 5 per cent—according to them. Basically, in that case, unless the minister can secure extra quota of monkfish and megrim for our fleet, he will be leaving that area of the north-west coast to French and Spanish boats at the expense of our own fleet. I know that the minister said that foreign vessels do not fish that area—I presume that he was referring to dedicated prawn vessels rather than to whitefish vessels. Will he please fight for the extra quota for monkfish and megrim, in order to give those fishermen a chance to earn a living? Because of the under 5 per cent rule, the smaller artisanal boats that fish for prawns in sector VI A will be able to continue to fish. However, because of the new cod recovery plan, the effort on the west coast is facing a reduction of 25 per cent. The cod recovery plan proposes to eliminate that reduction in return for good behaviour. The rules for this buy-back must be rapidly established, and those groups of fishermen that might benefit from the entitlement should be consulted. Will the minister please do that as soon as possible? Will he consult the west coast fishing associations on that as a matter of utmost urgency? It has been pointed out to me that the cod recovery plan allows the possibility of excusing from the plan vessels that catch less than 1.5 per cent of cod. If that turns out to be practical, it should be taken further, with a view to implementation. Earlier, I mentioned the grids that the EU wants Scottish fishermen to use. The fishermen do not think a great deal of the idea—in fact, the chairman of one association suggested implementing a grid to eliminate a large proportion of MEPs' expenses. If the proposal is not amended, it will prohibit scallop fishing altogether. There are two main questions. First, is the grid appropriate for the west coast, in conservation and practical terms? Secondly, even if it is, is there a net configuration that could be adopted that would avoid having to use the grid? Square-mesh panels are a good conservation measure and could be made to work better if they were put nearer to the cod end of the net. I know that fishermen in mixed fisheries—that is, demersal and prawns—do not want a square-mesh panel of above 110mm, and they want a cod-end mesh of a minimum of 80mm. However, the Clyde Fishermen's Association has  proposed for the clean nephrops fishery—which has an extremely small by-catch—a non-mandatory alternative of 160mm square-mesh panel set closer to the back end of the net. That proposal fits in well with the good-behaviour practice that would allow prawn fishing to continue. It also fits in with the European Commission's proposal that a more flexible approach is required to allow genuine conservation measures to be taken where they are most needed, while helping the industry to benefit from recovery once that recovery has taken root. It is vital that the minister consider that matter. I am somewhat horrified to see that the 2008 autumn fisheries negotiation paper, which is headed "UK Priorities", has no reference whatsoever to the west coast closure. That is simply scandalous, so I hope that the minister will highlight that dangerous situation.

In fact, I had just concluded them, Presiding Officer.

I congratulate Stuart McMillan on securing the debate. Sailing and boating is of real economic importance throughout my region of the Highlands and Islands. It sustains many jobs, including some in remote and rural areas. My region has some of the most spectacular scenery for boating and sailing in Europe, if not the world—notably the cruising waters of the Western Isles seaboard, which are undoubtedly the finest and most unspoilt in Europe. Many years ago I crewed on a charter vessel, which was a converted Danish fishing boat—I still have wonderful memories of the voyages to places such as the Shiant Isles and St Kilda, and I would love to go back there again. The Brewin Dolphin Scottish series 2009 competition, formerly known as the Bell Lawrie series, will take place next May at Tarbert on Loch Fyne, as it has done for more than 30 years. With hundreds of entrants from around the world competing in more than a dozen races, the event has put many thousands of pounds into the local economy and is a wonderful advertisement for Scotland's top-class facilities and waters. I note and warmly welcome the fact that Tarbert Harbour Authority has been working successfully  with the Crown Estate to invest in new pontoons to ensure that Tarbert remains a world-class location. I welcome the setting up last year of the Scottish boating alliance, and I commend its work so far in speaking up for waterborne recreation and tourism in Scotland. I agree with many of the sector's aims—notably that policy makers and planners should consult it more, and that more priority should be given to adapting existing redundant coastal facilities for leisure use. I am a member of Oban Bay Marine in my native Argyll. It is a community company that aims to promote and develop improvements in Oban bay to provide facilities for local and visiting pleasure and commercial vessels up to 24m. It has just won planning permission to install multi-use short-stay 60-berth pontoons. That will be a major enhancement of facilities, and I look forward to many new sailing visitors being attracted to Oban as a result. Oban is, after all, the gateway to the isles. The funding model that is being used has delivered excellent results through Tobermory Harbour Association and allows access to funds from HIE, the Crown Estate, the Big Lottery Fund and the European Union. It is interesting that the Crown Estate seems to be increasingly helpful in recent times—that is a great thing. Elsewhere in my region, the Moray Firth partnership has provided me with an excellent briefing on recreational boating in the Moray Firth. The work of the partnership is to be commended for bringing together a massive 640 members, including businesses, schools and councils. I warmly welcome its plans for a year-long study in 2009 that will examine marine recreation and tourism in the Moray Firth. Yachtsmen have told me that east coast harbours sometimes close to yachts in bad weather, which is obviously worrying. The joy of the west coast is found in the shelter and protection that the sea lochs and islands provide. It is imperative, however, that visiting boats can pick up fuel stores and water at as many points as possible. We should perhaps learn from the French region of Languedoc-Roussillon, which has great facilities for yachtsmen nearly every 30 miles. Egypt has also learned the importance of marine tourism; we could take a leaf out of its book. I am aware of the contribution that participation in sailing and boating can make towards good physical and mental health and wellbeing. It can be highly educational for our young people—it engenders teamwork and other such qualities that employers so often look for. I commend the work that local sailing clubs do in my region and throughout Scotland in encouraging young people to become involved, and I ask the minister to  indicate what further support can be given to those clubs. The Scottish Conservatives agree with Stuart McMillan's motion and hope that through positive and continuing engagement with the sailing and boating sector at every level of government and by key partner organisations such as the Crown Estate and British Waterways, it can expand throughout the country in the years ahead.

Will the minister implement the recommendation of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee that the fire and rescue service, which has massive experience, should be tasked with co-ordinating flood rescue activities?

I simply referred to the fact that the turbines have not got any clothes on.

I, too, congratulate Dave Thompson on securing today's debate. I pay tribute to all those who have been involved in the Highlands and Islands Community Energy Company, and I wish the company's transition to Community Energy Scotland every success. As others have said, the potential for renewable energy in my region, the Highlands and Islands, is massive, and we would all agree that community involvement from the beginning is crucial to the success of renewable energy projects. There have been some good examples of such involvement. Dave Thompson stole my thunder and the joke that I was going to tell about the three naked ladies—the three turbines on the isle of Gigha, which made £100,000 profit for the community in their first year. Last night, along with my Highlands and Islands colleagues, I took part in a seminar hosted by Viking Energy on its proposed Shetland wind farm, which would rely on a subsea cable between Shetland and the east coast of Moray. Such operations will help people in Shetland to keep the high standard of living to which they have become accustomed thanks to the oil revenues of the past, which will not last for ever. I have just read the First Minister's call for a North Sea supergrid partnership as a milestone in Scotland becoming the green energy capital of Europe. It is a great concept, as long as it is backed up by practical suggestions on how that can be achieved. If we are going to be the capital, we must start with a few counties. A constituent on the Isle of Jura has expressed his huge frustration at not being able to take forward a small-scale hydro scheme because of the lack of infrastructure on the island. We need a Government that has a real energy strategy and gives a steer on the form that energy production should take and the infrastructure that will carry it. I live in Argyll and Bute, where a good many wind farms are situated near hydro stations of the past  because the infrastructure already exists to carry the electricity. We cannot put the cart before the horse. This morning, listening to BBC Radio 4, I heard that Ironbridge coal-fired power station had not met the European Union acid rain regulations and so is due to close down, along with eight or nine other coal-fired power stations. Add to those the four nuclear power stations that are due to go into decommissioning by 2015, and one can begin to understand why there are already warnings about the energy gap and lights going out everywhere. New nuclear power stations offer an answer because they are carbon neutral, but on the principle that it is never wise to put all one's eggs into one basket, community energy projects are to be desired and encouraged. The Scottish Conservatives will certainly encourage them wherever they are appropriate. I emphasise to the minister the difficulties that are being faced by small hydro schemes that have to abide by the new controlled activities regulations to which Scotland signed up under the European water framework directive. The licences that are now required are making the job far more expensive in Scotland than in England. Small hydro schemes are ideal for the Scottish climate and topography and they should be encouraged rather than held back by the CARs. I ask the minister to comment on that particular problem.

The building of affordable houses is vital for social rented housing. Will the minister revert to the previous rules for housing association grants, under which far higher levels of grant were given to associations than is the case under the new rules? Does he accept that the new rules are seriously inhibiting the building sector, housing associations and, above all, families that need homes?

Is the member saying that the white-tailed sea eagle is not related to the vulture?

I welcome this debate, as I welcomed the publication of the strategy document earlier in the year. I agree with the framework strategy's stark message that the impact of non-native invasive species ranks second only to habitat loss and destruction as a threat to the world's ecosystems, and is one of the major factors causing biodiversity loss. The impact of non-native species in Scotland, in particular in my region of the Highlands and Islands, is already significant in a number of areas. I was pleased to speak in Murdo Fraser's recent debate on protecting Scotland's red squirrel from its invasive American grey cousin, and I pay tribute to Murdo Fraser for his work on that issue. Signal crayfish are another obvious example of a misguided importation. As someone who is massively aware of the importance of salmon fishing to the economy of his region and as a keen fisherman, I was interested in and encouraged by the recent media coverage of efforts to keep the pernicious Gyrodactylus salaris parasite from entering the United Kingdom. I agree with the Spey fishery board that the economic and ecological consequences of Gyrodactylus salaris entering the country would be catastrophic. We must guard our GS-free status, which means that everyone must know that, if they come back from a fishing trip in Finland, France, Germany, Norway, Portugal, Russia, Spain or Sweden, they must disinfect their fishing gear to ensure that the highly contagious parasite is destroyed. I hope that the cabinet secretary will do what he called on the then Government to do in an amendment to the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill in 2007.  I stress that large escapes of farmed rainbow trout or salmon into a wild fishery environment are every bit as bad as the introduction of a non-native species, and I hope that the minister has taken that on board as well. It would be remiss of me not to use this opportunity to raise my constituents' concerns about the reintroduction of species that have certainly not been native to Scotland in recent times and which many argue could be invasive or, at the very least, have a significant impact on biodiversity. Those species are, the minister will be pleased to hear, the European beaver and the sea eagle. From the significant amount of correspondence that we have received, Mr Russell will be aware of my interest in those issues on behalf of my constituents. I know that the Association of Salmon Fishery Boards recently wrote to the minister outlining its opposition to the reintroduction project, pointing out the complete lack of any objective appraisal or scientific studies of the impact of beavers on salmon and sea trout populations.

Many of my constituents simply do not see the beaver trial as a reintroduction, because they are not convinced that beavers ever lived in Argyll. I draw the minister's attention to the escape of swamp beavers in East Anglia in the 1940s. The few that escaped had become 200,000 by the late 1950s and, due to the huge damage that they did to drainage and irrigation systems, a costly eradication scheme was undertaken, which was completed only in 1989. At least beavers do not predate on animals or fish, unlike mink, whose numbers have again multiplied in Scotland, and which cause widespread death and destruction to other animals and fish. On sea eagles, I am grateful to Michael Russell for acknowledging the sheer desperation of crofters in the Gairloch and elsewhere in Ross-shire, who have had many lambs killed. I met many of those crofters recently, at a packed public meeting in Poolewe. Although SNH will study the diet of the Gairloch sea eagles next year, can the minister guarantee that the management scheme options that are available in other areas will be made available to my constituents in Ross-shire without delay? My crofting constituents in Ross-shire should not be discriminated against, as is happening at the moment. Will the minister also take into account the RSPB's admission that sea eagles predate heavily on sea birds, especially fulmars, which are a highly regarded species? I  cannot believe that the minister wants to treat the fulmar purely as a larder species for predators. Today, the RSPB voiced concerns about the fall in numbers of Arctic terns, guillemots and skuas. What is the RSPB doing to protect those birds, and the fulmars, from sea eagle predation? Sea eagles are cousins of the vultures that used to wheel over burned-out wagon trains in the Arizona desert. They are magnificent birds, but they are also magnificent killers. Crofters and farmers can shoot a dog or fox that kills their lambs, but they can hardly say boo to a sea eagle. The birds may be encouraging tourism in Mull, but they are not encouraging many people in Wester Ross. What will the minister do about that? When will he do something about it? Today's debate is important. I welcome the Scottish Government's recognition that close co-operation on major environmental issues is required between governmental and other organisations at national level. However, close co-operation between Government and people whose livelihoods may be affected by the introduction of non-native species is also required.

I will sum up. It is important that people are included in the equation. That point should guide us constantly as we move forward. I do not want to give the impression of being against all reintroduction—

Thank you.

The cabinet secretary mentioned angling. He must know that many anglers are worried about the possible introduction of the parasite Gyrodactylus salaris. In 2007, he lodged an amendment to the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill, in which he asked the Government of the day "to promote at points of entry into the rest of Great Britain measures designed to prevent the entry into Scotland ... of clothing or equipment which had been used in any" affected waters. Does the minister stand by that stated wish? The previous Government did not do it. Will he do it now?

To ask the Scottish Executive, in light of further job losses at Scotland's largest Harris tweed mill, Kenneth Mackenzie, and the potential impact on home weavers in the islands, what  action the Scottish Government can take to save this old-established industry for the Western Isles. (S3O-4585)

Does the minister share the concern of businesspeople who are involved in the tweed sector that the industry's present structure and position are not conducive to attracting private equity? Given the importance of Harris tweed to the livelihood of many weavers in Lewis, and given the social aspects, will he reconsider the industry's demands for extra funding for the Harris Tweed Authority and a strategy to deal with mill financing needs that exceed what is available from private sources?

I am grateful to members for their speeches, the scope and quality of which have shown just how strongly we Scots feel about tartan. Love them or loathe them, the plaid and the philabeg always provoke debate and, often, argument, and long may they do so. I should say that I consider praise from David Whitton to be of great quality. I have worked with the tartan experts on the options for a Scottish register of tartans since 2001, and the road has indeed been a long and winding one. It has also been educational and, on occasion, extremely rocky. Now, at last, we stand on the cusp of achieving the shared and long-held ambition of tartan experts, enthusiasts and the tartan industry of taking tartan to a new national level for the benefit of all. I therefore urge members to support my bill at stage 3, including Mr Whitton's helpful late addition. I am delighted that the Scottish Government will link the register to its wider plans for the homecoming in 2009, which will mark the 250 th anniversary of the birth of one of the greatest Scots, Robert Burns. I understand that the homecoming year will not only celebrate the work of Burns and Scotland's impressive heritage but look to the future, taking pride in the creativity and energy of modern Scotland. Of course, although he was a lowlander, Burns made references to tartan in poems such as, "My Nanie, O", "Highland laddie" and "The Jolly Beggars". In the last of those, Burns writes: "With his Philabeg an' tartan Plaid,  An' guid claymore down by his side,  The ladies' hearts he did trepan,  My gallant, braw John Highlandman." I am convinced that the tartan register can add value to the wider effort that is being undertaken with regard to the year of homecoming by helping to preserve an important part of our historic and cultural identity while working to promote tartan and our tartan industry in today's Scotland. When the first version of the bill was debated in February 2007, I indicated to the Parliament that an industry steering group had approached me some years before about such a bill. That group involved key players who have helped me to get the bill to this point. They are still working with us, and I am glad to see that some of them are in the public gallery today, monitoring the bill's progress—they are not prepared to leave me alone. They are the holders of the existing private registers. In particular, mention needs to be made of Brian Wilton, of the Scottish Tartans Authority, and Keith Lumsden, of the Scottish Tartans World Register, who have shared their tartan records with the new register. Those gentlemen, and  others with them, are owed a debt of gratitude for their vision and their generosity of spirit. They have donated their life's work for the public good, and I thank them. I must also thank the former Lord Lyon King of Arms, Robin Blair, who has passed the heraldic torch to the current Lord Lyon King of Arms, David Sellar, both of whom have provided invaluable support for the register proposals along with Alistair Campbell of Airds, the previous Unicorn Pursuivant. There has been immense and constant support from representatives of the Scottish tartan industry, particularly from Deirdre Kinloch Anderson of Kinloch Anderson of Leith and Nick Fiddes of Scotweb. I thank the Urquharts and the late James Scarlett for their contributions, and my wife, Emma, my mother, Mary, and my former assistant, Joanna Mowat, for their research. In my first attempt at a bill, I was ably helped by David Cullum, Rodger Evans and Alison Wilson of the Parliament's non-Executive bills unit. Latterly, I have received outstanding support from Mike McElhinney, who is a remarkable civil servant. He is head of the Scottish Government's manufacturing policy branch; he used to be private secretary to the previous First Minister, Jack McConnell. Is he not lucky to have spent such a productive spell with the Conservatives? That will certainly have done him a lot of good; his work certainly did me a lot of good. It is an achievement that his gift for diplomacy has helped to produce a Conservative member's bill that will, I hope, achieve the support not only of the Government but of all the other parties that are represented in the Parliament. I also thank the former Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Allan Wilson, of the Labour Party, without whom the bill might never have happened, and, of course, the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, Jim Mather, who has been utterly supportive from the outset and throughout the process; he has made a lot possible for me. I am sure that I have missed out many other people who have been supportive, but they are too numerous to mention. They know who they are. We had long discussions about the bill. Sometimes those discussions were animated, but they were always informed and reasoned. I was struck by the genuine willingness of the people involved to work through issues in order to find common ground and to set out a workable set of proposals for a register. That is where we stand now. I am grateful to them for supporting my bill. The collective efforts of those individuals and others are the foundations on which the register will be built. The collective input of so many people will help the register to become a definitive  repository of expertise and knowledge on, and a focal point for, tartan. I have said before that tartan belongs to Scotland. Its roots are in Scotland, but its branches spread worldwide. Scotland is the Mecca for tartan, and the bill will keep it so. Tartan is an immediately recognisable symbol of identity—it is the sort of symbol for which any other country would give its eye teeth. We must not—indeed, I believe that we will not—underestimate the importance of tartan as our Scottish brand. However, we cannot and must not stop at that. If members agree to pass my bill, as I hope they will, we will have given the industry the very thing that it has wished for for so long. Parliament will have done its bit, and public sector partners in the National Archives of Scotland stand ready to do their bit. The challenge now is for the Scottish tartan industry to do its bit—to seize the opportunities that the register will create to promote Scottish tartans and to market tartans that are designed, produced and owned in Scotland as authentic, high-quality products. Our tartan heritage rightly instils great pride. Many people have died for their tartans in bloody battles in clan wars and the two world wars in recent times. The magnificence and splendour and the colour and grace of Highland dress make me grateful to characters of the past such as Sir Walter Scott, who recognised the importance of tartan and promoted it at a crucial time. The bill is another chapter in the Scottish tartan story. I hope that there will be many spin-offs, including perhaps a world-class tartan museum with tartan artefacts and manuscripts, of which there are many. Amusingly, one of them is the tartan underwear that was worn by Queen Victoria's famous consort, John Brown—known as John Brown's underpants—which I believe are now in Keith. I will again quote the words that are written in the excellent tartan section of the Kelvingrove art gallery and museum: "When you see tartan, you immediately think of Scotland. It's a powerful symbol for the Scots—so powerful that Government"— a Whig Government— "once banned people from wearing tartan. Tartan is now a huge success story. It graces the catwalks of London and Paris, finding its way into the hearts (and the carrier bags) of most visitors to Scotland." I hope that, today, the Parliament will go some way towards rectifying the banning of tartan by a Westminster Whig Government. Perhaps we will dress tomorrow with a slightly different perspective.

I very much welcome this stage 3 debate and it gives me great pleasure to present my bill on a Scottish register of tartans for its final round of parliamentary scrutiny. I welcomed the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's detailed and thoughtful scrutiny of the bill. Members will have gleaned from Mr Whitton's eloquent and incisive remarks when he moved amendment 1 that debates in the committee were lively, thoughtful and informed. In particular, the debate about tartan's importance from the perspectives of wovenists, modernists and pragmatists caught the attention of not only the committee, but the Parliament during the stage 1 debate and during the debate on the stage 3 amendment. The committee's input helped to shape, improve and enhance the bill. I can say with confidence that the support of members of all parties has helped to improve what was already a good bill. In that spirit, I welcomed Mr Whitton's stage 3 amendment, although the committee and I opposed the amendments that Mr Whitton lodged on the matter at stage 2. It is nice that David Whitton has returned from his previously elitist stance to embrace good, old-fashioned egalitarianism. I thank him. I wanted to introduce the best possible bill for a statutory Scottish register of tartans that would be most useful to Scotland, the tartan industry and ancestral tourism. I said from the outset that I wanted my bill to encourage and promote interest in tartan, to take tartan to a national level and to make tartan accessible in ways that have not been possible in the past. Today we stand on the brink of achieving those aspirations. We have the opportunity to deliver a tartans register on a statutory and sustainable basis. There will be the first ever statutory definition of tartan. The National Archives of Scotland will oversee the register and facilitate public access to it. A range of stringent criteria and quality assurance measures will be applied before a new tartan can be included. I hope that the keeper of the records of Scotland, George MacKenzie, will be the new keeper of tartans. He will be a referee for the register.  The register will help to raise interest in and awareness of tartan and will become a focal point for tartan and tartan research. Over time, it will become the authoritative source on one of Scotland's definitive products. The register will have practical and effective linkages to the Scottish tartan industry, with the dual benefit of helping the Scottish industry both to capitalise on the increased interest in tartan that the register will bring and to pursue new commercial opportunities from questions about where and by whom in Scotland tartan can be designed, woven or produced. I have long believed that it is inherently right that we should have a publicly held, statutory register of tartans in Scotland to preserve and promote one of our national iconic products. I also believe that it is inherently right that the register should be independent, publicly held, accessible and sustainable—established permanently and in perpetuity for the Scottish nation. The register will create and preserve a unique archive of tartan designs and, in doing so, preserve an important part of Scotland's national identity and cultural architecture. It will embed that unique archive in Scotland's national archive and open up access to tartan records in ways that were previously not possible while also removing any risk that access to tartan records will be lost or restricted. It will also raise interest in tartan, helping to keep tartan alive and vibrant and to build economic value from what has been a latent brand to date. It will also, I hope, provide a focus for academic, family and genealogical research. I know that the National Archives of Scotland is keen to encourage academic research into tartan and is exploring ways of doing that. The bill is the culmination of long and assiduous work by many in the tartan industry in Scotland and among tartan experts and enthusiasts. I am grateful to them all for their splendid efforts. It will help to promote and preserve tartan as an iconic Scottish product, deeply interwoven with our proud national identity. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill be passed.

I am grateful to Mr Whitton for lodging his amendment. I have to say that I prefer to sing from the wovenist and modernist hymn book. During the bill's passage, the Parliament has heard passionately held and diverging views on tartan, its genesis, its production and how it is worn and used. Those issues have generated and will continue—for ever, I hope—to generate much debate and discussion.  Members might have been surprised by that. However, having worked for a number of years with tartan experts, I am not. I have learned that those long-held and wide-ranging views are immensely valuable to deepening awareness of and debate about tartan. I want those views to continue to contribute, to raise debate, to inform, to educate and to challenge as the register and the keeper become, I hope, operational. Central to the debate has been the significant discussion on the importance of woven tartan, not only to the industry but in history. Historically, tartan has been defined by the fact that it can be—and is—woven. Mr Whitton and I differ on many varied and important issues, but I believe that there is much common ground between what I am trying to achieve with the bill and what Mr Whitton is trying to achieve with his amendment. We agree on the importance of working to promote and grow the Scottish tartan industry, on acting in the interests of the industry as far as we can and on the importance of woven tartan. Indeed, as the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee suggested, I strengthened section 2 of the bill by including in the definition of tartan the words, "capable of being woven", to establish the importance of the woven tartan fabric. It was clear to me from the outset that I wanted to introduce the best possible bill to establish a statutory Scottish register of tartans. However, it is fair to say that I have been willing to take on board views that improve what was already a good bill. I listened to the committee's advice and lodged an amendment on the matter. The committee did not agree to the amendments that Mr Whitton lodged at stage 2, but amendment 1 is differently worded and would give the keeper discretion to seek a woven tartan sample in support of an application for entry on the register, if such a sample had not been provided. I can think of instances where such discretion might be useful. Amendment 1 would give prominence to the importance of woven tartan, as did the amendment that I lodged at stage 2, and it would provide helpful clarification to the keeper and to applicants that a woven sample is important, although not essential, when an application is made. The proposal is workable and will be beneficial. I am happy to accept amendment 1.

I welcome the Scottish Government's plans to improve the Crofters Commission and make it more democratic. Can the minister give more details on how big that democratic element will be and on how the elections will be held? The minister will have anticipated that I would be unhappy about the decision to abolish the bull hire scheme. I believe that that is a retrograde step that will be opposed by many crofters. What guarantees can the minister give us that crofters will be able to utilise private bull hire through the SRDP? What will happen to the Government farms where those bulls have been bred? Could they be used, for example, to help fatten crofters' lambs? The minister talked about the importance of housing to the future of crofting. I agree with him, but he did not give many details. Does he plan to introduce an enhanced croft house grant and loan scheme and, if so, when will it be introduced?

Will the minister consider the management of red squirrels as part of the Scottish rural development programme under the Government's agricultural schemes?

I did not know that the Scottish National Party name for the grey squirrel is the English squirrel, but you learn something new every day. I agree with Peter Peacock: I am often delighted by the antics of grey squirrels in city parks, and I know that they amuse lots of children in the botanic gardens and parks all over Edinburgh. It is unfortunate, however, that where grey squirrels exist in large numbers, red ones are hardly ever seen. I am happy to say that where I live, near the Eredine forest in Argyll, there has been an increase in red squirrels over the past 40 years, until perhaps just recently. There are no grey squirrels in the area, and on my way to Dunoon the other day I saw two red squirrels cross the road on the approach to Dunoon through the Argyll forest park. It is a credit to the Forestry Commission rangers that they have managed to help the red squirrel population through the introduction of squirrel boxes and other measures. The red squirrel is a delightful, harmless, pretty little animal, which makes hearts soar whenever it is seen, and it is certainly worth protecting. I was horrified to see on the map that the Scottish squirrel survey produced two green blobs near Dunoon, which mean that there are now grey squirrels in the vicinity where I saw the red ones. I hope that they do not spread, particularly because  of the threat of squirrel pox, which is carried by the greys and fatal to the reds. From another angle, I was alarmed recently while watching television—I think it was an edition of that very good programme on the BBC, "Autumnwatch". I witnessed a red squirrel literally screaming with fear as it fled the clutches of a pine marten, which was chasing it with obvious intent to kill. Not only grey squirrels pose a threat to red squirrels; the pine marten, which is now prevalent all over Argyll and the north-west, in areas where 20 years ago it was hardly ever seen, does too. I cannot prove where it came from, but rumour has it that it was introduced. As many people who work with poultry will tell you, it is a terrible killer on the ground and in the tree canopy. The sudden multiplication of any predatory species can cause havoc to native species and the biodiversity of an area, and I find it notable that the scientific adviser to SNH said recently that the pine marten should have its protected status removed because of its effect on other species. The first study to assess the impact of pine martens will be published later this year by the RSPB, which set up hidden cameras on 20 different capercaillie nests at Abernethy. It shows pine martens stealing eggs from almost all the nests and suggests that up to 80 per cent of all capercaillie eggs are eaten by pine martens. I wonder how many red squirrels are killed by pine martens. What I saw on "Autumnwatch" suggests that the number could be substantial. I hope that the minister will take note of what SNH and the RSPB are saying, which echoes what gamekeepers in managed areas have been saying for years. He might wish to read the wonderful book "A Hundred Years in the Highlands" by Osgood Mackenzie, the celebrated centenarian who lived at Inverewe. It contains a chapter on pine martens that it would be good for the minister to read. Paragraph 1.3 of "The Invasive Non-Native Species Framework Strategy for Great Britain", which was compiled by the minister's Government, along with the Welsh Assembly Government and the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, states: "The most important direct drivers of biodiversity loss and ecosystem service changes are habitat change ... climate change" and "invasive alien species". It is obvious to me that, to a red squirrel in an area of Scotland that did not previously have grey squirrels, the grey squirrel is indeed an invasive alien species that must be controlled.

Does the minister recognise the excellent work that has been done by Supporters Direct, and has he met it recently to discuss the positive role that it is playing in supporting the development of youth football?

Will the member give way?

I am delighted that Margo MacDonald has chosen for debate today the important topic of the legacy from lottery funding for community sport. I also welcome the fact that she rewrote her motion to address some of the concerns that were being expressed. I note that, although we are debating Scottish sport and sports funding, we all recognise the importance of lottery funding in other sectors, especially the voluntary sector.  The Scottish Conservatives agree with Margo MacDonald that significant national lottery funding is needed in the development of community sport and community sport facilities in Scotland in the run-up to 2014. No one disagrees that some of the money that would otherwise have been destined for sportscotland has gone to support the development of the London 2012 Olympics. Although the Conservatives are happy to be 100 per cent behind the London 2012 games and want everything to be done that will make them a British success story, it is legitimate to argue that some additional lottery funding should, as a consequence, be allocated to grass-roots sports development in Scotland, especially as no lottery money is directly involved in funding the 2014 Commonwealth games in Glasgow, which should also be a British success story. The 2002 Commonwealth games in Manchester did receive funds from the lottery. We agree with the highly respected Louise Martin, who said that, on current funding levels, sportscotland "would not be able to both train elite athletes ahead of the 2014 Games and maintain grassroots support." The Scottish Government's approach of seeking additional lottery support for community sport was endorsed by the Local Government and Communities Committee in its stage 1 report on the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill. The committee noted in section 87 of the report that "the Scottish Government is not now precluded from making a policy decision" to seek "lottery funding, allowing more money to be invested in grass-roots sport development in Scottish communities. The Finance Committee strongly recommends that the Scottish Government pursues this issue, and reports to it on progress as soon as possible. This Committee endorses this recommendation." The UK Government has announced a legacy trust of £40 million for the Olympic games, £34 million of which will come from the national lottery. Perhaps we should consider an equivalent, or something similar, for the 2014 Commonwealth games in Scotland.

I thank the member for that important intervention. As a party, we are proud that it was a Conservative Government that set up the national lottery. Since it was created in 1994 under John Major, more than 300,000 local projects in the UK have benefited from lottery funding totalling more than £21 billion. It is clear that the recent  tremendous success of Britain's Olympians and Paralympians was at least partly due to the decision to introduce a national lottery in 1994. Since 1997, more money could have gone into sport and other good causes. That is why we regret the UK Labour Government's political decisions to divert lottery money into what John Major called—in an excellent Telegraph article on 28 August—Labour's "pet projects". Research suggests that between 1997—when it took power—and 2006, the Blair Administration spent £3.2 billion of national lottery money on schools, hospitals and other state services. That is money that would otherwise have gone into the original five good causes. I am delighted that David Cameron and the Conservatives at Westminster are clearly committed to reforming the national lottery so that it supports only the five original good causes—sport, the arts, heritage, and the voluntary and community sectors. That pledge will be warmly welcomed throughout those sectors. If Labour wants to go to Mars, that is okay with us—but not on lottery funding, please. We all agree that, if we are to secure a lasting legacy from the 2014 games, we must invest now in the sports infrastructure in our communities so that young people—indeed, people of all ages—can work towards the games; so that our top sportsmen and women can hope to achieve medal success; and so that the thousands of others who are inspired by the games to get involved in sport can do so in their communities. Last week, in Jack McConnell's excellent members' business debate on making 2014 a year of sport in Scotland, I mentioned a letter that I had received from a constituent in Lochgilphead, who is in despair. The case is worth mentioning again. She has three children who are members of the Mid Argyll Athletics Club and who have excelled at long and middle-distance running. However, this term, they have had to abandon training altogether because there is no longer a suitable venue since the brand new high school was built with no track and field facilities. That is hugely ironic as many Lochgilphead residents, led by Hugh MacArthur and Bill MacAllum, founded a trust to build running facilities for mid-Argyll youth on the very ground where the new school has now been built. It is hugely frustrating to have young people who are dead keen on athletics and a dedicated coach, but no local facilities. I would be interested to hear the minister's comments on that. The nearest proper running track is in Scotstoun, which is a 200-mile round trip from where my constituent lives. I have also been approached by constituents in the Highlands whose children are involved in competitive rowing. They say that adequate resources are not made available through the Scottish Amateur Rowing Association and they  query the support that rowers receive when they represent their country. I lodged some written questions on that, but I would be grateful to hear more from the minister. I note that there is a special national lottery game —dream number—dedicated to the 2012 Olympics. Perhaps there should be a similar game dedicated to the 2014 Commonwealth games. I hope that all parties in the Parliament will unite to try to secure a positive legacy for Scotland from the 2014 games. That means investing in our communities in the run-up to the games. In its response to the Government's consultation on delivering a lasting legacy for Scotland from the 2014 games, the Health and Sport Committee noted, tellingly: "the committee is acutely aware ... that there is little, if any, evidence that other countries have achieved ongoing legacies as a result of hosting major sporting festivals." We therefore face a real challenge. Let us all try to rise to it and make Scotland an international example of how to secure a lasting legacy for communities.

I am glad that the minister mentioned that. I have never tasted more delicious lamb stovies in my life, and I wish more people tasted them. I commend the efforts of Argyll food producers in setting up a tent at the Connect festival, which brought together a lot of Argyll foods. It was a successful part of the festival, and I thank the minister for mentioning it.

I refer members to my agricultural interests in the register of members' interests. I warmly welcome today's important debate, and not just because of the publication of the RSE, SAC and NFUS reports—all the buses have turned up at once, but thank God they have finally arrived. I welcome the debate because of the severe problems that the sheep farming sector is facing in Scotland and because of the Scottish Government's imminent review of the LFASS.  I recently spent a very useful day in Argyll with sheep farmers and representatives of the National Sheep Association from both England and Scotland, and I also had a meeting with the Argyll section of the NFUS about the LFASS payments, so I am glad to have the opportunity to speak in this debate to highlight the problems that exist and challenge ministers to respond. As John Scott has said, the economic statistics in the SAC report are stark. Hill-breeding sheep flock ewes are losing farmers approximately £26 each, and in suckler cow herds farmers are losing around £280 per cow. Figures such as those are simply not sustainable in any business anywhere, and it is no surprise that Scotland's national sheep flock reduced by 2.3 million to around 7.5 million between 1998 and 2007, which is a 23 per cent reduction. However, the overall figure masks even steeper reductions in parts of my region of the Highlands and Islands, where there have been catastrophic reductions of up to 60 per cent. Sadly, my farming and crofting contacts have suggested to me that the reduction may even have accelerated in the past year because of horrific rises in fuel, feed and fertiliser prices. The impact that the decline in numbers is having on direct employment levels in the sector is enormous. In turn, that is hitting rural jobs and the sustainability of already hard-pressed rural communities. Critical mass is being lost in many ways in many areas, and the sheep farmers who are left are finding it almost impossible to get enough people to gather the sheep and manage the hill flocks. Unless real help is forthcoming now, sheep farming will simply disappear from many Highland areas.

Hang on a minute. The loss of sheep is also changing the nature of Scotland's renowned biodiversity and landscape. Policy makers must bear that important consideration in mind. Hill farmers and crofters are the true rural stewards and guardians of many of the iconic and scenic parts of the Scottish Highlands and Islands, so they have a very important role in tourism. I commend the NFUS for its realistic and positive approach to some of the solutions that need to be considered. On marketing, although I commend Quality Meat Scotland and others' many efforts, we need the Scottish population to eat a bit more lamb and mutton. No one has adequately explained why the Scots eat only 18g of lamb and mutton per week, compared with the English, who eat 51g, and the Welsh, who eat 103g. On genetics, I make no apology for once again urging ministers to confirm that they will support  the continuation in some form of the bull hire scheme in the crofting counties. The need for quality bulls is even more urgent as we face the continued reduction of stock numbers. We must have quality, and that is the way to have it. I ask the minister to respond to that point. I have already had a members' business debate on the matter, and I do not want to have another one. The NFUS, the SAC and the RSE all make important and welcome suggestions on the two key CAP levers that support our hill farming sector—the LFASS and the SFP. I am interested to hear what the minister thinks about clearer cross-compliance within the SFP. Would clearer grazing cross-compliance work in Scotland? Hill grazings should perhaps be grazed at least every five years. The Scottish Conservatives support the continuation of the Scottish beef calf scheme, and we are interested to hear whether ministers believe that the scheme's rules can be changed to allow calves from dairy herds that have been sired by beef bulls to be eligible. That might stop them being shot. As I said in the CAP health check debate in May, I would like ministers to consider what imaginative new measures they can introduce under article 69 to support the retention of sheep in our more marginal areas.

In a moment. We should bear it in mind that, since the 1950s, sheep and cattle numbers have been dictated by Government policy. The present crisis is down to Government policy. The RSE report notes the UK Government's position and says that its effect will be dire. Surely Labour's policy is now redundant. Scotland receives less pillar 2 funding than any other country in the EU. Although the reason for that appalling anomaly might be the fact that allocations are based on historical payment levels, it is inexcusable that the UK Government has failed to negotiate to resolve the situation.

Yes.

There is no doubt that John Scott and the Conservative party have done more for farmers and crofters than any other party in the Parliament. Ensuring that we secure the best possible LFASS system is crucial to the survival of what are left of our hill farms and crofts. Will ministers consider reintroducing the incentive for active farming that the NFUS seeks? Do ministers agree that the introduction of environmental options under the LFASS might support livestock numbers while also delivering tangible environmental benefits? How can the particular needs of our crofters and hill farmers in the remotest parts of the country be more fully recognised? I do not think that the Scottish rural development programme is the answer. Many people pay their so-called voluntary modulation—if people have to pay it, it is compulsory, so I prefer to call it a compulsory clawback tax—but they still cannot get on to the SRDP and they probably have no hope of doing so. What will the minister do about that? I fully agree with the RSE that the overall objective must be "a sustainable future for the Hills and Islands with vibrant and viable human communities". To achieve that, we need to support our hill farming sector far more effectively than we have done. I look to ministers to deliver for the sector. I assure them that they will have my support if they put in place support mechanisms that stem the flow of livestock from our hills and give hill farmers the confidence to carry on in the hope of better times ahead. An Argyll sheep farmer whom I know told me recently that he made more money in two evenings by selling lamb stovies at the Connect music festival in Inveraray than he had made in a whole year from his lambs. Did he make too much money from selling stovies or does he not make enough from selling his lambs?

I congratulate Jack McConnell on securing today's debate and agree with him that 2014 will be a very special year in sport for Scotland. I take this opportunity to congratulate all the medal winners in the GB Paralympic team on their hugely successful performance in this year's games. Like their Olympic colleagues, they have done the United Kingdom proud and have been an inspiration to many of us back home. The Scottish Conservatives are looking forward to the 2014 Glasgow Commonwealth games. We recognise the huge opportunity that the games present both for focusing global attention on Scotland and for encouraging Scots of all ages to become involved in sport. I am sure that many Scots youngsters will have been truly inspired by the performance of our Olympic heroes, such as Chris Hoy, and that many more will be inspired by our elite athletes in the 2012 London Olympics and the 2014 Commonwealth games and, indeed, by our top golfers in the Ryder cup. The Scottish Conservatives are passionate about getting our young people involved in sport and physical activity of all kinds, as can be witnessed in our recent policy announcement on securing Outward Bound education for all children in state schools.  However, the correct infrastructure must be in place to ensure that children's aspirations can be met. The other day, I received a letter from a constituent in Lochgilphead in Argyll, who is in despair. She has three children who are members of the Mid Argyll Athletics Club and who have excelled at long and middle-distance running. However, this term, they have had to abandon training altogether because there is no longer a suitable venue since the brand new high school was built with no track and field facilities. That is hugely ironic as many Lochgilphead residents, led by Hugh MacArthur and Bill MacAllum, founded a trust to build running facilities for mid-Argyll youth on the ground where the new school has now been built. It is hugely frustrating to have young people who are dead keen on athletics and a dedicated coach but no local facilities. We need to address such issues if we are to ensure that our youngsters receive the health benefits from sport that we all want to see, and to provide medal-winning sports people for the future. Perhaps the minister will want to comment on those points in his speech. As a sports enthusiast from Lochgilphead said to me, a kid from Lochgilphead is likely to become a champion hurdler because he has to jump so many hurdles to get any training facilities. Lochgilphead's nearest running track is now at Scotstoun in Glasgow, a 200-mile round trip. Sportscotland helps urban areas but seems to take no account of rural needs. Now that sportscotland has a new director, I will write to him to try to secure a more equitable approach to rural areas, especially in funding for track facilities. Why should a Scottish child be disadvantaged in athletics because he or she does not live in the central belt? We all recognise the massive and unprecedented opportunity that 2014 offers Scotland to be a global sports hub. We also know that investment and support need to be put in place now to allow Scots of all ages and in all places who wish to become active in sport to be able to do so. I commend Jack McConnell's motion, and I look forward to the minister responding in a positive fashion.

To ask the Scottish Executive, in light of the threat of closure of the Vestas factory at  Campbeltown and local concerns about the delay in re-establishing the Campbeltown to Ballycastle ferry service, whether it will support the establishment of a new ferry route between Campbeltown and mainland Ayrshire. (S3O-4114)

Will the minister acknowledge that even without the loss of jobs at Vestas the Kintyre and Campbeltown economy is under severe pressure and desperately needs new investment? Will he also acknowledge that although we all want the Campbeltown to Ballycastle ferry service to resume as soon as possible, a ferry service from Campbeltown to mainland Ayrshire would mean that businesses and potential new businesses in Campbeltown could get their goods to major new markets, which would be crucial? Will he ask his officials to consider the option seriously?

I welcome today's debate and many aspects of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee's report. Ferry services play a massive role throughout my region of the Highlands and Islands. I hope that the committee's report will influence the Scottish Government as it conducts its review of ferry services. I am glad to hear from the minister that he will have regard to the wishes of people on the island of Barra. The committee's recommendations on timetabling are important. I am sure that all members agree that CalMac must examine what can be done to lengthen the sailing day to maximise commuting opportunities to the islands. The committee also talks about achieving better integration of transport services, which we all  want. That was the first pledge of the first Minister for Transport and the Environment, Sarah Boyack. Anyone who has tried to co-ordinate bus, rail and ferry services to and from Oban will know what I mean when I say that "integrated" is not the adjective that springs to mind. The committee makes a number of positive suggestions in relation to the Scottish Government's ferries review. Crucially, it talks about the need for new thinking. Can ministers confirm that their review will utilise the views of the private sector, not just in the consultation but in the make-up of any review steering group?

I am glad to hear that. The review team needs to be made up of more than CalMac and civil service representatives. The private ferry sector, which has shown its dynamism and ability to deliver on a number of routes in Scotland, has a big part to play in the improvement of our country's ferry services. I read with interest the section in the report on the RET pilot and I agree with the comments that were expressed effectively by the Scottish Islands Federation, which argued that, although the pilot is to be welcomed, all other islands will be disadvantaged compared with those that receive the benefits of RET. I was in the Uists this summer, and my constituents there are looking forward to the beginning of the pilot in October. However, my constituents in some other islands, such as Colonsay, Mull, Shetland and Orkney, feel somewhat let down and badly treated by the SNP Government. It is incumbent on me as their representative to voice those concerns. The considerable length of the pilot scheme, which is identified as an issue of concern in the committee report, means that Argyll and Bute Council is right to say: "if monitoring of the pilot shows that tourism has been displaced from islands that are not included in the scheme, the Government will have to consider how to redress the balance."—[ Official Report, Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee , 4 March 2008; c 479.] Fragile communities such as Colonsay simply cannot afford to wait until the end of the scheme in 2011 if their economies are badly affected next summer. It is vital that livestock transport to and from Scottish islands is put high up on the agenda whenever ferries policy is discussed. It is vital to crofters and farmers on the islands.  While I am talking about fragile communities, I will mention the economic problems facing Campbeltown and Kintyre, with the possible loss of up to 100 well-paid jobs should Vestas withdraw from the area. The campaign to reintroduce the Campbeltown-Ballycastle ferry has cross-party support and has been going for years, but we need a decision from ministers without delay. That is even more true now than it was before. It has been suggested that the lack of better ferry services contributed to the possible closure of Vestas in Kintyre. Everyone would agree that we will simply not attract new jobs and investment to Kintyre unless there are better transport links. The Campbeltown-Ballycastle ferry has the potential to open up tourism. At question time tomorrow, I will be raising with ministers the possible introduction of a new mainland-to-mainland ferry service between Campbeltown and Ayrshire. I wonder if the minister will agree with me that such a new route could take a significant amount of freight from the roads and open up markets for Kintyre companies. During my summer tour I tried to take the council-run ferry to the island of Luing. Unfortunately, I chose the day when the council was on strike, so the ferry was off. That frustrated me, and it often frustrates Luing residents—and it makes them rightly worried about what would happen in a health emergency. I had a positive meeting with the minister and the Luing fixed link action group just before the recess, which I hope he remembers. The minister pledged to engage with Argyll and Bute Council on the issue. I would be grateful if he could provide an update on the matter. There is much in the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee's report that is positive and useful, and I thank its members for their work. The Government's own review will now be the focus, and expectations are very high. The viability and economic success of dozens of remote communities, many of them fragile, depend on ferry services. I commend the comments made by the SNP councillor Roy Pedersen, who has been so influential regarding RET. He said: "There is a lot of scope for the private sector to contribute to ferry services in Scotland. The current tendering system seems almost designed to inhibit the private sector in contributing."—[ Official Report, Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee , 4 March 2008; c 486.] I also commend Councillor Pedersen's submission to the European Commission on state aid rules. I hope that it will guide the Scottish ministers. But that is enough praise from me for the SNP. I look forward to debating the results of the minister's review, and I hope that it will deliver the  changes in the areas where we have concerns—unlike the policies of the previous Government.

rose—

It is surely the Parliament's duty to judge its members by the Parliament's rules and not by those of any other body. With the greatest respect to the members of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, of which I am one, the committee's decision in the case was wrong and a member of the Parliament has suffered an injustice and therefore an unfair slur on her parliamentary record. That is unfortunate, not only for the member concerned—Ms Wendy Alexander—but for every member of the Parliament. The standards committee must surely demonstrate a stature that is higher than that of any other committee because of what it does or may be called on to do, which is to sit in judgment on the conduct of other members. It must be self-evident from the committee's conduct that it has attained the highest levels of fairness, natural justice and professional objectivity. It must be seen to be free from partisan whipping and  members must make up their minds according to the evidence, rather than be told what line they should take. The committee members should do as they would be done by, which is most likely to be achieved if the committee reflects substantial parliamentary experience. However, it has been pointed out by the press and others that all those who voted in favour of sanctions, including the convener, were new members who were elected in May last year. I mean no disrespect to them, but how many members would feel comfortable to be judged by a committee that is so lacking in parliamentary experience? Party leaders and managers should bear that in mind when appointments to the committee are made in future. I know that I shall make myself unpopular by saying this, but there was a distinct scent of partisan alignment on the committee, which should not have been there. I am proud of the fact that I based my judgment purely on the evidence that was before me, without anyone from my party telling me what I should or should not do. That is how the process should be carried out but, regrettably, it was not. I am sure that most members believe that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee must be above blemish. It was wrong to recommend imposing sanctions on the member, and the time taken to produce a result, because of incessant filibustering in private committee sessions, did not allow the Parliament to vote on the matter before the recess. The sword of Damocles was therefore left hanging above the member's head for an unnecessary two months. I suspect that that was a major factor in the resignation of Ms Alexander from the leadership of her party. It disturbs me that in a country allegedly famous for justice and fair play, an event of this kind has been allowed to happen in our Parliament. Lessons must be learned. From day one, I was convinced that there was no case to answer and that although a breach might have been committed, it was as a result of the member falling foul of a flawed system rather than her personal conduct. The member made every effort to register the donations. She took the advice of the Parliament's lawyers and the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee clerks who advised that there was no need to register the donations. Admittedly she was a week late in doing so, but that was as a result of her belief that there was no precedent for registration in a leadership campaign. I questioned the lawyers and the clerks who all told me that they would have given her the same advice whenever she had asked that question. It is a sorry state of affairs if any member of this Parliament cannot have confidence in the advice  given by the Parliament's lawyers and the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee clerks. Who else is a member meant to ask? Should he or she employ a Queen's counsel at vast expense? I do not think so. I do not think that many of us would feel obliged to do that or, for that matter, could afford to do that. I do not believe that justice has been done and that is why, during the committee sessions, I argued and voted against any sanctions on Ms Alexander. For the same reasons, I will vote against the motion set before us today.

I thank the cabinet secretary for early sight of her statement. I welcome the dropping of the £2,000 grant to first-time buyers in favour of expanding the funding for shared equity schemes. Another bad SNP policy has been dropped in favour of a good Conservative one. However, I am disappointed that the Government intends to further restrict the right to buy, and my party will oppose any legislation that the Government introduces to do that. The right to buy has enabled 480,000 Scottish households to buy their own homes. Why is the cabinet secretary so determined to remove the right to buy from one group of tenants and so take home ownership out of their grasp? In addition, housing associations have been expressing to me their concerns about future funding. Will the cabinet secretary today guarantee that she will not reduce the level of housing association grant in future? The cabinet secretary will be aware that the chief executive of Homes for Scotland said earlier this week that the number of new houses being built in Scotland this year could be down no less than 20 per cent on last year. What impact does the cabinet secretary think that that will have on plans to boost the number of affordable homes?

I thank members for their amusing and good contributions to the debate, and for their broad support for the bill. I turn to David Whitton's remarks about tartan being woven or not. I feel strongly that the register should be inclusive. We have achieved consensus after a five-year debate and to exclude one sector, even if it is just a few registrations a year, would be a mistake. I prefer to sing from "Hymns Ancient & Modern" rather than favouring one expert over another, because I have so much respect for the experts whose names have been mentioned today. It is because of their consensus that we have got as far as we have, and I would hate to lose that at this stage.  Members may remember that I first introduced proposals for a Scottish register in the previous session. That bill attracted a good level of support, but I withdrew it to allow work on the options for a register to be undertaken. That has happened, and I am grateful to the minister for allowing me to remain in charge of the legislation. He might have introduced an Executive bill, but he chose not to. I am very grateful for that. With Government support and on-going engagement with the tartan industry in Scotland, the revised bill retains my original proposals. They were for a statutory footing for a Scottish register of tartans, a statutory definition of tartan and a keeper of tartans to operate the register. On the question of a definition, Jamie Stone asked how to differentiate between tartan and gingham or another check. As the committee heard, reaching a universally acceptable definition would be difficult, but the definition in the bill has been agreed by the tartan industry experts and will be applied on a consistent basis by the keeper. The bill now proposes a much more cost-effective, streamlined and less bureaucratic way to deliver the register—and that is very welcome. It will minimise cost to the taxpayer and reduce bureaucracy. It will use existing public and private sector expertise and infrastructure and, importantly, avoid adding to the public sector landscape by creating a new public body. I am pleased that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee welcomed the fact that the keeper of the records of Scotland will be the keeper of the Scottish register of tartans. I am also pleased that the committee recognised that the functions of the keeper will ensure that the register is maintained in a way that protects and preserves the tartans in it while making them more publicly accessible.

I want to make some headway. Over time, a quality assurance approach by the keeper to tartan registration will help to develop the credibility of the Scottish register and the authenticity of the tartans that it contains. It will be the first and only national register of tartan maintained in the spiritual home of that important and iconic symbol of Scotland. As well as including existing tartans and tartan designs, the bill empowers the keeper to ensure that new tartans meet certain criteria for entry into the register. In my view, those criteria are stringent and will enhance the tartans in the register. They include meeting the first ever statutory definition, as endorsed by Scotland's Parliament, and showing that the design has been considered in  detail, including colour, thread count—the DNA of tartan—and sett.

I would prefer not to; the member has made several interventions. There will also be criteria to ensure that the person seeking to register a tartan has a clear link to its name. The committee raised a valid point about how to prove a sufficient link to a tartan, but we can do that in several ways. For an individual, it may simply be through proof of surname, region of origin or residence. On behalf of an association, business or organisation, it could be a letter or other confirmation from a body or organisation confirming the link.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. In either such case, I suggest that the appropriate way forward is for the keeper to have discretion to consider each application on its merits. I envisage that the keeper will develop guidance on the issue, which he will have power to do under section 4 of the bill. The bill is the culmination of long and assiduous work by many in the tartan industry in Scotland and among tartan experts and enthusiasts. Let me say again that I am grateful to them all for their efforts. Their on-going engagement with the register will be important. The register can become a focal point for tartan and tartan research and it can help the tartan industry in Scotland to capitalise on the commercial opportunities that will flow from the register and increased interest in tartan. Nested alongside the family history centre at the National Archives of Scotland, the register will help in the wider aim of promoting Scotland and interest in Scotland. However, the bill is about more than that. It will create a register that will be a valuable national asset in that it will preserve Scotland's tartan records in perpetuity—not just for Scotland but for all who have an interest in and affinity with our proud nation and who have an interest in our iconic Scottish tartan product. I return to Tavish Scott—

I should close—okay. In that case, I will not return to Tavish Scott, other than to reply to his remarks about clan Gregor. He was correct about the proscription of the name. The words of defiance on Rob Roy's grave sum it up: "MacGregor Despite Them".

I welcome the stage 1 debate on my member's bill to create a Scottish register of tartans. I also welcome the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's detailed and thoughtful scrutiny of the bill, and I am pleased that the committee supports specifics in my proposals and recommends that the Parliament agree to my bill's principles. The committee's stage 1 report can help to shape and further enhance the bill as it progresses. I will say more about that shortly. The bill will create the first-ever publicly held statutory Scottish register of tartans. The register will be independent, accessible and sustainable. It will be established permanently and in perpetuity for the Scottish nation. The register will be maintained and run by the National Archives of Scotland, with continuing support and expertise from Scotland's tartan industry and tartan experts. The keeper of the records of Scotland will also be the keeper of the Scottish register of tartans. The committee agrees with those proposals. The approach will minimise bureaucracy and costs to the public purse and—this is important to me—will avoid creating an additional public body, which my original bill envisaged. In taking evidence, the committee heard some of the passionate and deeply held views on tartan. The wovenist view is that tartan must be woven, and the modernist view is that tartan is a design that is mostly woven but which can be produced commercially in other forms. The bill envisages that the keeper will accept registrations of tartan designs that are woven, as the vast majority will be, and non-woven, of which the current registers receive only a handful each year. If we are serious in our commercial intent to help the tartan industry promote and market itself, we should not discount the commercial and intrinsic value of both woven and non-woven tartan. We should do all that we can to draw through potential commercial opportunities for the industry. I am confident that the criteria for registration that are set out in the bill and the classification of tartans in the register by the keeper will strike the right balance between accepting genuine tartan designs, as happens at the moment, and recognising the woven use of the design. Section 4(2)(c) allows the keeper to deal with the  classification of tartans. The minister will say more about that later. The committee has heard some of the powerful arguments for helping to position the tartan industry in Scotland to maximise the commercial and creative opportunities from tartan as a design and as a product. For that reason, we should not unduly restrict the use of that design to one iteration or mode of production as a woven product.

The definition is for the bill's purposes only. I am sure that arguments about the definition of tartan will continue in perpetuity. The keeper will accept woven and non-woven tartans for registration. For that reason, section 6(9) says that an application to the keeper "may include a woven ... sample". However, that will not and should not be mandatory. I recognise the inherent and historic value of the woven tartan. The requirement in the bill to provide thread count information will mean that designs that come to the keeper must be capable of being woven. In recognition of the importance of tartan as a woven product, and to embed that recognition further in the bill, I am minded to take on board a suggestion that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee made, and to lodge an amendment at stage 2 to the definition of tartan in section 2 of the bill in order to emphasise that the tartan is capable of being woven—which it will be, because of the provision of thread count information. I intend to use the words "capable of being woven". The committee asked me to address the questions whether a swatch of tartan should support an application for entry in the register and whether that would present opportunities for the textiles industry or a possible disincentive to tartan registration. Further views have been sought from industry sources that confirm a number of important points. They confirm that the possible opportunities that would result from requiring a sample are far outweighed by the possible costs of doing so and that there is a risk that requiring a sample would deter people from seeking to register tartans. First, approximately 120 new tartans are registered each year. The volume of possible business from weaving samples is therefore low.  Secondly, there is no guarantee that a Scottish weaver would be approached to produce any such swatch—it could be produced overseas or at home on a hand-loom. Thirdly, the likely size of a swatch or sample will not be large. If it is to be provided at all, the Scottish Tartans Authority seeks a piece 9 inches by 7 inches. However, weavers do not weave swatches; rather, swatches are cut out of sample production runs. The minimum quantity that a professional weaver would produce would be a sample length of between 4m and 10m. Fourthly, in the light of an approximate swatch or sample cost of around £50 a metre, the process could quickly become very expensive and could deter individuals or groups from registering tartans. It would be unfortunate if a woven sample were provided and subsequently not accepted for registration because it replicated an existing tartan. The committee heard about schoolchildren designing their own school tartans. A cost of between £200 and £500 for providing a swatch in addition to the registration fee could become a barrier to fostering interest in tartan among young people and more widely in Scotland and elsewhere. Therefore, the best way forward is the way that has been proposed—to leave open the option of supplying a swatch, but not to make supplying a swatch a requirement of registration. That would still draw through any opportunities that might exist for weaving swatches or samples and for any woven or non-woven products that swatches end up being used in before or after registration. Such an approach would also reduce the risk of the cost of producing a swatch or sample deterring people or groups from applying to register tartans. In any event, I have stated my intention to amend the bill to include the words "capable of being woven" in the definition of tartan. That will clearly establish the importance of the woven tartan fabric. Requiring a woven sample is inconsistent, redundant and unnecessary. In conclusion, the bill shows that tartan is an important part of Scotland's heritage and culture that we can be extremely proud of. I strongly believe that my bill strikes a balance between the exclusivity and the accessibility of tartan, and that it offers a valuable and workable way forward towards achieving a goal that has wide support in the industry: a Scottish register of tartans. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill.

I, too, must apologise for having to leave before the end of the debate. I congratulate Claire Baker on securing tonight's debate. Scottish Conservatives fully acknowledge that many tenants rely on the return of their deposit in order to pay the up-front deposit on their  new property. We also acknowledge that delays in the return of deposits can lead to difficulty and hardship. Claire Baker is correct to say in her motion that Scottish ministers have the power, under the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 to introduce a tenancy deposit scheme if they wish to do so. However, it seems to us premature of ministers to embark on such a course without having sound evidence for so doing. We should await the outcome of the Government's surveys of private tenants and landlords. Particular issues relating to students' deposits certainly need to be tackled. Having consulted a number of private sector landlords and landlords organisations in preparation for tonight's debate, I would like to raise a few points. If a property is managed properly, if an inventory is made up and if tenants are given a chance to comment on the inventory at the commencement of a lease, the number of difficulties at the end of the lease will be reduced. The motion refers to the "successful introduction" of tenancy protection in England and Wales, but one landlords organisation put it to me that the Westminster Government made a complete mess of the introduction of that scheme. If ministers here intend to go ahead with such a scheme, they should try to learn from what happened in England and Wales. Despite what I have said about the introduction of the scheme in England and Wales, I understand that its operation has since proceeded relatively smoothly. Indeed, the latest figures show that less than 2 per cent of tenancies have ended with a dispute over the deposit. A more general concern is over the need for politicians fully to comprehend the impact of extra regulations on the private sector. Scottish Conservatives are well aware of that impact, and we will not support regulations that will have a negative impact on costs and on business. Scottish landlords and agents are still trying to deal with the complexities of the landlord registration scheme and the regulations on hard-wired smoke detectors, and energy performance certificates are looming in January. Ministers should always exhaust all other options, such as the raising of awareness of good practice, before resorting to the imposition of regulations. Regulations must be proportionate. The landlord accreditation scheme, which has been developed by the Scottish Association of Landlords and the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association, has the potential to drive up standards and to be a really positive thing for the rented sector. The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors operates a voluntary deposit scheme, too.

I will come to that in my conclusion. I acknowledge the concerns that lie behind Claire Baker's motion, but ministers should tread with caution before burdening private individuals and companies with further regulations. I accept that there are a few bad apples in every barrel, but if we take a broad-brush approach, we could easily upset the running of good businesses, too. I look to the minister to assure me that he will proceed in an evidence-based way, in line with the scale and nature of the problem.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this stage 1 debate, which marks an important milestone for Scotland's cultural sector. We agree with the bill's main aims and welcome the extra £5 million, but I want to raise several concerns about  our publishing industry that have been raised with me. I am sure that the minister agrees that publishing is synonymous with Edinburgh. The importance of publishing to Edinburgh—its importance goes back to the time of the Nelson reading rooms and further—is beyond question. Edinburgh is Europe's first city of literature, and the Edinburgh book festival is becoming huge—750 authors will be involved in it this year. Therefore, I ask the minister why our publishing industry in Edinburgh is riven by dissent and dissatisfaction. Why are large numbers of Scotland's best known and most important publishers, including Edinburgh University Press, resigning from Publishing Scotland? Surely that speaks volumes about the publishing industry's opinion of that body's effectiveness. Publishing Scotland is our publishers' representative and development body. It receives a significant part of its funding from the SAC—soon to be creative Scotland—but serious concerns have been expressed to me about its effectiveness, performance, whether the Scottish taxpayer gets value for money from it and whether the best books are seeing the light of day. Furthermore, its website, booksfromscotland.com, has underperformed for the past two years to the extent that its income is only £15,000 a year, which is a fifth of its target income. A previous direct sales scheme that Publishing Scotland ran was also a failure, to the tune of £70,000. Publishing is a business that either makes or loses money, but the loss of sectors must be reined in. I ask the minister whether, to safeguard the interests of the taxpayer, a proper analysis and investigation should be carried out if grants have been given to projects that have failed. A major publisher has summed up its concerns about the publishing industry in one paragraph. The publisher stated: "Assuming the state wishes to fund writing and publishing in Scotland, is this best served by a position where 2/3 of the grant support given to the publishing sector is given to a trade association, namely Publishing Scotland, representing a minority of Scottish publishing output, and the remaining 1/3 is mediated on a book by book basis by a small committee late in the publishing process with a series of artificial restrictions on what can be given to whom? Equally is Scottish writing best served by a system whereby the far larger funds available to writers are divvied up by a similar small grouping without any regard for either the publishability of those writers or indeed even as to whether they will write anything at all!" The Scottish publisher's lot is not a happy one at the moment. However, I am happy to read that the minister said, in committee: "We need the legislation to allow parliamentary scrutiny and to send out the message that what we are doing here  is extremely important, in that we are transforming the development of arts and culture in Scotland."—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 14 May 2008; c 1028.] On the bright side, it seems that the change from the SAC to creative Scotland presents a good opportunity for the minister to get together with the publishing industry and the key players to produce a better framework for the support of publishing than currently exists. They must look at the publishing conveyor belt. At present, the SAC publishing grant fund is added to the process near the end of the operation, or is sometimes not added at all, which is the crucial point. A publisher decides to publish; the book goes to the manuscript level, which the SAC insists on; it then goes to the SAC for support, at which point it may well be turned down even after so much has already been spent on it. That process needs to be changed, and fast. I am glad that the policy memorandum to the bill states that creative Scotland will "support activities which involve the application of creative skills". The main difference between the SAC and the new creative Scotland appears to be the addition of a role in the development and support of the creative industries. Surely it should be mainly publishers who influence what is published, not the high heid yins in the SAC or creative Scotland, however good their credentials may be. This debate is about the best way in which to support the creative industries in Scotland. Publishing is a key creative industry, and the minister has the perfect opportunity to correct the faults of the past and to create a golden future for our talented literary sector.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will ensure that police forces implement "Galas and Events Affecting Public Roads—Guidance to Organisers" so that local shows, highland games and other events are not burdened with excessive costs. (S3O-3578)

I wrote to the cabinet secretary recently to highlight the case of the organisers of the Inverary highland games, who, thanks to the new rules, faced new costs this year of up to £1,300, for the use of a traffic management company and for a temporary traffic order. Since my intervention, I am pleased that the local police seem to have reconsidered the matter. The costs will not be incurred this year, but no guarantee on future years has been given. Can the minister guarantee that scores of local shows and highland games will not have to pay huge new costs for services that police forces have always been willing to provide without charge?

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it gives to the elderly care home sector in Argyll and Bute. (S3O-3482)

The minister will be aware of the recent regrettable confusion surrounding the future of the Argyll and Bute Council-run Eader Glinn home in Oban, which caused great distress to patients, relatives and staff. Given the increased level of nursing care that traditional care homes for the elderly have to provide, can the minister guarantee that enough funding has been provided through the concordat to enable Argyll and Bute Council and other local authorities in the Highlands and Island to upgrade their existing buildings to meet the requirements of the current fire safety and physical environment legislation, thus preventing further closures of otherwise excellent establishments such as Eader Glinn?

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that all modulation is compulsory for those who have to pay for it? It is not voluntary at all.

I refer to my agricultural interests in the register of members' interests. I welcome the opportunity to speak in today's debate, which I hope will inform and guide ministers in the run-up to the crucial agriculture council in November and the full EU Council in December. It is vital that Scotland gets the best possible deal from the health check proposals, as the conclusions will impact on farming and crofting for many years to come. It was kind of Karen Gillon to remind us of the surpluses under the Conservatives. Do not worry, Karen, blue skies are round the corner. My colleague John Scott referred to modulation or, as I prefer to call it, agricultural clawback tax. We all know that the EU agriculture commissioner, Fischer Boel, detests voluntary modulation because she sees it as a nationalisation of the CAP. Farmers and crofters, especially those who failed to access the agri-environmental schemes that voluntary modulation purports to underpin, might call it something much worse. I do not know why only we and the Portuguese insist on this masochistic exercise for our farming  industry. Will the minister give us a categorical guarantee that any increase in compulsory modulation across Europe will be met by an accompanying equivalent reduction in voluntary modulation by the Scottish Government? That is the only fair and equitable way forward. Anything less will perpetuate or even increase the unlevel playing field with which our farmers and crofters have to deal. Ministers have said that they have the powers to reduce voluntary modulation as the compulsory element rises, but they must confirm that they will do that or, better still, get rid of it. The Scottish Conservatives' support for an increase in compulsory modulation is conditional on a reduction in voluntary modulation. We hope that the Government and other parties will therefore support our amendment. On progressive modulation—the cap on single farm payments above a certain level—we share the concerns of farming and landowning representatives that Scotland will again be penalised compared with other EU countries because we tend to have larger farming units. Where is the fairness in hitting the most efficient farmers and food producers? What is to prevent large farming businesses from splitting themselves into smaller units to avoid progressive modulation?

Not on that point. We look forward to a commitment from the cabinet secretary that the Scottish Government will do all that it can to oppose progressive modulation. I believe that the money that is being top sliced from modulation—or, as some farmers would say, stolen from them—should be used to reflect modern farming priorities. For example, most hill farmers would be lost without quad bikes, but there is no priority to support the purchase or maintenance of quad bikes. Quad bikes rely, for the most part, on petrol, so they cannot use the red diesel that is put in tractors. I am convinced of the importance of hill roads that open up far-flung land for good agri-environmental schemes and I believe that they should also be on the list of priorities. I would like to see a return to grants for lime and slag, to encourage tired pasture and improve grazing in marginal areas. That would help hill farmers' productivity and bring extra added value. Will the minister ensure that so-called flood management tries to prevent floods rather than allowing the water to go where it wants? It seems ridiculous to do that.

Not at the minute. Set-aside played its part and it has been beneficial to wildlife. If it is to go, we need to see a smooth transfer of set-aside entitlements to standard entitlements. I trust that ministers will arrange that. In the long term, it would benefit agricultural land to have a system of rotation of different crops rather than persistent monocultures, which we have seen previously. I am aware that proposals within the CAP health check under article 58 to allow specific recoupling for direct headage payments will be controversial. The Scottish beef calf scheme under the beef national envelope has certainly fulfilled a useful role in supporting the beef sector. Most farmers and crofters want to see the retention of the beef national envelope. Ireland's suckler cow welfare scheme has had a massive uptake and I am prepared to say that the Scottish Government should think imaginatively about a new measure or measures to support the retention of cattle and sheep in our more marginal areas, including most of my region of the Highlands and Islands. At the same time, any new support measures should not risk market distortion, not least as the beef market, especially, has begun to recover in recent times. Ministers must ensure that any new support measures under article 58 do not become a Scottish Highlands versus lowlands issue. The retention of quality sheep and cattle in the marginal and remote areas of the country is crucial, because those farmers supply the stock that is fattened and processed in the rest of the country. The maintenance of critical mass in sheep and cattle numbers is of massive importance. Perhaps ministers could use some of the ideas in the Aylward report into the EU sheep sector; it certainly has some positive ideas, which have been welcomed by industry representatives, including the Scottish Crofting Foundation. On the subject of the Aylward report, which the European Parliament's agriculture committee adopted this week, like the Scottish Crofting Foundation I was pleased to see that it called for the abandonment of electronic sheep tagging, which some MEPs have correctly branded an "ill thought out, illogical and unworkable scheme." I could not have put it better myself.

As an MSP for the Highlands and Islands, I agree with the points that Alasdair Allan raised on behalf of people in the Western Isles and the Hebridean islands. I commend the letter on the subject written by Argyll and Bute councillor Duncan MacIntyre on behalf of Highlands and Islands transport partnership. I want to highlight the plight of the fishermen, hauliers, farmers and businessmen, from Oban to Campbeltown in Argyll and Bute, who face bankruptcy due to increasing fuel costs. The cost of red diesel, used by farmers and fishermen, has risen to more than 70p a litre. In January 2007, the cost was 33p a litre; in October 2007, it was 44p a litre; and now it is a massive 71p a litre—a rise of more than 100 per cent. Many fishing boats are not going out because to do so loses money. Fishermen are making jokes about going back to sails and oars, but the livelihoods of fishermen and their families are no laughing matter. How has such a serious situation developed in such a short time? I hate to bring politics into a members' business debate, but I am forced to do so. This disastrous scenario has developed because the present Labour Government is prepared to profiteer and is standing on thin ice as long as it can to refuel its own empty financial tanks. It could not care less about how the fishing and farming communities of rural Scotland cope with the fuel price tsunami, and it has not bothered to check. In the middle of March, I asked the Scottish Government about the fuel prices for the fishing industry. Its answer was that a task force was being set up. What has it done? That was more than two months ago and, unless I am mistaken, the task force is having its first meeting on Friday. It is hardly a fast reaction task force, although I will be happy if the minister tells me I am wrong.  I congratulate Tavish Scott on his contribution. The price of diesel in Colonsay is £7.50 a gallon. I say to the so-called environmentalists and members of the Green party who seem to revel in rocketing fuel prices that that pressure is forcing the prawn trawlers and scallop dredgers of the west coast to put more effort into areas closer to home. That is contrary to what they should be doing if they want to conserve stocks. The fishermen know that it is not good for fish stocks, but what can they do? I have been told that French fishermen are being heavily subsidised, but I have yet to ascertain the truth of that. At least fishermen get between 9p and 10p back on fuel duty. That does not apply to farmers and crofters who, as well as the fuel price increase, have had to face a 200 per cent increase in fertiliser prices and a 100 per cent increase in animal feed prices within a year. Everybody knows that primary producers cannot raise their prices to cope with sudden fuel increases. It is scandalous for the Government to ignore that, although it may not be able to ignore the consequences of those increases. Many rural industries depend on a good haulage service. Forestry, agriculture, fish farming and the food and construction industries—which deliver basic requirements—all depend on haulage, yet hauliers in Campbeltown are laying off drivers and selling their lorries. Who will carry the freight and, for that matter, who will carry the can? The Prime Minister fiddles; on fuel he is fiddling us all. I have it on good authority that while the price of crude is the same worldwide, as we speak the price of petrol at the pumps in Abu Dhabi is 20p a litre. In Campbeltown, it is 130p a litre—650 per cent more. No wonder people are screaming with rage. Something must happen, minister.

Could the member tell me in which areas of Scotland beavers lived?

I thank the cabinet secretary for providing an advance copy of her statement. Keeping our senior citizens warm and dry must be a continued priority of the Government, because it promotes wellbeing and dignity and saves the national health service money. I share the minister's concerns that more households will fall into fuel poverty as energy prices continue to  rise. What progress is she making to redress the balance in the current unfair practice whereby low-income households that use prepayment meters end up paying more than £200 more than people on normal tariffs? Scottish Gas has improved—judging by my mailbag—on Eaga's record in the Highlands and Islands, but it still has a long way to go. I welcome the minister's commitment to address the latest problems regarding Scottish Gas's failure to pay installers, but how does she intend to address the ever-increasing waiting lists, especially in remote and rural areas such as the Highlands and Islands, where the weather tends to be colder? I am encouraged by the minister's words that the central heating programme will include some priority groups, such as fuel-poor families with young children, and disabled people, who are excluded under the present criteria. I am glad that she listened to Help the Aged and Shelter, which stated that the programme is failing in its primary goal of eradicating fuel poverty. Will she ensure that solutions are flexible rather than broad brush, so that the scheme can cover applicants who require only a new boiler and do not need new radiators and pipes? Will she ensure that the £40 million is spent with the maximum of fuel efficiency to cure fuel poverty?

Some senior citizens have been advised to have completely new central heating systems when they actually require only a new boiler. Is not that a waste of money all round?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I wonder whether the crofters on the islands that do not qualify for road equivalent tariff would get better payments than the ones who do qualify for RET.

Today's debate marks an important moment for a sector whose success is crucial to the economic and social wellbeing of large parts of my region, the Highlands and Islands. Crofting knits together the socioeconomic fabric of many communities, links town with country, and unites purpose. Like others, I put on record my thanks to Professor Shucksmith and his eminent team for their comprehensive report, which contains many positive ideas. I was pleased to take part in one of the stakeholder discussion sessions in Argyll last summer. I found it useful, and I am encouraged by the numbers of people who took the opportunity to have a say in the future of crofting. The previous Executive announced the committee of inquiry in 2006, but it remains my strong view that we should have had the inquiry and its report before we dealt with the Crofting Reform etc Act 2007. Had that been the case, we might have had better legislation. It is notable and, sadly, not surprising that despite all the parliamentary time that was spent on the 2007 act, the report concludes that "new legislation is needed to replace, simplify and clarify the accumulated laws which set the framework for crofting today." That said, we need to move on, and perhaps implement many of the report's suggestions, which have been formed from the practical experience of  crofters and are crucial to the future viability of crofting. I agree with the report that access to affordable housing is essential for population retention in crofting communities. The crofters building grants and loans scheme was a genuine success story, and ministers need to answer the question in section 3.7.2 of the report: "if the CBGLS was so effective in population retention why was it replaced with a much less generous scheme?" We look to ministers to deliver, without delay, the new enhanced scheme that is recommended. That is one of the most important issues for crofting people. Ministers will be aware that I have repeatedly stated the importance of the bull hire scheme. Its importance is highlighted in the report. Can ministers assure me that they will continue with an effective version of the scheme, possibly using extended national reserve provisions, as is suggested? I have already instigated one members' business debate on the issue, which was comprehensive. Surely we do not need to have another one on the same subject. The bull hire scheme promotes quality cattle, which, in turn, promote better prices for crofters. Scottish Conservatives share whole-heartedly the report's strong focus on the importance of getting young people into crofting. The report is right to argue that measures to assist new entrants should be emphasised in allocating future funding. I am interested to hear what the minister thinks about the suggestion that, in future, new crofters might be able to access single farm payments through the national reserve provisions—which, incidentally, Scotland's deer farmers are also campaigning for. Regrettably, I do not think that there is much in the kitty. Can the minister confirm how much is in the national reserve? I think that it is a pretty paltry figure. On the subject of agricultural support payments, I was impressed to see that the report suggests that future options for crofters within the Scottish rural development programme should be "easy to access (not web based nor restricted to electronic applications)". That is clearly embarrassing to ministers, who currently are forcing crofters and farmers to apply online for support under the SRDP, which is angering many of my constituents, especially, I am told, because the rural priorities scheme is intensely complicated. Many farmers I know are just beginning to use mobile phones—many have yet to try, let alone own, a computer. Ministers should reconsider the matter in light of the common sense contained in the report. Why should a farmer or crofter who is not skilled in information technology, but very skilled in what he  does, not be allowed to make a paper application? Does the Google and Yahoo! mentality rule everything nowadays?

In that case, I suggest that the minister make the applications less complex. I am worried by rumours of a black market in crofting reassignments, which can lead to developers, rather than good crofters, taking over crofts. Crofting land is special land. If it is made just like any other land, crofting will disappear, and the considerable benefits of a tried system will be lost. I am encouraged by a great deal of what the Shucksmith report contains. The Scottish Conservatives want Government to act as an enabler to allow crofting to flourish and to help sustain some of the most marginal communities in Europe. Crofters are facing short-term problems—not least the horrific cost of fuel, which is hitting them particularly hard—long-term challenges and extremely low prices. As Norman Leask, the former chairman of the Scottish Crofting Foundation said: "In 1886, people needed crofting. Today, crofting needs crofters." With the correct implementation of the Shucksmith report, especially those recommendations relating to housing and jobs, I believe that crofting will be secured for generations to come. We look forward to the minister responding constructively to the report.

I, too, thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. As president of the Highland Disabled Ramblers Association, I particularly welcome the £16 million to modernise and redesign NHS wheelchair and seating services in Scotland, which is long overdue. We also welcome the right for disabled tenants in the social rented sector to adapt their homes, and the measures to improve access in new-build houses. How and where will the £9 million announced for  the teaching of English for speakers of other languages be allocated over the next three years? We are glad that the minister intends to tackle the issues faced by Gypsy Travellers, but will he look again at the Scottish Government's repeated refusal to meet representatives of the Scottish section of the Showmen's Guild of Great Britain? Travelling show people are a distinct and important section of Scotland's community and cultural fabric, and I am hugely disappointed that ministers have refused to meet them to discuss some of the issues that mean that they are discriminated against more in Scotland than in England. Finally, the percentage of males who suffer from domestic violence has increased by 138 per cent since 1999. Does the Scottish Government recognise that there is a need to address that worrying concern and, without loss of resource to female victims of domestic abuse, ensure equality of care and remedial action?

May I ask for clarification?

Another week, another housing debate. The Scottish Conservatives are always pleased to talk about such a key domestic issue, so we welcome the fact that Labour is using its parliamentary time in this way. We agree with the broad thrust of the Labour motion, although our proposed solutions to the problems might differ from Labour's and from those that are emerging from the SNP Government. All members recognise that one of the biggest issues is the need for more affordable housing in communities throughout Scotland, but do ministers realise that the private sector is ready and willing to engage with Government to achieve delivery of affordable homes on the ground? Given the range of practical and innovative ideas and models for increasing the number of such homes, I urge ministers to do more to engage with and co-operate with the private house building sector. The Government has already recognised the role that the private sector can play in providing affordable rented housing through the rural homes for rent scheme, but it must go further and be bolder. The demand for affordable houses to buy simply will not decrease. As "Firm Foundations" points out, the vast majority of tenants in housing associations aspire to own their own home. The Scottish Conservatives are proud to believe that Government should enable every family that wants to exercise its right to be a home owner to do so. Proper partnership and engagement with the private sector is the only way in which the Government stands a chance of meeting its target of building 35,000 new homes each year by the middle of the next decade—up from the 23,000 to 24,000 built each year since 2000—yet the  barriers that face the private house building sector are horrendous and are getting worse all the time. One reason for that is that, in this country, the infrastructure providers enjoy a quasi-monopoly status. For mains water and sewerage, there is only one provider—I will give members three guesses as to its name. The situation with electricity is much the same. Therefore, the Scottish Government must ensure that the Water Industry Commission for Scotland and the other regulators do their job by ensuring that such quasi-monopolies do not hold builders and developers to ransom and thereby deprive families of affordable housing or, for that matter, any other kind of housing. Another quasi-monopoly that is proving a barrier is planning. In the Highlands, I am told, it now takes eight months to get a building warrant. I do not know whether that is because the council has cut down on the number of employees or simply cannot get employees, but I know that such delays are holding up housing developments of all kinds. That must be a very bad thing. The number of empty properties in Scotland is an issue that I highlighted in last week's debate, but I make no apology for returning to the subject. Of the 87,000 vacant residential properties in Scotland, 55 per cent are in the private sector and 22,500 of those have been empty for more than six months. That is a massive waste of resources by anybody's standards. Do ministers agree that the approach that local housing strategies take to empty homes is very patchy? Argyll and Bute Council in my area is taking the lead on developing a local strategy on empty homes and should be commended. All of us want empty properties to be brought back into use. Again, we look to the Government to come up with a firm policy initiative to tackle the problem. We need more delivery and fewer words. Social housing for rent is, we believe, best delivered by housing associations, which have a track record of positive engagement with their tenants. The SNP's appeasement of its left-wing supporters by suggesting that councils should once again take the lead in building homes for rent is plain wrong. The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations has warned that the Government's proposals on housing association grants will decrease the supply of affordable rented housing and push up existing rents. What is the minister's response to that extremely worrying claim from one of the key bodies that will be expected to help to deliver the Government's 35,000 houses per year target? In addition, will the minister confirm whether private bodies will be given the chance to be part of building control? Last week, my colleague David McLetchie spoke passionately about the benefits of stock transfer,  on which we have also lodged an amendment today as we have such a powerful argument. Audit Scotland's 2006 report "Council housing transfers" rightly stated that tenants benefit from the better service, new investment and greater local control that such transfers deliver. The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations—which has a lot of experience through the role that its members have played—has correctly highlighted that stock transfer allows rental income to be spent on higher maintenance standards rather than on repaying historic debt. In addition, the new landlords can successfully access private funding for investment and new development. Given that Scotland's housing debt stands at more than £2.2 billion, the SNP Government simply has no excuses for not encouraging the transfer of council housing stock where tenants wish it. To ignore the pile of money that is on the table from Her Majesty's Treasury would be criminal. As we said last week, the SNP campaigned along with the Scottish Socialist Party for a no vote on such transfers, but the SNP Government now says that it is neutral. Today's SNP amendment calls on the SNP Government to ensure that second-stage transfer proceeds speedily in the interests of all tenants. If the SNP likes second-stage transfers in Glasgow, what was wrong with first-stage transfers in other areas? In areas where council tenants voted no, there was a failure to explain to tenants why their best interests would be served by stock transfer. Surely the challenge for the Government is to reverse those earlier decisions, which have lost Scotland so much money. There must be a way of doing that. We are certainly investigating possibilities, which we will bring back to the chamber in due course. Today's debate is welcome. "Firm Foundations" showed up the failings of the SNP Government's approach on housing. The SNP has identified the problems that we face—that is the easy part—but it seems to have no coherent approach on how to face those problems. The Scottish Conservatives recognise that we need a multifaceted approach involving effective planning reform so that houses can be delivered where they are required. We need to tackle development constraint and to co-operate with the private sector, which has a huge role to play, not least in creating a dynamic rented sector. We need successful shared equity schemes and to bring back into use the tens of thousands of empty properties that exist. We should work through housing associations and transfer social housing stock from local authorities, where tenants vote for it. I hope that this evening members will support the amendment in my name.  I move amendment S3M-1848.1, to insert at end: "regrets the failure of the Scottish Government to actively promote housing stock transfer by local authorities to community-based housing associations, with the approval of tenants, and urges the Scottish Government to co-operate with HM Treasury and councils to achieve the substantial debt write-offs of over £2 billion which are available and thereby facilitate new investment in social housing."

During the first parliamentary session, the SNP's Christine Grahame and I were taken on a tour of Glasgow's worst housing areas by the Evening Times . The vast difference between the desperately deprived council areas and the improved areas that had been taken over by housing associations was glaringly obvious to both of us. Why, in that case, is the SNP returning to the failed policies of the past in encouraging councils to build? Councils have proved themselves to be poor landlords. We would prefer housing associations to be given the funding to build new social housing for rent in Scotland. Furthermore, we maintain that the SNP must recommence housing stock transfer in Scotland so that councils can take advantage of Treasury money to eliminate Scotland's £2.2 billion housing debt. What is the point of £25 million over three years compared to that? As my colleagues David McLetchie and Mary Scanlon said, the Scottish Conservatives have real concerns about SNP ministers' rhetoric on council house building. Where is the proof that local authorities are best placed to build houses for rent at the most competitive prices and in successful mixed communities? Do ministers not realise that housing associations the length and breadth of Scotland have expertise and experience and are ready and willing to deliver effectively affordable housing in diverse communities? Should not the priority be to support  our housing associations? Having spoken to many people at the National Landlords Association reception in Parliament last night, I know that the desire of the private sector to help with affordable housing is plain to see. Why does the Government not engage more with the private sector to come up with a solution? On the right to buy, the Scottish Conservatives will always be proud that our policy transformed the lives of tens of thousands of ordinary people in Scotland, providing them with the best advance ever in their lifetimes. The SNP's proposal to curtail the right to buy is a clear indication of its dogmatic anti-aspirational agenda. We will resist that wherever we can. Why should a new generation of social tenants be denied the right that is enjoyed by current tenants? In a recent written answer, the Minister for Communities and Sport revealed to me that Scotland has more than 100,000 properties that are classified as vacant dwellings or second homes. Of those, housing experts suggest that 87,000 could be empty properties, which equates to 3.8 per cent of our housing stock and is a higher rate than the UK average. Many of those empty properties are in rural areas. All members would surely agree that bringing back into use even a small percentage of those redundant or dilapidated houses would, at the very least, ease the affordable housing crisis that many of our communities face. The Government has said that the rural empty properties grant scheme is one way of tackling the number of empty properties, yet another recent answer from the Minister for Communities and Sport confirmed that only 101 properties in the whole of Scotland have benefited from the grant since 1998-99. That is a drop in the ocean. The Scottish Conservatives are positive about the rural empty properties grant scheme, but the scheme obviously needs to be improved if it is to have a better impact. Along with the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association, we are also positive about the rural homes for rent grant scheme, which recognises—as we have long argued—that the private sector is well-placed to provide affordable rented housing. However, the scheme is small in scale and will provide only 100 properties for rent by 2011. Again, on behalf of our hard-pressed rural communities, we look for more from this new Government. As I have, members will have received a useful briefing today from Leonard Cheshire Disability. One in four households includes a person with a disability, and there are real concerns about the availability of social housing for young disabled people. Can the minister say what his Government will do to involve disabled people in the planning,  design and management of homes in the future? The Scottish Conservatives will continue to press the Government to take fundamental action to ease Scotland's affordable housing crisis. That means providing effective reform of the planning system, addressing development constraints, working with housing associations, utilising effective shared-equity schemes and—crucially—working closely with the private sector to create a dynamic rented sector. I agree with Robert Brown that "Firm Foundations" contains serious flaws. As David McLetchie rightly said, £25 million over three years is peanuts. What could housing associations do with £2 billion, though? We continue to support wholeheartedly the transfer of local government housing to communities. Such housing should be run by locally accountable housing associations, co-operatives and companies—a process that was started by our party. We believe that that makes housing officials more accountable to tenants and provides more local management. The SNP seems to have a policy-free zone on stock transfer. Perhaps the minister can enlighten us on what its policies actually are. While he is at it, perhaps the minister can confirm that the first-time buyer's grant that the SNP pledged while in election mode—and which most people in the housing sector believe would be an inflationary measure—will be scrapped, if it has not been scrapped already. Will he also consider scrapping the single seller survey, which is set to become another unnecessary hurdle for the housing sector despite the disastrous pilot scheme? The single seller survey will be costly and will lead to multiple surveys, so it will not even achieve its intended result. That is not just my opinion but the opinion of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, whose representatives I met only the day before yesterday.

The minister mentioned elite athletes. Does he accept that such athletes, especially the elite swimmers who did so well for Scotland at the Melbourne games, owed a tremendous amount to the Scottish Institute of Sport? Will he acknowledge that fact, given that the institute has now amalgamated with sportscotland?

As my party's spokesman on sport, I am pleased to sum up for it in the debate, which represents another significant milestone as we prepare for the games in 2014 by fulfilling one of the key conditions of the host city contract. Since it was introduced in the Parliament on 9 November last year, the bill has made rapid progress. Credit should be given to everybody in the bill team. I thank the minister again for responding to the amendments that I lodged on behalf of a number of business interests in Scotland. From the outset, the Scottish Conservatives said that we would work closely and constructively with the Government on the bill, but that we would raise concerns that had been put to us. I am pleased that we have followed that approach and that we have a bill that has been improved and which now genuinely enjoys widespread support. I take the opportunity to put on record how pleased our party is with the recent appointment of John Scott—not John Scott, our famous MSP—as the chief executive of the Glasgow Commonwealth games organising company. His experience in the 1994 Victoria and 2002 Manchester Commonwealth games, as well as his experience in the London 2012 Olympics bid, will prove invaluable to Glasgow. With that appointment, and with Sir Robert Smith as chairman of the organising company, we have a strong and tested leadership right at the top of the project. The Scottish Conservatives look forward to seeing the results of the consultation on the games' legacy, which we hope will guide ministers, local authorities, sportscotland and other bodies as we move on to 2014. We all hope that having the games in Glasgow will boost participation in sport among people of all ages in that city and across Scotland. The games are a massive opportunity to raise the profile of sport. This week, Audit Scotland released figures on the number of adults who take part in sport at least once a week, which show a drop of 7 per cent from the 2001 figure to 42 per cent in 2006. That shows just what a challenge we face in getting more people to become actively involved in sport. Robert Brown made an important point when he said that to have two events so close together is a big thing for Great Britain.  I recently visited some schools in my region, in Grantown-on-Spey, Fort William and Lochgilphead. The excitement among the young people and children there is mounting. If it can be felt in those places, it must be mounting even more in Glasgow. Athletes and would-be young athletes in Scotland should be setting their sights on representing their country in the games. Scottish athletes did so well in Melbourne; let us do even better in Glasgow. On the subject of great athletes, I remind members that we will be visited by Lord Sebastian Coe this evening in committee room 1 at 5.30—my colleague, Bill Aitken, is hosting a reception for the London 2012 organising committee. Lord Coe will address the meeting along with the First Minister. Sebastian Coe is someone who really made me proud to be British. I welcome the bill and look forward to enormous Scottish achievements in the Commonwealth games.

Once again, I have managed to lose—[ Interruption. ]

I apologise. Amendment 9 attempts to provide a definition of "vicinity" in section 48. Although many sections of the bill refer to "vicinity", the Government has failed to define the concept anywhere in the bill. I make my comments in the context of the advertising regulations, but it is clear that a definition of "vicinity" is important for many people. It is notable that both the Local Government and Communities Committee, in its stage 1 report, and fellow members who spoke in the stage 1 debate at the end of February commented on the lack of a definition of "vicinity" and called on the minister to define the concept at the earliest opportunity. Thus far, the Government has committed only to stating that any restrictions on advertising will be designated in legislation that is to be issued nearer to 2014, and that the meaning of "vicinity" will be defined then. In practice, that could mean that the concept will not be clearly defined until early in the year of the 2014 games, when, as section 46 requires, ministers must have set out the detailed provisions of the advertising regulations. Without a definition of "vicinity", the advertising sector in Scotland will not know what it can and cannot do. That will be most important for the owners of outdoor advertising sites. Advertisers sell their space months in advance, so there must be clarity on which sites will be in the vicinity of a games location and which will not. Even if the minister is not prepared to accept my amendment 9, I ask him at least to do what the relevant minister at Westminster did in relation to the Olympics, when, in the context of games venues, he said:  "When we talk about vicinity, we mean a few hundred metres."—[ Official Report, House of Commons, Standing Committee D , 18 October 2005; c 78.] That would at least provide a welcome steer to those who will be affected by the restrictions that are likely to be contained in the advertising regulations that are eventually issued. In the consultation, Glasgow City Council expressed concerns that legitimate businesses in Glasgow might suffer from the impact of restrictions in their day-to-day commercial activity. Perhaps the council was thinking of as innocent a matter as the status of commercial signage on shop fronts and newspaper stands. Ministers responded to that concern by stating that the advertising regulations would provide for such businesses to continue to conduct their ordinary, day-to-day business, provided that there was no direct conflict with the games. I put it on record that I wish the parliamentary draftsmen some years hence luck in arriving at a suitable form of words that will succeed in achieving the differentiation that is sought. I would be interested to hear the minister's thoughts on the contractual implications for existing branded venues that do not happen to be used for Commonwealth games events but which find themselves in the vicinity of such events. I move amendment 9.

Obviously, the definition of "vicinity" is not straightforward: I understand that. I hope that what the minister said allays the concerns of those who raised the matter. I am sure that he will keep his word. I seek leave to withdraw amendment 9.  Amendment 9, by agreement, withdrawn.

The purpose of amendment 1 is to allow ministers, in the run-up to the 2014 Commonwealth games, to exempt advertising that appears in "newspapers, magazines and cinemas, on television and radio and by means of mobile telephony or any other electronic media." One of the purposes of the advertising regulations that can be issued under section 10 is to ensure that advertisement hoardings outside games venues are not inadvertently covered by cameras that are covering events or the spectators who are watching them. We understand that, but there is real concern that it is likely that newspapers or magazines that spectators might take into the games, or through the vicinity of games locations, will contain advertisements that have been sponsored by people other than the official games sponsors. Therefore, there is a risk of people inadvertently falling foul of the regulations unless an exemption is provided to cover such a scenario. The same applies to the users of mobile phones or laptops who might source advertising by non-sponsors inside a games area. What would happen if a local person within the official vicinity of a games venue tuned into their commercial radio station or into an advertising-funded television station? That person could be breaking the rules if they saw or heard advertising by a non-sponsor, which is why exemptions are needed. It has been pointed out that a cinema that is within the vicinity of a games venue might show  adverts by non-sponsors and might therefore, in theory, break the rules. Some might say that such concerns are far-fetched, but that is not the opinion of the Scottish Daily Newspaper Society or the Advertising Association, which represents the Scottish Newspaper Publishers Association and several other organisations. The organisations responded to the 2007 consultation on the draft bill and made the points that I have made. They are worried about the matter. While the Olympics legislation south of the border was going through Westminster in 2005 and 2006, ministers in both houses recognised the validity of such concerns and offered reassurances that the advertising regulations would contain the necessary exemptions. I ask the minister to support my amendment, which would deal with the legitimate concerns that I have raised. If he does not want to do so, will he provide, on the record, reassurances relating to the Commonwealth games in Glasgow that are similar to those that his counterparts at Westminster provided for the Olympic games in London? It is hardly enough to say that the Government will take a commonsense approach to enforcement, as that would not provide the necessary reassurance to people who are frightened of breaking the rules by accident rather than by design. I look forward to hearing what the minister has to say on amendment 1. My colleague Bill Aitken will speak to amendment 2. The purpose of amendment 3 is to state, in section 11, the maximum period during which advertising regulations issued under section 10 could apply. We agree with the principle that official sponsors should be protected from ambush marketing by non-sponsors. Nevertheless, we consider that the measures that achieve that should be proportionate and should provide the wider advertising industry in Scotland with the greatest degree of certainty. In our view, the bill as it stands does not do that. We think that the bill should indicate the maximum duration of advertising regulations that could be issued under any eventual statute. The purpose of the amendment is to provide the advertising industry in Scotland with the greatest degree of certainty now about how any regulations issued under section 10 are likely to impact on the sector come the summer of 2014. The opening and closing dates in the amendment are calculated on the basis that the games are scheduled to open on 23 July 2014 and close on 3 August in that year. The Commonwealth Games Federation appears to require that the restrictions be in place a fortnight  earlier, which would be 9 July 2014, and that is what is in the amendment. The closing date in the amendment is the day after the official end of the games. Unless the Government has come to an agreement with the Commonwealth Games Federation of which we are not aware, we think that the regulations should continue only for the 24 hours following the official closure. The minister will know that there is nothing in the bill that specifies the dates on which the regulations will be in place. Understandably, advertisers would like those dates to be clarified if possible. I move amendment 1.

I am grateful to the minister for giving those assurances on amendments 1 to 3. I am prepared to accept what he has said, which allays our worries.  Amendment 1, by agreement, withdrawn.  Amendment 2 not moved.

I am pleased to speak in the debate, which has been very informative. In 2004, during a similar debate, I made a speech that was partially critical of Historic Scotland and its role. Things have improved; there has, as Ted Brocklebank said, been a change of cultural outlook. Earlier this week, like other members, I found it encouraging to read that 2007-08 was a record year for Historic Scotland, with overall visitor numbers increasing by 62,000 compared with the previous year. That included some strong performances in my own region, the Highlands and Islands, including Skara Brae, which has been mentioned; Kisimul castle in the Western Isles; the iconic Urquhart castle on Loch Ness; and Rothesay castle on Bute, which had an amazing increase in visitors of 49 per cent. Well done them! Given the pressures on the international economy these days, those figures are very positive and a tribute to those who work for Historic Scotland throughout the country. I hope that we can look forward to Dumfries house being another success story in next year's figures. Having been closely involved in last year's campaign to save Dumfries house, I commend Historic Scotland for its involvement in saving what I hope will turn out to be one of the jewels in Scotland's tourism crown. It was a good example of Historic Scotland working closely and effectively with local authorities in the Ayrshire area, as well as with other organisations, for the common good. We have heard a number of examples of instances in which it has been suggested that Historic Scotland could engage more positively and productively with the owners of particular historic buildings in various states of repair, and more widely with local communities. I associate myself with my colleague Ted Brocklebank's comments, especially concerning Castle Tioram, which featured in my 2004 speech. I will repeat what I said then: "Can the minister explain why it is wrong for an individual to spend £4.5 million of his own money on the restoration of a 13 th century castle to its 1715 condition? Is it wrong that he should want to live there? Is it wrong that he should wish to create a museum for the public? Is it wrong that he should create spin-off benefits and employment for the local community and for local hotels and bed and breakfasts? Historic Scotland seems to think that that is wrong, despite 70 per cent of the local population around Acharacle signing a petition in support of the renovation and Highland Council giving the go-ahead to the plan, which seems democratic enough to me. The renovator is not asking for money; he seeks permission to spend his own money on the restoration of a piece of Scotland's heritage that without renovation will crumble into the sea. Will the minister look at the case and at the prejudice that is blocking a good idea from becoming a reality for the people of Moidart?"— [ Official Report , 11 March 2004; c 6619.]  I asked that question of the then Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport. Today, I ask the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture the same question. I congratulate John Farquhar Munro on raising the case of Eilean Donan and we should also consider Kinkell castle, which was built in 1592 and was completely sacked after the '45. It was lovingly restored by Gerald Laing, who is one of our foremost sculptors. That is another example of a building that has been renovated to the benefit of Scotland's heritage. In a number of cases, Historic Scotland and local authorities can work more effectively with the owners of historic properties and local communities. For example, our amendment seeks a clearer approach to dispute resolution. Last week, however, I had the pleasure of hosting the Dalmally historical association's historic visit to the Scottish Parliament, and I heard about a generally positive case of engagement with Historic Scotland. The Dalmally project involved the restoration of the historic local parish church. The original project was to restore the church windows, which dated from 1811, at a total cost of £26,000. At the time, the church did not have the money to fund the project. The cost ballooned to £250,000 when it was discovered that the internal structures of the church tower needed to be replaced. The original tower had been rendered in porous limestone, but at a later date the render had been covered in non-porous plaster, which caused the structure to become waterlogged, damp and dangerous. The committee that was set up, which involved members of the church, provided the framework and organisation that were needed to manage the project. In all, 14 bodies have been involved in supporting the project. Some £40,000 was raised by the church and the rest of the money came from the other bodies that were involved. Historic Scotland doubled the funding when the project went over budget. I congratulate Historic Scotland on a wonderful piece of work. I agree strongly with the statements in "Scotland's Historic Environment" that "protection of the historic environment is not about preventing change" and that, rather, "change in this dynamic environment should be managed intelligently and with understanding, to achieve the best outcome for the historic environment and for the people of Scotland." The Scottish Conservatives support any moves that will streamline the relationship between local authorities, Historic Scotland and stakeholders. We look forward to hearing the Scottish  Government's proposals in that regard. As has been recognised, Historic Scotland can be a powerful enabler for voluntary heritage organisations, network bodies and local authorities. It can allow them to deliver successful, locally based, locally supported outcomes for the historic environment. I support the amendment in my colleague Ted Brocklebank's name.

You alluded to Eilean Donan castle as having been a pile of rocks, but I remind you that it was under your party's Administration that Castle Tioram remained a pile of rocks.

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing the debate, which I hope will inform the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change as he prepares to finalise the Scottish Government's strategic transport projects review. I also hope that it will demonstrate to him the cross-party support for a bypass for Elgin and other much-needed transport improvements along the A96 corridor. Like other members, I pay tribute to all the organisations that have campaigned for the Elgin bypass with such enthusiasm and vigour. As with Robert the Bruce and the spider, they will not give up. As I know from personal experience, Elgin suffers the worst traffic congestion anywhere between Inverness and Aberdeen. It is common sense to conclude that that must act as a deterrent to business investment in the Elgin area. Moray has some of the lowest average weekly earnings in Scotland. Improving the area's transport links is a key part of tackling that by attracting new businesses and employment to the area. Highlands and Islands Enterprise's valuable study of drivers' perceptions of the A96 highlights the slow-moving agricultural traffic, the lack of overtaking opportunities and stressful journeys. The quality of the route is viewed as a constraint to future economic expansion. The Scottish Government has a duty to respond to those issues without delay. I note that Moray Council's Elgin traffic management document suggests that public transport provision along the A96 route needs to be boosted in conjunction with road improvements. Perhaps the minister will want to address that tonight. Does the minister agree with almost 90 per cent of the Moray citizens panel that more goods should be transported by rail along the route, rather than by road? What action can he take to support that? Apart form the economic aspects of the bypass campaign, there are important safety and environmental issues, which other members have spoken about and which add weight to the arguments of local campaigners. I welcome the fact that, during his visit to Elgin last month, the minister agreed with local  campaigners that improving the area's transport infrastructure is the key to unlocking Moray's economic potential. We are now all looking to the minister to set himself apart from his predecessors by actually delivering the Elgin bypass, and not just delivering lip service to it.

The homelessness charity Crisis published a report in February that demonstrates that, by enabling people to rent in the private sector, deposit guarantee schemes can make a major contribution to tackling homelessness. In light of that report, does the minister have any intention to extend the use of such schemes?

I appreciate the importance of caged fish farms. However, does the member agree that escapes, such as recently occurred in Loch Etive, can be detrimental to the biodiversity of local fish species?

What is the current status of the Government's exercise on prescription scheme, which was mentioned in the SNP's manifesto as something that would be available to children across Scotland?

I welcome the opportunity to discuss housing policy. The minister spoke of optimism, but that is no substitute for bricks and mortar. The proof of the pudding will be in the eating. Like all members, I am only too aware from my mailbag of the massive and increasing problem of the lack of affordable housing throughout Scotland. As politicians, it is our duty to take the lead in offering practical and realistic solutions, because the situation is ruining many people's lives. As the Scottish Conservative party's communities spokesman, I have had the pleasure of meeting a wide cross-section of housing interest groups and discussing their concerns and ideas. One issue that arises time and again is the lack of dynamism in our planning system, which remains cumbersome and slow, despite recent reforms that were supposed to improve it. Just the other day, one housing expert told me that in Edinburgh alone, about 5,000 affordable housing units that have been granted permission are stuck in the planning and delivery pipeline. That situation is crazy, but it is—sadly—replicated throughout the country. Do ministers recognise the  widespread concern about the planning system's role in the lack of delivery of affordable housing? If so, what action will they take to respond? Is the housing supply task force considering that? In the past, ministers have launched ambitious targets for the number of affordable housing units that they want to be delivered each year, but a gap has existed between the rhetoric and the delivery of new affordable houses. Planning is a major factor in that. As for affordable housing in rural areas, like the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association, I welcomed the Government's recent announcement of grants for rural homes for rent. The Government is recognising what the Scottish Conservatives have long argued—that the private sector has a key role to play in providing affordable homes for rent in rural areas and especially in remote rural areas. I hope that that is just the beginning of positive co-operation between the Government and the independent housing sector and that ministers will expand the scheme after the pilot study, if it is assessed to be successful and to provide value for money. I am also interested to hear whether ministers plan to expand the rural empty properties grant scheme, which has successfully brought back into use redundant and disused properties on many estates. I am disappointed that the SNP wants to restrict a tenant's right to buy the home in which they live. We believe that everyone should be able to buy their home if they wish to, so we want to protect the right to buy for the next generation of home owners. That is why we lodged our amendment. Will the minister confirm that the Government is abandoning its first-time buyers grant? According to The Sunday Times , of the 400 respondents to the "Firm Foundations" consultation, 90 per cent opposed the grant, including the Council of Mortgage Lenders, the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland, the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, Homes for Scotland, the Association of Local Authority Chief Housing Officers, the Royal Bank of Scotland and Cala Homes. Like the Scottish Conservatives, they all realise that, although the grant is well-intentioned, it would add to house price inflation and would help nobody. The Conservatives' policy of removing stamp duty on houses with a value of up to £250,000 for first-time buyers would help such buyers much more. After the next general election, we expect that policy to take effect all over the United Kingdom. The lack of affordable housing is one of the major domestic issues that faces modern Scotland and it must be addressed. Many responses to the "Firm Foundations" consultation offer insight into the problems that prevent the delivery of affordable housing as well as welcome new ideas  and solutions. I look forward to the Government's providing a definitive response to the consultation. I move amendment S3M-1603.1, to insert at end: "further believes that the right to buy should not be further restricted, and calls on the Scottish Government to encourage councils to bring forward plans for housing stock transfer to take advantage of the debt write-off which is available from HM Treasury and promote new investment as a result."

The two national parks play a significant part in my region. They are both young, although they are growing up, and at present they need encouragement rather than interference. Professor Kay is a fine academic and I feel that I know him well, having read many of his works on the Dunoon ferry service, which delivers people to the Argyll forest area of the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park. I will comment on some of the issues that are identified in his report, and on some of my concerns, but first I will highlight the positive aspects of the national parks. The other week, I had a meeting in Grantown with the convener of the Cairngorms National Park Authority, David Green. I am particularly interested in the work that the authority is doing to offer training to land-based businesses. The training is benefiting estates, farms, crofts, forestry, fishing, horticulture, nurseries and outdoor recreation providers in the park. Indeed, any business that is related to the management or use of the land is benefiting. Environmental courses on deer  stalking, black grouse management, mole control, water margin management and dry stone wall dyking are vital in maintaining traditional skills. There is so little agricultural training nowadays that those courses are all the more important. Public-benefit courses that have been delivered through the training programme include ones on the Scottish outdoor access code, Cairngorms wildlife, tick control and heather management, and catering for the less-able visitor. The CNPA has received positive comments from businesses and organisations about the training. Last year, more than 800 people from 182 businesses in the Cairngorms national park benefited from the project and said so. In the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park, a community training programme runs useful courses on a range of subjects including how community organisations can better access funding streams. I am also impressed by the work that the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority is doing to increase apprenticeships in the park and to encourage businesses in the park to make use of the latest information technology. An issue of concern that my constituents in the Cairngorms national park have raised with me is the requirement on developers in the park to make up to 50 per cent of new homes in a development affordable homes. Although we share the aim of having more affordable homes, will imposing a punitive requirement for an extra 25 per cent of affordable homes on a developer or house builder produce more homes or lead to fewer? I would like the minister to comment on that, if possible, because it is doubling a tax that, at best, is beginning to look inefficient. I would be interested to hear the minister's views on that when he sums up. Given that both NPAs have been up and running for about five years, it makes sense to examine and take stock of their performance. Professor Kay identifies an excess of bureaucracy in the NPAs, and the Scottish Conservatives are always prepared to consider a reduction in bureaucracy so that money can be focused on delivery at a local level. As John Scott said, it might be true that the number of board members should be assessed to reduce expenditure, and we should probably debate that. What really matters is that the park is run so that it is a success. I have concerns about the suggestion to strip the two NPAs of their separate status and merge them with SNH. Constituents who have contacted me in light of Saturday's coverage in The Scotsman are concerned about and opposed to that suggestion, which would be a backwards step. Anyone who remembers the consultations in the run-up to the creation of the  parks will remember, as I do, that the main cause of concern in the communities affected was that SNH might run them. I would not be wrong in saying that most local people would consider domination by SNH to be a form of colonialism and therefore quite unthinkable.

I am delighted to hear the minister reiterate that. I know that ministers will be conducting a formal review of the Scottish national parks later in the year and Professor Kay's report will no doubt influence that process. Ministers will, however, need to tread with caution and should not compromise our national parks' independence. I was glad to hear the minister mention the primacy of local input in his speech. In conclusion, I highlight the positive work that goes on in our national parks while acknowledging that improvements could be made. I urge ministers to treat Professor Kay's report with caution. I support the amendment in the name of my colleague, John Scott.

The number of people who qualify as fuel poor dipped to a new low in this country in 2002, yet between the financial years 2004-05 and 2005-06, fuel poverty rose by 30 per cent, which was, of course, under the Liberal-Labour coalition. Most worryingly, nearly 50 per cent of single pensioner households are fuel poor. Therefore, although I congratulate Liam McArthur and think that he is right to highlight those appalling statistics, I point out that the situation came about under his Government's watch.

Let me make progress—I will come back to the member in a minute. I well remember in the previous session of Parliament taking on, in a short period, more than 100 cases involving senior citizens in the Highlands and Islands who could not get the free central heating that they had been promised. Some of those people who had no heating were in Orkney and Shetland. Because the proportion of elderly people in our population is ever increasing, a long-term solution must be found if the Government is to honour its pledges on the central heating programme.

In a minute. I am still listening to complaints on the issue from people from Campbeltown to Shetland.

If the member will let me carry on, I will come to that. We are told that there is a waiting list of 10,000 for the central heating programme, with an average waiting time of between five and six months. How many of those people might die as a result of that wait? The motion speaks of 3,000 deaths, which is a sobering thought. In my region, the Highlands and Islands, the problems are exacerbated by storms and bad weather, which often cut electricity supplies to rural households. More than a third of households in rural areas suffer fuel poverty whereas, in urban areas, the figure is a fifth. I listened to the chancellor's speech yesterday, and it is good to know that he has finally woken up to the unfairness for customers who have prepayment meters. However, it is too late for most of those people, because they cannot get their money back. Prepayment meter customers pay on average £214 a year more than those who pay by direct debit, which is grossly unfair, particularly as the extra charge generally falls on those who can least afford it. I am concerned that the latest price rises will hit low-income households the hardest. I welcome the response to political and customer concern about anti-competitive behaviour—we have the Ofgem investigation into the domestic retail market, which will report before the end of September, and the House of Commons Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Committee investigation. If the  assertions that have been made are confirmed, steps must be taken to ensure that the customer gets a fair deal. Increased energy efficiency can help the fuel poor. Scottish Gas has highlighted that, for every £3 that is spent on heating and lighting, £1 is lost immediately. Twenty-five per cent of carbon emissions are generated in the home, so we are wasting money and potentially damaging the environment. Energy efficiency measures are widely acknowledged to be the cheapest, cleanest and safest way in which to achieve Britain's climate change commitments. In addition, energy efficiency can make an important contribution on other energy priorities, including those on fuel poverty, supply shortages and sustainability. Best of all, energy efficiency makes money for those who invest in it—for example, installing cavity wall insulation can save £150 a year on energy bills in an average home. I agree with Liam McArthur's sentiments regarding the fuel poverty forum, the goal of which was to end fuel poverty in Scotland by 2016. I note that the minister, Stewart Maxwell, has written to Westminster to ask the UK ministerial fuel poverty group to reconvene as soon as possible. Can he enlighten us as to the responses to that inquiry?

Apparently, he has not had a response—that is not very encouraging. I support the investigations into the domestic retail market and the calls for the re-establishment of the fuel poverty forum. I call on the Scottish Government to ensure that the central heating programme reaches those who need it most as quickly as possible. I move amendment S3M-1550.2, to leave out from "deplores the fact" to end and insert: "regrets that the latest figures show that fuel poverty increased by 30% between 2004-05 and 2005-06, with nearly 50% of single pensioners experiencing fuel poverty, and welcomes the Ofgem investigation into the domestic retail market and the similar investigation by the House of Commons Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Committee; further regrets that almost 3,000 deaths per year are linked to living in cold, damp housing; believes that tackling the social, health and environmental impacts of fuel poverty can save people money, improve health and help to tackle climate change; calls for the re-establishment of the Fuel Poverty Forum with a remit to include the development of a one-stop-shop approach to fuel poverty that increases the installation of energy efficiency measures, efficient central heating systems, microgeneration and smart meter technology, and further calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that the central heating programme is reaching those who need it most."

I am a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee and I am pleased to speak in the debate. I agree that something needs to be done to ensure that appointments to the boards of Scotland's public bodies reflect the increasing diversity of the Scottish public. Current research shows that diversity can improve the performance of our boards by better facilitating communication and understanding between boards and their users. The consultation document, which was prepared by the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland, Karen Carlton, is excellent. Its most important facet is that it upholds the principle that merit should remain the most important criterion when new members are appointed. Instead of seeking the achievement of specific targets for increasing minority representation, it calls for a different kind of aspirational target by encouraging a greater diversity of people to apply. That is extremely important, because it would be a mistake to implement an affirmative action programme that could result in the appointment of candidates who are not best qualified to do the job. I have faith that if we succeed in attracting a qualified and diverse group of applicants, the problem will solve itself by providing ministers with an applicant pool that is diverse and not lacking in quality. By suggesting that current board members should undertake equality training, the draft strategy goes beyond simply calling for something that will result in a more diverse pool of applicants. Although that seems reasonable, it is vague about what equality training entails. Will it have a significant impact on Scotland's boards and their members' skills, or is it just another level of red tape—I hope that it is not. I am concerned that the infusion of new people with fresh ideas has not been addressed. A diversity of opinions and beliefs is important, and the fact that many of the same suspects serve on many boards can be counterproductive to the  ultimate goal of achieving diversity. We must work to ensure that boards are not over-monopolised by particular individuals or familiar faces wearing different hats. I also take issue with the application process, which can drag on for many months because of its overly complex and bureaucratic nature. As a result, many qualified candidates might be put off out of sheer frustration, which hampers the aim of achieving greater diversity on boards. I believe that the draft strategy's aims are honourable and well intentioned, but they are also ambitious. If its recommendations are implemented, the Government will have to be patient and give them time to take effect. I have confidence in the committee and the policies that we are debating and I support our convener's motion.

Not only the people of Mull and Islay, but the residents of Jura, Bute, Colonsay and Arran—as well as those who live in Dunoon—will miss out on the lower ferry fares. All those people would have benefited from the previous Government's manifesto plan for a 40 per cent cut in ferry fares, but after 19 October—

For 30 months after 19 October, only the people of the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree will benefit from lower fares. Does the minister think that that is equitable?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to make people feel safe in the Highlands and Islands. (S3O-2363)

Does the minister agree that Northern Constabulary's recent survey of the public's perception of community safety, which showed that 95 per cent of people felt safe in their community, is a tribute not only to all those policemen, policewomen and other staff who work for Northern Constabulary but to their system and method? Does he think that that should be looked  on by other police regions as an example of good practice?

Not in all areas.

I did not know that John Farquhar Munro has used his net in the Minch. I always thought that he did so in the coastal areas around Skye. I declare an interest in that I am an honorary vice-president of the Clyde Fishermen's Association, a sea angler and a freshwater angler. I know perfectly well that stocks in the sea lochs and the open sea have badly declined in the past 20 to 30 years. Once in the 1970s, my sister and I caught 110 good-sized saithe and lithe off a rock on the Isle of Coll. We returned on the same date two years ago and caught six. That either means that we do not know how to fish any more or that the fish are not there. Sea angling is a major contributor to the economy in the region that I represent—the Highlands and Islands. John Scott gave figures on what it produces there. I was staggered when I heard a gentleman who was representing the European Federation of Sea Angling, I think, say today that sea angling is worth £7 billion to the European economy and that it supports half a million jobs in Europe. I have just spent a week's holiday in Lanzarote, where one gets bombarded with pamphlets that ask people to go sea fishing. When a German sea angler to whom I was speaking there found out that I had come from Scotland, he said, "Ah! You really do have good sea fishing." We do not make enough use of what we take for granted on our coast, but we should. Sea fishing is worth a lot, but it could be worth much more. Some species of fish are best caught by anglers during the winter months. Income from winter tourism can be especially important to remote communities, many of which are struggling economically. Such communities want tourism to be expanded so that there are tourists all year round. Today, I spoke to the president of the Scottish Crofting Foundation, Norman Leask, who comes from Shetland. He told me that he has many friends with boats who make a lot of extra income out of taking people fishing. Of course, the fishing around Shetland is still quite good.  I was on Orkney during its sea angling festival around two years ago. There was a huge buzz in the air and all the hotels were full, although the festival was held off-season. Local boats were hired to take out sea anglers. We ought to make more of that obvious mode of tourism. A councillor there said that it is probably the best diversification that can be found. Politicians always tell farmers and crofters that they must diversify, and sea angling is a means of diversifying on their doorsteps that they could do something about. Scotland has a huge coastline: Argyll alone has more coastline than France. We are surrounded by the sea on all sides—surely it is possible for commercial fisheries and sea anglers to live in sustainable co-existence. Lamlash Bay is closing, and there are areas in which people have voluntarily stopped commercial fishing. The fishermen's associations must be asked to work together with sea anglers so that, as I say, commercial fisheries and sea anglers can live in sustainable co-existence.

It enjoys it.

The member might not be aware that Aviemore in my region has supplied more Olympic athletes per head of population than has any other town in Europe. I think that that is because of the sporting infrastructure that surrounds the village, which is important. Does he agree that the sporting infrastructure that is left by the Commonwealth games will be exceptionally important?

I am pleased to speak in the debate and I welcome the Government's swift action to introduce the bill, in line with the legal requirements of our successful bid to host the Commonwealth games in 2014. The Scottish Conservatives strongly supported the current Government and the previous Executive in the campaign to secure the games for Glasgow and we will give similarly strong support as the bill makes its way through the Parliament, by flagging up any concerns about details in the bill. I also welcome Sir Robert Smith's recent appointment as the chairman of Glasgow 2014. His experience in the business world, as chairman of the Weir Group and of Scottish and Southern Energy, and his success in delivering large capital projects bodes well for the success of the Glasgow games. I have studied many of the 39 submissions to the consultation on the draft bill that were received between June and September, and I am encouraged by the fact that the vast majority are broadly supportive of the bill's policy objectives and the fact that, in a number of instances, the Scottish Government has already clarified matters in response to issues that were raised in the consultation. In addition, the main committee report from the Local Government and Communities Committee states that it considers that there is broad overall support for the bill; that the bill has been welcomed as containing appropriate measures for the delivery of the Glasgow games; and that, subject to the resolution of some of the issues that will emerge today, it recommends to Parliament that the general principles of the bill be approved. However, a number of points have emerged from  the consultation and the committee's report that I hope the minister can address further. Submissions from respondents such as the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Federation of Small Businesses emphasise the need for those organisations to be consulted in the development of the transport plan. Delivering a successful transport infrastructure for the games will require a lot of organisations to work together in an integrated way, and the delivery of an effective transport system will be key to the success of the games. I welcome the fact that the Government has added section 37(2)(c) to ensure that the consultation over transport can be as wide as possible, and I look forward to its delivering on that. Local businesses in potentially affected areas must be consulted as a priority. The Guide Dogs for the Blind Association is disappointed that there is no requirement to consult the Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland or other disability organisations about the transport plan or for the plan to include a timetabled plan for making transport more accessible. The same organisation wonders what the organising committee is doing to ensure that buses in Glasgow and at other games venues meet the requirements of the Public Service Vehicles Accessibility Regulations 2000 and that they also have visual and audio announcement systems. I back the Local Government and Communities Committee in seeking assurances that the position of current licensed street traders is taken into consideration so that they are not penalised financially as a consequence of the games being held in Glasgow. I also agree with the committee that definitions of "vicinity" and "precinct" should be provided as soon as possible and should take into account practical issues surrounding games venues and events, including street trading and advertising. I note that several police forces, including the Northern Constabulary in my region, have also made those points. The Scottish Conservatives are in favour of the general principles of the bill and will work with the Government and all agencies to deliver the best ever Commonwealth games for Glasgow and for Scotland. I hope that the bill is drafted adequately to prevent the kind of cost overruns that occurred for the 2002 Manchester games, for which the final price tag was four times the original bid estimate. I am sure that all of us in the chamber wish to avoid that.

Is the First Minister aware that the community on the island of Luing in Argyll currently has no lifeline ferry service because of the industrial action affecting Argyll and Bute Council? Does he acknowledge the distress that is being caused to the people on Luing, whose children cannot go to school in Oban, and who have no way of getting off the island? What will the Scottish Government do about that serious situation? What back-up exists for such crucial lifeline ferry services?

I think that I said that there has been unfairness in the past and that we look forward to a much more progressive attitude and a more level playing field for private and state-funded enterprises within the forestry sector.

Forestry directly provides 19,000 jobs in Scotland, many of which are in my region of the Highlands and Islands, especially in remote and isolated communities where their value—and that of the associated jobs that they sustain—is consequently great. I hope that the number of people who are employed in the industry in the future will increase as the sector expands. Scotland has the land to provide further significant forestation and huge potential can be realised in many areas if the Government puts in place the right conditions and support, including adequate infrastructure. I live on Loch Awe in Argyll. I remember when every house in the villages of Eredine and Dalavich, which were both purpose built by the Forestry Commission, was filled by a forestry worker. Almost all those workers have now departed, despite the fact that the forests are still there. I acknowledge that the Forestry Commission did good work in the past, but I share the concerns that have been expressed about how much value for money the taxpayer has received from the investment that was made.

I hope that the state and private sector will continue to work together, but I disagree with the minister that many of the people living in Dalavich work in forestry—they do not. The private forestry sector is concerned that it does not have a level playing field. I hope that the minister will respond to such concerns in his summing up. Will he concede that the state forestry sector receives four to six times the level of support that the private forestry sector receives? Will he assure me that the new grant proposals under rural development contracts will be fair and equitable? Will he today provide specific details on how grants for restocking and replanting will be administered? I want to see the private forestry sector, with its excellent delivery mechanism and value-for-money comparisons, winning adequate support to allow the replanting that is needed for a sustainable forestry sector. What will the minister do to ensure that the enlargement of the commercial forestry sector, taking account of biodiversity and the enhancement of native woodlands and open  space, is moved up the agenda of the regional project assessment committees? That is vital, but so far it seems to be a very low priority for the RPACs. The previous Executive let down the private forestry sector badly when, in 2006, it ended the forestry grants scheme a year earlier than planned. We therefore look to the new Scottish National Party Government to treat the private forestry sector with more respect and to promote forestry that encourages wildlife. John Scott's amendment refers to capercaillie and Scottish crossbills. I add to that blackcocks and greyhens, which will thrive in diverse forests but are destroyed by the monoculture of massive blocks of Sitka spruce. I agree with what other members said about the tourism potential of forestry. We must plant a diverse range of deciduous trees as well as conifers because that will benefit the environment, wildlife and tourism. I hope that most members agree that the days of simply planting thousands of acres of Sitka are over and will not be missed. Monoculture in forestry is a bad idea—the Gearraidh na h-Aibhne plantation of western hemlock on the Isle of Lewis was completely destroyed by the pine beauty moth. Forestry must be planted with markets in mind, whether we are talking about the production of fuel briquettes for biomass, which Jim Hume mentioned, or the production of high-quality paper, for which Scotland already has a good reputation: Time magazine, for example, uses Scottish paper. Pulp and paper mills, such as those that sustained Fort William and Invergordon in the past must be strategically planned and timber transport should be planned to involve sea and rail, so that as little damage as possible is done to Scotland's roads. I am also interested in alternative types of fencing for forestry. Young trees must be fenced to protect them from deer, but it is possible nowadays to use unobtrusive electric fencing in place of the conventional high fences that can kill birds and are expensive to maintain. Today's debate has been constructive and welcome. If ministers take anything from it, I hope that they will recognise that the private forestry sector wants to play a full, positive and dynamic part in developing the commercial forestry sector in Scotland, and that it is uniquely well placed to do so. All the private forestry sector wants is a level playing field in accessing the support that is available, and a process that is not bogged down with bureaucracy and red tape. I support the amendment in the name of my colleague John Scott.

The minister should speak to his MSP.

Will the member join me in welcoming the fact that Bob Dylan now has a property in the Highlands and Islands?

I congratulate Rob Gibson on securing the debate. I am very pleased to speak about the Scottish traditional music sector, having long been a strong supporter of it. The 2007 awards, which took place in Fort William, in the Highlands and Islands, and which contributed to the year of Highland culture, were a fantastic celebration of the very best in Scottish traditional music. All the organisers and participants are to be commended for that. The awards also represented a significant boost to the local economy. I will highlight some of the award winners who come from the Highlands and Islands. I wish to praise Julie Fowlis from North Uist for winning both the album of the year award and the award for Gaelic singer of the year; the fantastic Fochabers Fiddlers, who were awarded the Strathspey and reel society of the year award; and the outstanding Mid Argyll pipe band from my native Argyll, which, with its latest title of Scottish pipe band of the year, continues to put Argyll on the map. Obviously, the Highlands and Islands are very well represented in terms of award winners, which speaks volumes about the region's key role in sustaining the traditional music sector. God bless the Old Blind Dogs on a great win—what a name for a band, and what a sound they make. The motion refers to the lack of TV coverage. I share Rob Gibson's concerns. I am sure that the awards would attract a significant TV audience, and I will be interested to hear what the minister has to say on the matter in her response. The fact that the Inveraray junior pipe band won a £17,000 lottery award that was voted on by TV viewers all over the country shows how popular this kind of music can be. The motion also mentions the "rude health ... of Scotland's contemporary indigenous music", and on that I agree with Rob Gibson again. I am sure that he and other members taking part in the debate will wish to put on record our delight at the success of this year's Celtic Connections event, which finished last weekend. This year was the most successful in the event's 15-year history: more than 120,000 people attended and ticket sales broke all records. The whole Celtic Connections team, led very ably by Capercaillie member Donald Shaw, who has helped to turn the whole event around after a dodgy period in 2006, should be congratulated on that success. It is good that the festival included so many new international acts, because I believe that that gives more scope to composers and musicians. Indeed, it also included the work "Ben Dorain" by Scotland's great composer Ronald Stevenson, which is based on a poem by Duncan Ban  McIntyre and will, I hope, become a classic of Gaelic culture that will be seen again and again. I have previously spoken of my respect for accordion and fiddle clubs, and I make no apology for doing so again. In that regard, I consider Robbie Shepherd's excellent Radio Scotland shows—"Take the Floor" on Saturday evening and "The Reel Blend" on Sundays—to be great showcases for exponents of this grass-roots sector of Scottish traditional music. I also pay tribute to Scotland's bagpiping sector and the great enthusiasm of the individuals who run and play in Scotland's many pipe bands. In particular, I want to compliment the recently formed Inveraray junior pipe band, which has just won a world championship. These bands are a great outlet for the enthusiasm, exuberance and energy of young boys and girls and give them something to look forward to. Indeed, the shared team experience of being a piper or drummer in a pipe band can prove highly valuable for the future.

I refer members to my interest in the agricultural industry, to which I will refer in my speech. History teaches us, and the SNP concedes the point in its motion, that the single most effective way to lift people out of poverty is to grow the economy so that more people are in work and earning enough money to allow them to provide for themselves and their families, and to provide the wherewithal for decent pensions and welfare. Therefore, every able adult of working age who is  capable of earning a decent living for themselves and their dependents must be given the incentive to do so. The stronger the economy, the better the welfare system will be. A good welfare system is required to enable financially those people who are unable to work or who find themselves temporarily out of work. Within that context, I want to highlight the very real problems that face the rural primary industries in my region of the Highlands and Islands and which are contributing to real poverty in our remote communities. Unless something is done, the problems will get much worse. Although much of the debate has rightly focused on conditions in the most urban parts of Scotland, the Parliament and all MSPs have a duty to consider and address the issues of rural poverty and deprivation. The main industry on most of the open land in the Highlands and Islands continues to be livestock agriculture. For farmers and crofters, 2007 was the worst year that most can remember. I am pleased that I was at least able to help to achieve the £6 per ewe foot-and-mouth compensation payment from the Scottish Government and payments under the light lamb welfare scheme, also from that source. I thank the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, for listening and acting, albeit that both payments were less than what was called for. However, it is disappointing that the Scottish Government seems no longer to be putting pressure on Hilary Benn, the Labour Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, for compensation to alleviate the huge losses that the livestock farming industry in Scotland has incurred due to the serious and fundamental mistake by the Government's laboratory at Pirbright. The National Farmers Union of Scotland and the National Sheep Association tell me that the present UK Labour Government refuses to acknowledge the catastrophic losses to the sheep industry. It is undoubtedly the case that those losses will contribute to severe rural poverty. To compound the industry's difficulties, feed prices have doubled since last year and the price that sheep made at the autumn sales would have been laughable if the position was not so deadly serious. Much is made of the Highland culture in which people in remote communities look after each other. Poverty can destroy such communities and that culture. That is why I ask the Scottish Government to find out why primary livestock producers on the continent, in countries such as France and Germany, receive so much more for their product than the equivalent primary producers here in Scotland receive. We are, after all, meant to have a common market. I will continue to keep up pressure on the long- suffering cabinet secretary, Richard Lochhead, to make him aware of the predicament of those who depend on the agriculture of the Highlands and Islands. I refer not only to farmers and crofters, but to all those who earn their living from agriculture including those in the haulage industry, animal feed industry, and veterinary industry, as well as the fencing contractors, auctioneers and market men. Will our cabinet secretary let Hilary Benn get away with this scandal? Other members referred to fuel poverty in the context of rising electricity and central heating bills. Those price rises impact particularly on pensioners and those who are on low incomes. The high cost of petrol and diesel is having a devastating effect on many rural businesses—quite simply, some of our small companies are being priced out of the marketplace. I was in Stornoway early last week. In some parts of the Western Isles, petrol is more than £1.20 a litre, which is around 20 per cent more than the average mainland price. That high cost is crippling the lives of local residents and deterring tourism. Higher haulage costs increase the price of goods in the shops in the Western Isles. I would be interested to hear the cabinet secretary's view on that and whether she agrees that inflation in many of our island and remote communities is running way above the headline rate of inflation, due in large part to the rising cost of fuel. Since the route out of poverty in rural areas is a mosaic of thriving small businesses, it is important that the physical routes that are vital for those businesses are kept open. I point out to the Scottish Government that the lifeline A82 to the Highlands still has a single-line section with traffic lights that has been in place for more than 30 years. Also, its sister road, the A83, now has a similar single-line section at the Rest and Be Thankful. Good road links are essential to local businesses and tourism, and bad infrastructure relates directly to rural poverty. I share my colleague Mary Scanlon's concerns about the appalling health statistics in some parts of Scotland. I will support any measures to bring about change. We must eliminate the culture of dependency that leads not only to poverty and deprivation, but to feelings of exclusion, depression and despair among many who are caught in the trap. The Scottish Conservatives will support any moves to make the Scottish economy more competitive and to make conditions more conducive to job creation. We believe that those are the best ways in which to reduce and eradicate poverty. I hope that the cabinet secretary and ministers will acknowledge the specific problems that face the primary industries in the rural areas of Scotland. I support the  amendment in the name of my colleague Mary Scanlon.

To ask the Scottish Executive what support is available for healthy living centres in remote and island communities. (S3O-1872)

Does the minister recognise that the future of many healthy living centres in remote and island communities, including the one on Islay in Argyll, is in doubt because of their difficulties in convincing the Big Lottery Fund that their work affects enough people to merit support? Surely the population of Islay, which is 3,400, is large enough to justify the continuation of a healthy living centre that up to now has been successful in providing services to the people of the island. However, the centre will close if further funding is not forthcoming. Will the minister make representations to the Big Lottery Fund in that regard and emphasise how valuable the centres are in helping to improve health and well-being in some of our most remote communities?

I thank the cabinet secretary for providing an advance copy of his statement, in which he says: "the key achievement of the autumn negotiations" is "the historic agreement that provides unprecedented flexibility to run our own days-at-sea scheme." Will he be able to use that flexibility to return the 28 days at sea per year that were taken away in error from the west coast prawn fishermen in 2006? I raised the matter with the cabinet secretary on behalf of the Clyde Fishermen's Association, and in his reply to me of 10 January, for which I thank him, he said: "my officials were given the impression that Commission officials accepted an error had been made." The cabinet secretary also said: "The UK asked the Commission for copies of the papers showing where these previously unknown west of Scotland thresholds were established, but Commission officials explained that they were agreed verbally". That was not a satisfactory answer. Will the cabinet secretary assure me that he will fully investigate the scandal?

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has made to the Norwegian Government in respect of its proposal to close its consulate in Edinburgh. (S3O-1770)

I, too, wrote to the Norwegian Prime Minister in November, although I have not yet received an acknowledgement. Does the minister acknowledge the real concerns of many of my constituents in the Highlands and Islands and many others throughout Scotland and northern England who use the Norwegian consulate in Edinburgh and find it an efficient office, and who now face the possibility of receiving a less effectives service in future, particularly in relation to passports? Will she repeat her opposition to the Norwegian Government's plans to downgrade its consulate? Does she agree that it is ironic that devolution in Scotland is leading to the centralisation of consular services of a country with which Scotland has so many links?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. Will the minister concede that his announcement is a significant U-turn on the SNP's stated manifesto commitment to abolish sportscotland, which was opposed across the whole Scottish sporting community? Although his U-turn is welcome, will he acknowledge that it is regrettable that we had many months of uncertainty in sports  policy when we should have focused on the real priority of encouraging more participation in all sports among all age groups? Will the minister give more details on how the new structure will ensure that the excellent work of the Scottish Institute of Sport is expanded? If the institute is to be merged with sportscotland, will its management have seats on the sportscotland board? How will the institute fit in with sportscotland's achieving excellence team? Which of the institute's six area boards will be done away with? I am sure that the institute wants to know. Finally, the Scottish Institute of Sport's legacy was the Scots athletes' achievements in Melbourne, which the minister mentioned. I hope that he will not be haunted one day by the phrase, "If it ain't broke, don't fix it."

I welcome the opportunity to speak in today's debate about sportscotland. I will come straight to the point and say that the Scottish Conservatives simply do not believe that any case has been made in any quarter that convinces us of the need to abolish sportscotland. I hope that the Scottish Government will not do that, despite the SNP manifesto pledge. Members will be aware that we were complimentary about sportscotland in our manifesto. Since then, I have consulted a wide range of sports organisations in Scotland, which are mostly supportive of the role that sportscotland plays. The Government says that the Liberal Democrat motion is premature, because the Liberal Democrats have not waited for the results of the Government review. I suppose that the Government has a point, but surely, in that case, it was also premature of the SNP to state in its manifesto that it wished to abolish sportscotland before it had seen the books. The SNP said not that it wanted to review sportscotland, but that it wanted to abolish it. The Conservatives look forward to hearing any positive proposals that the SNP might have to improve sportscotland—hence my amendment—and thereby improve the delivery of sporting opportunities and physical education for young and old in Scotland. The SNP amendment mentions further debate. We certainly agree that there should be further debate, but we cannot support that amendment because of the SNP's declared intention in its manifesto to execute sportscotland without a fair trial. If the SNP is intent on changing only the name, just as it changed the name of the Executive to the Government, and just as the previous Executive changed the name of the Scottish Arts Council to creative Scotland, I suggest that that change would have to offer public benefit, otherwise it would be a waste of time and money. If a pencil is blunt, sharpen it—one does not necessarily need a new one. However, sportscotland is a sharp organisation. The Scottish Conservatives have made it quite clear that we do not want excessively bureaucratic quangos, but given that there is no widespread support—indeed, there is practically no support whatever—for replacing sportscotland with an unspecified organisation, where is the logic in doing so? The only logic is that the SNP pledged in its manifesto to abolish sportscotland. I hope that the SNP is big enough, with the benefit of hindsight, to alter that pledge today. That is especially important because, given that the 2012 Olympics and the 2014 Commonwealth games are coming up, we have so many other priorities, not  least in encouraging more of our young people to participate in all kinds of sport. The previous Executive failed to deliver on many of the sport 21 targets. Instead of abolishing sportscotland, the new Government would be better placed telling us how it intends to improve delivery on the proposals in "Reaching Higher". There might be ways in which sportscotland can become a leaner, meaner machine. However, abolishing the expertise that has built up, which has coincided with a successful period for Scottish sport, and replacing sportscotland with an as yet undefined organisation, which might mean that sports policy is centralised within the Scottish civil service, is simply not what our grass-roots sports organisations want. Members will have noticed that the SNP amendment does not mention the abolition of sportscotland. If the SNP had made it plain that rather than abolish sportscotland it wanted to improve it, we might have been able to support its amendment. However, if the SNP is going to remain dangling from its own petard, given its manifesto pledge, I do not see how we can support its amendment. Perhaps the minister has reflected on the overdogmatic abolition pledge in the manifesto and lightened up his attitude. If he continues to reflect, we might be able to reflect with him. However, if ministers lose the vote tonight, as seems likely, they will have to shoulder the blame, because they have simply not made the case for the abolition of sportscotland and they have not taken with them the Scottish sporting community, which is united in opposing sportscotland's abolition. I hope that the current review will take heed of the debate and the vote, and ensure that we focus on what really matters: encouraging our youngsters to experience the pleasure of sport and providing the best possible support for our sportsmen and sportswomen. I move amendment S3M-1018.1, to insert after first "sportscotland": "without prejudice to any proposals which may improve the performance of that body".

When the minister met those various bodies, did they say that they wanted to abolish sportscotland?

I congratulate Liam McArthur on bringing such an important subject to the chamber for debate. As another Highlands and Islands member, I am aware that people on other islands, as well as those on Orkney, are worried about air ambulance provision. People on the Isle of Mull have been worried about the issue for some time.

I certainly will. Although helicopters are a useful tool, there is no doubt that their inability to fly safely in certain weather conditions can put vulnerable patients in grave danger and could cause avoidable deaths. What is needed, as Liam McArthur said, is a fully operational, local back-up service to the existing helicopter service. I fully expect that that will cost  more money, but saving lives is paramount and all eventualities should be catered for if the means exist to do so.

The change from Eaga to Scottish Gas was meant to bring improvements. Why do the concerns about the delivery process still exist? Aside from the financial aspect, what will the minister do to ensure that pensioners and people who really need the heating get it in a shorter time than is currently the case for some of them? They have to wait for months and even years.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to increase NHS dental provision in Argyll and Bute. (S3O-1297)

The minister is obviously aware of the efforts to establish the much-needed new national health service dental practice in Oban. I hope that she will assure my constituents that the Government is keeping up the pressure on the matter. In addition, I wonder what advice the minister can offer to one of my constituents who has moved up from Greenock to Lochgilpead. Last week, she tried to sign up with an NHS dentist there and was informed that she could only be put on a waiting list that consists of 500 people, and that she would be better to stay with her existing dentist in Greenock, almost 100 miles away.

Does the minister recognise that the shellfish segment—which he has not yet mentioned—is by far the most valuable segment of the industry?

Will the member give way?

I am pleased to speak in this debate, and I welcome the fact that it has been scheduled some weeks before the EU council meeting on 17 to 19  December. That will give the cabinet secretary more time to listen to the concerns of the various different sectors of the fishing industry before he goes. I genuinely hope that the debate will inform and assist the cabinet secretary and his officials as they prepare for his first EU ministerial council, as well as the second round of the EU-Norway negotiations, which are under way and which are equally important. I declare an interest as an honorary vice-president of the Clyde Fishermen's Association. I will start with the demersal sector of the North Sea before moving on to raise some of the other key issues that affect my fishing constituents on the west coast and in the Highlands and Islands. As other members have mentioned, the one piece of positive news that stands out from the ICES October science report is its assessment of North Sea cod stocks, which has led ICES, for the first time in six years, not to recommend a zero catch. That scientific report mirrors what most fishermen tell us about their recent experience of cod stocks in the North Sea: the situation is getting better. It is of course early days for cod's recovery, but the Scottish fishing industry has bent over backwards to create, with Government, the scientists and the non-governmental organisations, a range of tools that are aimed at reducing cod mortality through fishing. I and Scotland's fishermen now look to the minister to negotiate an increase in the cod TAC to mitigate discards in the North Sea. Fishermen and the public are rightly outraged by those discards. People cannot understand why they have to go on taking place. Along with addressing that, we need a series of achievable and practical cod avoidance measures. On the pelagic sector, the industry has accepted a 9 per cent reduction in the mackerel TAC, but fishermen are seeing a much greater abundance of mackerel at sea, and we hope that the science will catch up with that next year. At last December's council, 28 days were deducted from the number of days that derogated west coast prawn fishing boats could spend at sea. The derogated boats are those that catch less than 5 per cent cod. The days available to those vessels were reduced from 280 to 252. That was an error. The days should have been deducted from the days that are allowed to the same fleet in the North Sea. Officials in both Edinburgh and Brussels have admitted the mistake, and they have asked that the days at sea that were deducted be added back before any consideration is given to the days to be allowed for 2008. Will the cabinet secretary assure me that he recognises the mistake and that he will seek to remedy last year's reduction in the number of days that the derogated west coast prawn fishing boats  could spend at sea? Does he accept the west coast nephrops fishermen's real concerns that any move to an introduction of kilowatt days could hit them particularly hard? Does he also accept that any imposition of statutory real-time closures will severely hit prawn fishermen? Will he engage with their representatives before any decisions are made in that regard? More generally, I hope that the cabinet secretary will agree that such a diversity of fisheries requires a diversity of approaches—we need more paint-brushes in the tin. The one-size-fits-all approach failed us in the past. Perhaps he will consider a more combined approach when dealing with the different sectors of the industry. On the north-west coast, around area VI, there has been much talk and rumour that the so-called French line that runs from west of Shetland down the continental shelf is to be removed by the EU. That is causing fishermen major concern. Will the cabinet secretary consult those fishermen before he goes to Brussels? There are only 12 boats in that area, but they are big boats, and they are vital to Kinlochbervie and other places. There is also talk of a habitat closure off Rockall, which will cost one of those vessels alone more than £200,000 annually. Since when has there been significant cod catch west of St Kilda? There has been no such thing. Will cabinet secretary push for a 10 per cent increase in the quota for west coast monkfish and megrims in that area to allow boats to continue to fish there? Fundamentally, the Scottish fishing industry needs two things. One is sustainable amounts of fish to catch, and our fishermen are committed to working with all the relevant agencies to achieve that. Secondly, the industry needs enough time in which to catch those fish sustainably. I am sure that the whole Parliament wishes the cabinet secretary well in his efforts to achieve those things for our Scottish fishing fleet.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank the First Minister and the ex-First Minister for their terrific efforts to secure the Commonwealth games, and I thank many other people, including the individuals who were seconded from sportscotland. In considering preparations for the games, will the First Minister consider the creation of sports schools to develop our most talented young people, as the Scottish Institute of Sport suggested after a recent study? Does he agree that the specialist sporting experience of sportscotland would be invaluable in developing the legacy of which he speaks and in connecting Scotland's communities to the games in the context of sport and recreation?

The Deputy First Minister will be aware of the closure of the A83 lifeline road to Argyll and Kintyre due to a landslide 12 days ago near the Rest and be Thankful. Is she aware of the disastrous financial consequences to businesses in Cairndow, Inverary and Strachur, that people cannot get to work, and that workers are now being laid off? Is she aware of the thousands of pounds per day that the closure is costing haulage businesses? Is she aware of the number of road accidents that the diversions have caused? Why  was no action taken on the 2005 report, which identified the road as being at high risk of landslide? When will the A83 be open to traffic again?

I take the points that the minister makes. The Crown Estate commissioners to whom I spoke made clear that they are open to applications for funding for projects, but that such applications have not been made. However, they are pursuing a number of projects, which is most encouraging for the future.

Will the member give way?

I, too, congratulate Tavish Scott on securing a debate on a subject that is very important for my region of the Highlands and Islands. I also want to put on record that, purely by coincidence, I acted as sponsor to the Crown Estate for its exhibition at the Parliament. I am pleased to note that, as a result, many MSPs were able to put their views and concerns directly to senior Crown Estate management. I know that Tavish Scott has specific concerns with regard to Lerwick harbour. Of course, it is his right and duty as member for Shetland to raise any concerns that exist in the local community. I am also one of their MSPs and am well aware of the problems that have existed in relation to Lerwick Port Authority and Shetland Islands Council reaching agreement on the way forward for development at Lerwick harbour. However, it is worth putting on record the fact that the Crown Estate continues to say that if a way forward can be found, it is willing to be involved in its development, and its investment in that could be many millions of pounds—something we would all want—so that Lerwick harbour could  benefit from potential decommissioning activity from the oil and gas sector. Furthermore, on the specific issue of the cost of the dredge material for reclaiming land from the harbour, it must be pointed out that the Crown Estate will charge Lerwick port authority about 60p per cubic metre. That compares with a typical cost in the marketplace of up to £8 per cubic metre, which is massive difference. Moving on from Lerwick, last week, I was pleased to receive a press release from Tarbert (Loch Fyne) Harbour Authority in my native Argyll about a joint venture for development of the harbour with the Crown Estate. The plans are for additional berthing at the north pontoons together with improved shore-side facilities. The possibility of additional facilities within the development, such as a boatyard, a heritage centre, a chandlery and other retail outlets, will also be looked into. The Crown Estate is also part-sponsoring the Bell Lawrie Scottish series 2008 at Tarbert, which is of great importance to the local economy. That joint working at Tarbert comes on top of the successful work that has been achieved in partnership between the Crown Estate and Tobermory Harbour Association: the Crown Estate has invested £300,000 in building extra pontoons at Tobermory that will provide more berths for the summer sailing season, and help to reinforce Tobermory's reputation as one of our premier sailing destinations.

I take the member's point, but we are all taxpayers. The Crown Estate is extremely efficient and businesslike in what it does. I also want to touch briefly on the Crown Estate's important role in the aquaculture sector, which is important as an employment source in some of the Highlands and Islands' most fragile and remote communities. The Crown Estate owns 930 aquaculture sites. It has pledged that supporting the fish farm industry will continue to be one of its priorities and it has committed to investing in priority research and development projects. I acknowledge some of the concerns that Tavish Scott and other members have expressed today, but I hope that all those who have concerns will engage directly with the Crown Estate to see whether ways forward can be found. The Crown Estate is willing to address concerns that have been expressed, and wants to work constructively  with port authorities and local authorities wherever possible. We should also recognise the significant investment that the Crown Estate makes in Scotland every year, and the very real skills and expertise that exist within the Crown Estate's workforce. It manages in the public interest what was traditionally the personal property of the Crown, thus generating a return for local communities and the taxpayer. I hope that those factors will be given full consideration in any further reviews of the Crown Estate's functions.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it  is taking to encourage economic growth on islands such as Luing in Argyll. (S3O-1026)

Will the minister acknowledge that good transport links are one of the fundamental priorities in helping to boost economic growth on islands such as Luing? I know that he will be aware of the campaign to secure a fixed link for the crossing to Luing. Will he assure me that financial support for such a link will be made available as a result of the imminent Scottish budget statement, to add to the money that the Highlands and Islands strategic transport partnership has ring fenced for that project?

What evidence does the cabinet secretary have that the single seller survey scheme is wanted in the market or has worked in trials? Will she admit that single seller surveys are an unnecessary interference? Secondly, will she take action to streamline the grants process for rural property grants so that bureaucracy is reduced to a minimum and people are not deterred from applying for grants in our rural communities? Thirdly, will she acknowledge that mistakes were made in the past in the development of large-scale council housing, which led to massive sink estates? Will she ensure that lessons have been learned and that local authorities and housing  associations co-operate to achieve the smaller and more varied developments that have proved to be more successful? What will the cabinet secretary do to ensure that delivery, as opposed to approval, of affordable housing units is achieved? Does she agree that there has been a mismatch between approvals for affordable housing and what has been delivered? Will the Government take responsibility for delivery of houses—

I am just finishing, Presiding Officer.

To ask the Scottish Executive what additional support it can provide for the sheep sector to help it recover from the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak. (S3O-949)

In the light of the measures that were announced yesterday, which have been welcomed by the farming community but which many people feel offer only partial compensation, will the minister pursue the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs for further compensation? Also, in the light of the threat of bluetongue disease, will the minister update the farming community on what progress is being made on developing a vaccine for bluetongue? When will it be ready? Will he advocate a nationwide vaccination programme for Scottish livestock?

I draw attention to my livestock farming interests in the register of members' interests. I congratulate Richard Lochhead on securing a debate about agriculture. It is good to see the word agriculture back in the Parliament, and not dressed up as environment or rural development. It is agriculture—farming—and it is important to Scotland. Yesterday I attended the important annual auction market in Dalmally in Argyll for store beef calves. The quality of the stock was excellent and prices were similar to those in the 1980s. I never fail to be amazed by the optimism of hill farmers, who have tightened their belts so far that there are no notches left for further tightening. These people are fighting desperately to save their businesses, which already contribute so much to the Scottish environment and economy and could contribute so much more. The main talk was obviously of the sheep sector, and my impression was that, since the error at Pirbright, product income for ewes and lambs had halved. There were many rumours of a headage payment of £10 per breeding ewe, which would just about cover half the losses that had, through no fault of their own, accrued to those hard-working people. That speculation had come from last Saturday's tup sale at Stirling and had possibly encouraged people to spend a bit more money on better quality tups for breeding. I am afraid that they will be disappointed. However, they will not lie down and die at the whim of Hilary Benn and his broken promises. I pay tribute to the Scottish Blackface Sheep Breeders Association, the National Sheep Association and the NFUS for the work that they and other individuals have carried out on behalf of farmers and I sympathise with their difficulties in dealing with a Labour Government that appears to have turned its back on farmers, crofters and the rural economy. I am appalled by the cynicism and the lack of concern shown by Hilary Benn and Gordon Brown. It is awful to hear a UK minister such as Mr Benn being described as unspeakably arrogant, ignorant and, even worse, incompetent, but I find it difficult to disagree with such assessments. He should have listened to the NFUS, which was only representing its members, instead of deliberately humiliating it.  Of course we know that DEFRA is strapped for cash. After all, Gordon Brown insisted that it pay the £36 million EU fine for Labour Government incompetence over payments to farmers in the past. How appalling it is that that fine is more than the amount that is being offered to Scotland's hard-pressed hill farmers. There seems to be little love lost between the Treasury—or for that matter, Gordon Brown, who used to run that Treasury—and DEFRA. I agree with farmers, crofters and the NFUS that the UK Government has a clear responsibility for addressing the crisis facing Scotland's rural economy for three reasons. First, the animal health budget is not devolved. Secondly, any payments from this budget apply to England, Wales and Scotland. Thirdly, losses incurred in this type of emergency can be compensated out of the contingency fund held by the UK Treasury. Indeed, that was the source of funding for compensation during the 2001 outbreak. The only difference this time is that farmers have incurred losses as a result of movement restrictions, which has dramatically reduced direct compensation payments made by Government at huge cost to businesses. I note from the piece of paper that the cabinet secretary has provided that the support package for farmers amounts to £25.1 million. That is something, but it is not enough; Scottish losses are estimated at £60 million. As the cost of the 2001 outbreak was paid for by a UK contingency fund, why does the Labour amendment suggest that that should not be the case this time?

No. For the future of farmers and crofters all over Scotland, especially in my region of the Highlands and Islands, and for the future of hauliers, veterinarians, auctioneers and all the others who are part of Scotland's great agriculture industry, the Government should take steps to ensure that they and the farming industry are never again caught in such an exposed position. Scottish sheep farming can have a happy future, but only when the prices that we get for our animals are the same as those that farmers in France and Germany get. German farmers are getting £75 for lambs that Scottish farmers would be lucky to get £40 for, and my question for the minister is why a Scottish lamb should be worth only half a German one.

On the subject of the number of such crimes that are reported, as someone who is familiar with farming and the countryside I have always found it odd that birds such as eagles and red kites are reported to have been poisoned, although such birds may be the last carrion eaters to visit a carcase. Why is it that large numbers of other birds of prey that usually arrive at a carcase first—such as black-backed gulls, ravens and hooded crows—are not found?

Will the Solicitor General take an intervention?

The Solicitor General mentioned that the police work with other bodies. Is it correct that the police allow bodies such as the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds to take evidence away from wildlife crime scenes for independent analysis?

Is the minister aware of the island of Kerrera in Argyll and Bute, which lies within half a mile of Oban town centre? Despite that proximity to urban life, the long-suffering community has no community hall, no road links between the north and south communities, substandard roads, no school, and no ferry link to Oban after 5 pm. Will the minister look into that sorry state of affairs and do something, so that Kerrera and its people can achieve parity with other Hebridean islands, which is something that the local authority has so far failed to achieve?

I want to touch on a number of subjects and I hope that the minister will listen as I do so. The British Lung Foundation, the British Lung Foundation Scotland and a number of constituents have raised with me issues relating to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, which encompasses chronic bronchitis and emphysema. The minister will be aware that COPD is estimated to affect 18 per cent of males and 14 per cent of females aged between 40 and 68. Nearly 130,000 people in Scotland live with COPD, but three quarters of them remain undiagnosed. COPD is  particularly prevalent in the more deprived neighbourhoods of Scotland and it is more prevalent in Scotland than it is elsewhere in the United Kingdom. COPD costs the national health service £138 million a year and the cost of working days lost as a consequence of COPD is estimated to be between £300 million and over £400 million. Scotland is the only country in the UK that has not developed specific policies to improve care for patients with respiratory disease. Northern Ireland has a 10-year plan, Wales has something similar and the Government announced in June 2006 that a new national service framework specifically for COPD would be developed in England—and work on it has already started. Why does Scotland not have a specific plan to improve care for people with COPD? Four health board areas have managed clinical networks that approach the problem. Perhaps the best solution would be to extend those to all health boards in Scotland. The British Lung Foundation Scotland is calling for NHS Quality Improvement Scotland to develop new standards and services for COPD sufferers. It does not want the Scottish Executive to wait until publication of the report on the national service framework in England because that will not occur until 2008, which might mean another 10,000 people in Scotland die as a result of COPD before anything is done. The British Lung Foundation Scotland is calling on the Executive to take action to help people with COPD as soon as possible. I would like to use this opportunity to talk about an extremely important situation in my region. Nicola Sturgeon will be aware that I recently copied to her a letter about dental provision in Oban that I sent to the chairman of the Argyll and Bute community health partnership. Since then, things have got worse. At the end of last week, 2,000 people in the Oban area lost NHS dental service provision when that service ceased to be provided by the Argyll Square practice. The state of affairs is hugely serious. Although emergency NHS dental services will be provided by two dentists in Lorne and the Isles hospital, I share the strong desire of the local CHP to see new NHS dental provision established for the community as soon as possible. The hospital is keen to expand services such as endoscopy and colon-cancer screening, and all the spare space in the hospital will be needed for that expansion, so it is vital that the new location for dentistry is outside the hospital. That new location must be immediately identified in the interests of the people of Oban. I am sure that the minister agrees that dentistry is a basic entitlement. As other members have said—and as the media have often reported—the previous Lib-Lab Administration's record on dentistry was on the  poor side of appalling. We look to the new Administration to help communities, such as Oban, that need dental treatment. I would be grateful if the minister could set out today what the Executive can do to help my constituents who have been left without an NHS dentist.

I am sorry, I need to press on. Since becoming my party's sports spokesman, I have had the pleasure of meeting a number of sporting organisations and I look forward to meeting many more over the next few months. I am pleased that Stewart Maxwell recently told me, in a written parliamentary answer, that the new Executive is committed to fully implementing "Reaching Higher". Can Mr Maxwell give me further details today about when he will set out concrete proposals for implementing those plans? The Scottish Conservatives will support positive proposals to increase the amount of sport of all types, as we recognise that that is crucial to our attempts to tackle rising obesity rates and to ensure that our children develop skills that will ensure they have better health. I would like to associate myself with the remarks Jackie Baillie made about the Vale of Leven hospital. I know how important that facility is to people in Helensburgh and Lomond. The RAH in Paisley is no substitute, and the north of the river option has to be seriously considered should the worst happen and the Vale of Leven be closed. The Scottish Conservatives will work with the new Executive to improve the health and well-being of the people of Scotland. We will support it when we think it is doing the right thing. However, as Mary Scanlon said, we believe that political dogma has no place in planning health services in Scotland. We were disappointed with the cabinet secretary's outdated attack last week on the independent sector. What matters should be what works. If, as in the case of Stracathro hospital, the independent sector can complement the NHS, we should welcome that and seek to expand complementary working relationships elsewhere.

I congratulate Jim Hume on securing this very important debate. I expect that his father would want us all to eat local Scottish lamb, and I would certainly agree with that. I commend the NFUS on its recent efforts in that regard, and I particularly recommend Highland heather-fed blackface lamb, which stands out in excellence. Jim's father would probably say that the Cheviot is better, and we must not forget the Shetland either. I recently attended the Kintyre working group in Campbeltown, where local food as a tourist attraction was on the agenda. It is still an enigma that we in Scotland have the highest-quality lamb and beef and yet, in some hotels, people are still offered microwaved slabs of something that tastes like shoe leather. We also have the finest hard-shell prawns, or langoustines, in the world, but members should try getting them in Scotland, where the average so-called prawn cocktail contains frozen foreign pink shrimps adorned with a piece of lettuce. If we go to France, we find that local food is not only served, but highlighted in festivals and fairs. If we go to Spain—to Seville or Barcelona, for example—we will find the west coast Scottish prawns, but at huge prices. Thanks to people such as John Scott, and thanks to the Highland show, we are improving. Places such as the Oyster Bar in Cairndow—which has a famously political car park—produce excellent shellfish. I am thinking too of the Mussel Inn in Edinburgh and the Seafood Cabin in Skipness in Argyll, which is a must for any visitor who likes scallops or queenies. I recently visited an excellent celebration of local produce at Inveraray primary school, where pupils from primaries 4 and 5 hosted their very own farmers market. Those inspired children have done a project on how food gets from the field to the plate. The Argyll and Bute procurement officer, Alan Brough, told the people assembled that more and more local food was being used in local schools—meat, vegetables and fish. That is a very good thing for our people, our children and our local farmers, crofters and fishermen. Good local food ingredients are great assets for Scotland. Members should go and see them at the Highland show tomorrow—if they have not been already. We must continue to expand the use of local food in Scotland.

I welcome this opportunity to debate housing policy. Like many members who campaigned in the recent election, I found that affordable housing was a key issue that was raised with me time and again. It is a massive subject across Scotland, particularly in my region of the Highlands and Islands and especially in the more remote areas and on the islands. In Argyll and Bute, which has 27 inhabited islands, the average salary is £17,758, which is a good deal less than the Scottish average of £21,149. It is interesting to work out what an average person who buys an average house at £151,000 is left to live on once the cost of their housing is taken out. After income tax at 22 per cent, that average person would receive £1,143 a month, while their total monthly outgoings for mortgage, council tax and water charges would  amount to £1,157.80. That would leave them minus £15 to pay for everything else. Such a situation is clearly unsustainable, and our proposal for affordable housing trusts would make a difference by helping to shoulder the burden, particularly for first-time buyers. Since the election, I have continued to receive numerous letters and e-mails from young people in the Highlands and elsewhere who are desperately trying to find a place on the housing ladder. Indeed, I received a typical letter just this week from a Mrs Lucy Pond, who lives on Tiree. She and her husband, who are committed to staying on the island and have full employment, have been desperately trying to find permanent accommodation for more than four years. Sadly, their frustration and anger are shared by far too many young couple across Scotland. We must find ways of increasing the amount of affordable rented property, given that the number of households in temporary accommodation has increased by 150 per cent since 1999. That dreadful record was, I am afraid to say, achieved by Labour and the Liberal Democrats. As other members have pointed out, infrastructure is critical to the provision of affordable housing, and I support the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland's call for Scottish Water to engage positively and constructively with Communities Scotland—for as long as it remains—local authority housing departments and registered social landlords to ensure that future water and sewerage investment ties in with strategic housing investment plans. It is crucial to get that kind of joined-up thinking and planning. Although communities throughout Scotland are in real need of new affordable housing, they are told repeatedly that they cannot get it because of development constraints. That is simply not good enough: development constraints need to be tackled in our villages and small towns as well as in our larger towns and cities. In that respect, the SNP has promised action to remove the barriers that impede investment in water and sewerage. However, the SNP has also pledged to create a Scottish housing support fund to provide loans to first-time buyers. We do not know whether such a move will provide value for money, and I ask the minister to consider the Scottish Conservatives' suggestion for affordable homes trusts. Indeed, the Council of Mortgage Lenders has been positive about that proposal, which goes further than the Government's proposals. It is vital that the Executive engages with the private sector, which has a key role in helping to tackle the lack of affordable housing. As it is—regrettably—unrealistic to expect everyone to own their own home, we want to ensure that social housing works better for those  who need it. Transferring housing allocation powers to local government would help in that respect. After all, the present centralised control leads to families being matched with homes that are unsuitable both for their needs and for the community. Local authorities that make a local judgment based on local circumstances have a far greater chance of getting things right than remote politicians who try to micromanage the housing situation.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it recognises the cultural and historical importance of Dumfries house and its contents and whether it considers that opening the house to the public has the potential to provide the communities of East Ayrshire with a significant regeneration boost. (S3O-262)

Does the minister acknowledge that the majority of the money that is needed to save Dumfries house for the public has been raised privately? Indeed, an individual has pledged £5 million to match possible support from the Scottish Executive. Does she agree that the communities of East Ayrshire could gain significant benefit from having what would be a top United Kingdom tourist attraction, which would give the whole area a much-needed economic boost?

As the homelessness figures have increased, and following concerns that the legislation is not fit for purpose, will the minister consider an urgent review of the homelessness problems that now face us and how best to deal with them?

It gives me great pleasure to close the debate for the Scottish Conservatives and to support our motion. It has been an interesting and lively debate, and I will touch on a number of issues that have been raised. Murdo Fraser made the point—let us be clear about this—that the SNP's desire to have a Scottish Olympic team is nothing to do with sport but is all about politics. At the SNP's annual conference in Perth on 11 October 2006, Alex Salmond repeated the SNP pledge to pull Scottish athletes out of their British Olympic teams. I wonder whether he asked any of those athletes first. Sadly, that shows the SNP at its worst: inward looking, narrow minded and petty—despite the fact that Stewart Maxwell knows the words of a Proclaimers song. I wonder whether the SNP has surveyed the opinions of Scotland's athletes and of sports' governing bodies, especially the Scottish Institute of Sport, which has done so much to secure medals for us, particularly in swimming. None of those experts wants to dilute the potential of team GB, which, through its collective strength, may even be able to challenge the might of teams such as the United States of America.

Not at the moment. We are inclined to agree with the cycling gold medal winner Chris Hoy, who said that a Scottish Olympic team would dilute the resources and expertise of the British team. We also agree with Simon Clegg, the chief executive of the British Olympic Association, who said: "The British Olympic Association ... strongly believes that we are stronger collectively than as individual countries."

Not at the moment.  In Athens, teams of mixed British nationalities worked together, as in the case of Shirley Robertson, the Scot who achieved the ultimate glory of an Olympic gold in sailing with her two English crew members Sarah Ayton and Sarah Webb. Incidentally, as with many Scots athletes, most of her training was carried out south of the border.

I cannot envisage any member of this Parliament joining any Olympic team—especially not Alex Neil. Different loyalties do not have to be divided loyalties, as Chris Hoy made clear when he said that "You can be part of a Scottish team and part of a British team." He is dead right. What is wrong with that? I acknowledge Kenny Gibson's commendable patriotism, but neither he nor the SNP has the monopoly on patriotism, even if they would like it. The saltire happens to be a symbol for every party in the Parliament and—if I may say so—it is the smartest and best part of the union flag. The Conservatives have whole-heartedly supported Scottish sportsmen and sportswomen. We are thrilled by the recent successes of Scottish athletes and realise that success has been brought about by clever planning so, unlike the SNP, we do not want to change a winning formula. It has taken Scotland a long time to achieve such success and political distractions could easily upset an extremely delicate balance. We recognise the value of sport—at both grass-roots and elite levels—in promoting good health, improving self-esteem and fostering a sense of community and teamwork. Successful Scottish athletes have enjoyed the best training facilities and coaching that the UK has to offer.

As I have already pointed out, the athletes and the governing bodies all seem to want a British team, not a Scottish one. I have an important question for the minister. If we had a separate team, would Scottish athletes continue to receive the investment that they receive at the moment, which we are led to believe is at least £100 million a year? I turn to football. Of course the Scottish Conservatives believe in the integrity of the Scottish team—there is no doubt about that. I hope that the minister and other members will join me in congratulating the Scotland under-20 football squad, which will go to Canada for the under-20 world cup with the excellent coaches Tommy Wilson and Archie Gemmill a week on Sunday. In qualifying for the event, the Scotland under-20 team has done what many top European teams have not.

I liked Iain Smith's idea of having a youth football tournament, with the best home nations team representing the UK in the Olympics. I do not see anything wrong with that. The SNP needs to raise its game a bit. It needs to get over its dogmatic and backward-looking view of the world, and to realise that Scottish sportspeople do not want a separate Scottish Olympic team.

The minister mentioned councils delivering free personal care. What will she do in the areas where they are not doing so?

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on a beautiful iron maiden speech. I also congratulate my fellow Highlands and Islands MSP, David Thompson, on his maiden speech. He made some good points about care homes, in particular in relation to Graham House. It seems that we all share the aim of having our elderly and vulnerable citizens cared for in circumstances that are most appropriate to them, with those citizens and their families having as much say as possible over the type of care that they receive. I have seen at first hand how elderly people's quality of life at home can be vastly improved when they get support and help. I have also seen the opposite scenario, as described by Jackie Baillie in relation to Argyll and Bute, with elderly patients languishing in hospital beds, often in pain, because they could not get referred to a nursing home or could not get the home care packages to which they were entitled. They could not have cared less whether that was the fault of the council or of the Executive; they just felt cheated, ignored, abused and betrayed. The doctors and hospital staff felt frustrated and let down, because they saw at first hand the awful result that the political blame game had had on the welfare of their patients. The minister will be aware that I recently lodged an oral question: "To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the independent elderly care home sector about increasing care home places in the Highlands and Islands."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 7 June 2007; S3O-86.]  A number of points arise from the written answer that I received and from concerns that have been raised with me. Does the minister recognise that many independent care home providers feel that they are not working on a level playing field in competing with council care homes, as some other members, including Mary Scanlon, have mentioned? Does the minister address those concerns? Does she recognise that the independent care home sector has a crucial role to play in providing the extra care home places that are needed, especially in my region, the Highlands and Islands? Does she recognise that that is all the more important now that free personal care is with us? In recent years, the fees that have been paid to independent care homes have been restricted. Referrals have been reduced, and local authorities have used care in the community policy to reduce their spend on independent care homes. In Highland and Argyll and Bute, council-run care homes cost at least twice as much to run per person per week as what is paid to independent homes—whether private or voluntary—and they are generally full. Why are councils not making more use of the independent sector? It makes no sense—it would be cheaper for them to do so. I understand that Highland Council and Argyll and Bute Council are market testing their direct services. As I have just said, those direct services cost well in excess of the sums that are paid to the independent sector for the same service. Local authorities have hidden behind COSLA guidelines in setting the fees that are to be paid to independent providers.

In a minute. That led, in 2005-06, to Argyll and Bute Council increasing the cost of its homes by 30 per cent, while restricting the increase for independent homes to 2.7 per cent, in line with the national guideline from COSLA—so much for local autonomy, which seems to work only in one direction. The situation has led to closures in the independent sector, which are the last thing that we want, as future demand for care home places will only increase now that we have free personal care. David McLetchie dealt ably with the issue of charges for food preparation. The problem was created by the Liberal-Labour Executive, which gave contradictory and confusing advice to councils on what was and was not chargeable, which has resulted in a postcode lottery. In Argyll and Bute, the council charges for meal preparation. Further, I heard only yesterday from a constituent—Mr Duncan McIntyre, a senior citizen from Strone, near Dunoon—who has 10 hours of  care, including help to make breakfast and tea, for which he was charged £36 a week, which, he told me, has risen suddenly to £100. In the past, his £41 attendance allowance covered the payment, but it now falls far short. That 140 per cent rise is even backdated from 26 May. He also has to pay £50 for messages and cleaning if he wishes to remain independent. He asked me why people in other parts of Scotland pay nothing for the same services. That does not seem a fair, equitable, inclusive Scotland, does it, minister? I very much hope that the free personal care system in Argyll and Bute, which was dire, will improve. The Scottish Conservatives acknowledge that every elderly person, once assessed as needing care, is entitled by law to receive it. Waiting lists must be tackled as a priority and ended at the earliest possible opportunity. We believe that all Scottish councils should refund people who have been charged wrongly. As the fault lies firmly with the Scottish Executive, it should make a special grant allocation to councils to cover the cost of refunds. If the Executive does not do that, current council services could be affected, which would be grossly unfair. The cabinet secretary seems to accept that, because the level of payments has not risen for the past six years, there has been an erosion of the benefit. Therefore, increasing the level in line with inflation from next April will do nothing to reverse the erosion of the past six years, so the damage will go on being there. Can she not do something about the damage that she talked about?

Will the member give way?

Martyn Hunter, the finance director of Elgin City Football Club, has raised the issue of increased expenditure incurred by clubs such as Elgin, which have risen from the Highland league to the national leagues. He highlighted the extra funding needed for health and safety measures for stadiums and the huge expense of travel for 125 youth players who are now attached to Elgin. Is the minister discussing such issues with smaller football clubs such as Elgin, which are expanding?

I congratulate Roseanna Cunningham on bringing this important matter to the chamber. I speak as an MSP for the Highlands and Islands, which contains many fast-moving and slow-moving rivers and many inland freshwater lochs—some huge and some small. Sadly, each year in those waters the lives of people who are taking part in sports such as angling, canoeing and kayaking, and others who simply go for a swim and are overtaken by currents or cold, are lost. The police, emergency services and the coastguard do a wonderful job when they are called out, but Roseanna Cunningham's motion will help to highlight the increasing number of accidents that occur in water in Scotland. I congratulate her on that. I have a question for the minister about hidden reefs and rocks and submerged crannogs in our Scottish lochs. Is anyone responsible for marking those hazards, which contribute so much to loss of life in water, through boating accidents? I have asked the question before in Parliament, but I have not yet received a satisfactory answer.

I understand the picture that the member is trying to paint. I agree with it to a certain extent in the area surrounding Inverness, but does he agree that in other parts of the Highlands and Islands—the more far-flung areas—the picture is not the same?

I refer to my membership of NFU Scotland, the Scottish Rural Property and Business  Association and the Scottish Crofting Foundation, as well as to my farming interest in the register of members' interests. It is thanks to that interest that I have an acute knowledge of the despair that has faced the farming industry for the past few years. I hope that the new Executive will bring about an improvement. I welcome this opportunity to debate the rural development programme, the shape of which is vital to sustaining our farming sector throughout Scotland, but particularly farmers and crofters in the more remote parts of Scotland, such as my region, the Highlands and Islands, from Campbeltown to Shetland, which I am delighted and grateful to represent again. We need to get the rural development programme funding right so that our farming communities can survive and can help to provide a basis for employment and income for rural communities. So many things depend on farming. I hope that the new Executive will realise the importance of hill farming, particularly in sustaining rural livelihoods and the open landscape that is so important to walkers and ramblers. In "The Final Farewell to the Bens", Duncan Ban MacIntyre described that landscape as "wondrous hill country", saying: "As these are the parts of which I've taken leave, my thousand blessings aye be theirs". As my colleagues have mentioned, the Scottish Conservatives support the vast majority of farmers and crofters in believing that the level of voluntary modulation should be no higher than 5 per cent. Furthermore, I make the point that this is not voluntary modulation; for those who pay it, it is a compulsory clawback of the single farm payment, which constitutes more than 50 per cent of many farmers' incomes. When the minister says that he hopes that farmers will benefit from agri-environment schemes, can he guarantee that his Executive, unlike the previous one, will make it possible for farmers to get into those schemes? A great many were unable to get into schemes under what I can only refer to as the last lot. A modulation level of 5 per cent, which amounts to £1,464.9 million over the period 2007 to 2012, could provide adequate funding for a meaningful Scottish rural development programme, but at 8 or 9 per cent, it will threaten the basic financial viability of many farms and crofts. The Scottish Executive's own figures show that the average net farm income in 2005-06 was £10,100. LFA specialist sheep farms and LFA mixed cattle and sheep farms saw their incomes fall particularly sharply. Only a rise in sheep and cattle prices at markets will save the day in farming, but an 8 or 9 per cent clawback tax, which rises to 14 per cent when we take the European element as well, could mean a fall of  about 60 per cent in those tiny incomes. That will be too much. The Scottish Conservatives have long supported agri-environment schemes, as we recognise that farmers and crofters are the guardians of the countryside, but any further increases in voluntary modulation will simply increase the great financial pressure on them.

Not at the moment—I do not have time. Will the minister address a number of specific points that have been raised with me by farming and crofting constituents who want a much better and more effective SRDP than has been the case until now? How many new entrants were there for the rural stewardship scheme this year? What assessment has the Executive made of the effectiveness of the rural stewardship scheme, and what plans does it have to reduce the bureaucracy of the scheme? Why have there been no new land management contracts this year? What happened to the money previously allocated for them, and, for that matter, the money that normally would have gone into environmental grants? Will environmentally sensitive area scheme members continue to be automatically entered into the RSS or the equivalent scheme, which they have had in the past, after 10 years? The SNP has talked a lot about the need to get young people into farming—the Conservatives agree with that absolutely. I wonder whether the minister has any specific proposals for working with the industry to widen the training opportunities for young people in agriculture. It is vital that we not only attract young people into agriculture but ensure that they are well trained. The pool of trained young farm workers became desperately shallow under the previous Executive. How will the minister refill that pool? I welcome some of what the minister said, and in particular the fact that the voluntary modulation rate is at least not going up to 15 per cent. I continue to think that 5 per cent is high enough, however, and I hope that the minister might review the rate and make it lower than the 8 or 9 per cent that he is suggesting.

Does the minister agree that, in a local economy such as Invergordon, it is important for all agencies to work openly and positively with local businesses, especially to avoid displacement of employment and resources? Is he content that that is happening in Invergordon in relation to the former Nigg construction yard?

Will the minister take an intervention?

rose—

Thank you. The terrain on Rum is no more difficult than lots of places on the mainland. There are several ways of building fences. There is conventional fencing; there is electric fencing, which can be powered by wind turbines if necessary; and there is fencing that locks together and can be moved to another plantation once the first one has grown up. I therefore do not understand SNH's argument about refusing to use fences. That is the key to the issue.

I am grateful to the BBC's "Landward" programme for alerting the public to the subject of this debate. The programme is a great champion and watchdog of rural stewardship and a great credit to the BBC. I am also grateful to the many people who have sent letters and e-mails, and to the academics Professor Tim Clutton-Brock from Cambridge, Jo Pemberton from Edinburgh and Steve Alban from Aberdeen for their invaluable information on the deer project and the natural environment on the isle of Rum. Let us make no mistake. The subjects of this debate—the island of Rum and the herds of red deer living there—are national treasures and an important part of Scotland's natural heritage. I am not alone in saying that. I represent a large number of people who have written letters and e-mails because they have been horrified by the suggestion that Scottish Natural Heritage might cull the red deer herd on Rum from its present level of 1,200 to 1,300 animals down to a population of 300 to 400. The reason that SNH gives for the proposed cull is to regenerate trees in Rum without using appropriate fencing. It is using the basis of four deer per square kilometre, which would be a tiny stocking density compared with the current figure. That would be a calamity. Remembering that Rum is publicly owned, I maintain, along with many others, that that flawed policy will result in a very low regeneration of trees at the expense of the destruction of the most important red deer herd in Scotland, which is a vitally important asset. The herd has been the subject of a 35-year research project, sometimes referred to as the Kilmory project. The findings will increase in importance because they will be of huge value in monitoring the effects of climate change and global warming on a group of mammals on which  there is already such a databank of knowledge. No other deer herd in the world has been monitored to such an extent, and it would be an act of extreme folly and—dare I say—ecological vandalism to destroy or harm in any way the subjects of such an important scientific project. The red deer herd on Rum has never been infiltrated by sika deer, which is most unusual in Scotland. It is remarkably pure. As I have said, there are between 1,200 and 1,300 deer now on Rum. They have already been culled from the 1,600 that were there some time ago. In the north block, which is the research area, there are 300 deer, and most of our current understanding of the ecology of red deer in Scotland is based on the research done in the north block over the past 35 years. For the past 30 years, all 300 deer using the north block have been individually identified and their reproductive success or failure and their longevity and condition have been closely monitored. SNH talks about overgrazing on Rum, but where is the evidence of that? Who says that there is overgrazing? A leading British expert on grazing ecology, Professor Michael Crawley, has been to examine the ground, and he disagrees with SNH's assessment. The number of deer remains constant and healthy, which is not a situation consistent with overgrazing, and there is certainly no evidence of any reduction in the diversity of plant species in the north block. Professor Steve Albon of Aberdeen, who has studied Rum for 30 years, is adamant that there is very rich flora on Rum but that it is short, rather than rank and overgrown—perhaps the difference between stubble and a beard. The plants can obviously cope with the present grazing level. Professor Albon reminded me that there has been continuous research on Rum since 1957, when the island was taken into public ownership. This year is the golden jubilee of its status as a true open air laboratory. He said that the knowledge of managing red deer that has been gained from the project was internationally acclaimed to be of enormous importance and that there was still a great deal to be learned about the reaction of red deer to climate change. People like to watch red deer. That was amply shown by the huge popularity of the BBC's "Autumnwatch" programme with Bill Oddie and Kate Humble. The programme brought images of red deer into many people's living rooms, and they were delighted and excited by the natural behaviour of such magnificent, beautiful and intelligent creatures. It is not surprising that people worry about the fate of hero stags such as Maximus, Brutus and Caesar, and would be appalled by their slaughter. What reasons would  SNH give the public for why any such slaughter is necessary? What would be the value of it? I would like to think that another Executive body—VisitScotland—has noted the popularity of the Rum deer on "Autumnwatch" and is planning to promote an obvious Scottish tourism opportunity rather than allowing it to be rubbed out. That would be joined-up thinking. Rum is an exceptional place. It lies within the red deer refuge, which, I remind members, was created in 1999 by a variation to the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. The refuge also includes the Outer Hebrides, Islay, Jura and Arran, but it is hardly a refuge if slaughter takes place. Rum is also the nesting home of one third of the world's population of Manx shearwaters and many other huge colonies of different sea birds. It was also the launch pad for the reintroduction of sea eagles into Scotland. Since the two "Landward" programmes and the furore that has followed on the Rum issue, both Scottish Executive answers to my written questions, and a reply from Ian Jardine of SNH to my letters, have indicated a more conciliatory approach to killing the deer on Rum. I am very glad of this apparent softening of attitude, and I cautiously thank them for listening. As SNH moves into planning its policy for the next 10 years, I respectfully implore it to work hand in hand with those running the continuing deer project. That project must go on for another 35 years—at least. One letter that I received from a constituent in Wester Ross asked: "Why can't SNH fence their trees like everybody else?" That is the key point. There are no capercaillie or black game on Rum, so that old argument is not relevant. SNH could use conventional deer fences or the new electric fence system that the Scottish Gamekeepers Association would be only too happy to show it. That fence system is lower than a normal stock fence, but extremely effective. It is best to have circular plantations and to build jump-outs so that deer that are trapped inside a plantation can be driven out. Any significant cull of the deer on Rum will ruin the deer project, because the figures on which the deer monitoring calculations have been done will no longer be constant. It is quite possible for this famous red deer herd to live in sustainable co-existence with a tree regeneration programme. However, it will be necessary to use appropriate fencing to achieve results that are good for both projects and good value for the public.

I thank the minister for mentioning the issue. However, if the new events are receiving an enormous subsidy in comparison to what other events are receiving, does that not make the displacement more likely to happen?

I congratulate Rob Gibson on securing a debate on Scottish traditional music. From Shetland to Gretna, it is an important part of Scottish culture. There are many different traditions, one of which we saw last night in the Parliament, when the Shetland squad gave us a taste of Up-Helly-Aa, in which a Viking minister, Tavish Scott, took part. It produced a most enjoyable evening. In the motion, Rob Gibson rightly compliments the highly competent staff of the Nevis Centre, which I have visited in the past. Events such as T in the Park are particularly important to rural Scotland. However, despite my enthusiasm for the many events that will celebrate Highland 2007, I am concerned that new events, heavily sponsored  by EventScotland through the Scottish Executive, might cause displacements from the events that already exist. For example, the organisers of the Hebridean Celtic festival, which takes place in Stornoway and is a bastion of Scottish traditional music, are surprised and quite angry that an enormous event featuring Elton John is being held at the Caledonian stadium at the same time as the festival. People cannot attend both events because the ferries do not run on Sundays. Surely some joined-up thinking could have put the events on different weekends. I am led to believe that the Elton John event is being sponsored through EventScotland to the tune of £150,000, so it is not surprising that the organisers of the Hebridean Celtic festival feel hard done by. Also planned is an event at Inveraray called Connect, which is to be subsidised with £250,000, and another at Aviemore entitled The Outsider, which will also receive help from EventScotland. I am not in any way against those events, which should make the year of Highland culture a great success, but I am worried about the existing shows that receive hardly any funding in comparison with the big, new events. It would be a tragedy if the new events displaced events such as Rock Ness, which was a success last year, or Tartan Heart, which has been going for some years, or any of the smaller concerts that will take place in the Highlands this summer. I hope that I have firmly made the point about displacement and that the minister will investigate the situation. I agree with Rob Gibson about BBC Radio Scotland and its coverage of Scottish music. I am a great fan of accordion and fiddle music, which is enjoying a terrific resurgence. Accordion and fiddle clubs are valuable in rural communities. I greatly enjoy listening to Robbie Shepherd's music shows on Radio Scotland, which emphasise the importance of Scottish culture. I am delighted that the Inveraray and District Pipe Band was recently awarded lottery funding of £17,000, having been voted a winner by a television audience. At the other end of pipe music, the Red Hot Chilli Pipers are also doing extremely well. Traditional Gaelic music also plays a great part. The songs and poems of Sorley MacLean and Duncan Ban MacIntyre will last for ever. Scotland's traditional music is like tartan and Highland dancing. It is a distinct brand that helps to market Scotland and it brings more people into contact with the history of a remarkable people, expressing love, sorrow and happiness through music that emanates from a culture that often grew from harsh conditions in a beautiful, though sometimes very hard, environment.

I thank my fellow members of the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill Committee for their hard work, Professor Begg for his valuable work in considering the evidence on outstanding objections, and the promoter for the conciliatory approach that it adopted in working with objectors. I also extend my thanks to the objectors, who played an important role in the process and whose high-quality evidence enabled the committee to enhance the protection that will be available to those who might be adversely affected by the bill. Thanks are especially due to Jane Sutherland and her clerking team—James Burton and Carol Mitchell—and of course to David Cullum, who always hovered in the background, for the invaluable support that they gave to the committee. Their hard work was greatly appreciated by us all. This has been an excellent and sometimes emotive debate. Scott Barrie said that EARL will not affect the 50-minute Glasgow to Edinburgh service. He said that it will reduce congestion on the roads and bring greater linkage between east and west. Those are good points. I note his worries about premium fares and, like him, I welcome the assurances about the welfare of badgers, newts and other wildlife. Tavish Scott said that Highland Council and Scottish Borders Council are supportive, which is a good sign. I agree with his wish to make rail travel more attractive throughout Scotland. Perhaps he could start by speeding up links between Edinburgh and Oban. That would be popular in Argyll. David McLetchie said that 99 per cent of the cost of the EARL project will now be paid by the Executive. However, he wondered whether the Executive will keep all the transport promises that it has made, especially if Gordon the brown engine  pushes the Barnett formula off the rails and into the troublesome truck department. He made the point that the promoter's revised figures improved the project, and he lauded the principle of connectivity and integration in our transport system. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton made a crucial intervention in which he said that Edinburgh must be kept competitive with other European capitals. I thought that that was a very good point. Christine Grahame huffed and puffed effectively, a bit like Thomas the tank engine. Chris Ballance only reinforced my theory that the Green party travels by TARDIS and is waiting for the age of "Beam me up, Scotty" to produce its next transport strategy. Margo MacDonald made an impassioned plea in supporting the project. She read out a letter from Sandy Cummings, the head of Highlands and Islands Enterprise, which contradicted many of Fergus Ewing's points representing the SNP's opposition to the EARL project. Iain Smith made us laugh a great deal, and Charlie Gordon, who is definitely the fat controller of our committee, stood up for Glasgow and gave us an insight into the mind of Mahatma Gandhi. For the remainder of my speech, I will focus on those areas that have been the subject of debate today and at the preliminary stage. The committee highlighted several areas of concern on which it agreed to seek further evidence at consideration stage. I was concerned that the route that had been chosen would not deliver the benefits that were stated in the promoter's memorandum; therefore, I dissented from the committee's preliminary stage report. I was especially unhappy with the STAG appraisal that had been conducted on the Turnhouse option because of the extremely dubious figures on comparative journey times that it contained. My concern at that time has been vindicated by the fact that the promoter has since conducted an entirely fresh appraisal of Turnhouse. I am, therefore, content to give the EARL project my support today. I and my fellow committee members were concerned, at the preliminary stage, about the uncertainty surrounding the funding of the project. Our preliminary stage report stated that "the Committee has major concerns that the Bill could be passed without the level of funding attributed to each source being identified." I am, therefore, pleased that the minister was able to confirm on 19 December that Transport Scotland will cover all the outstanding costs of the project. Our report also detailed the financial input that Edinburgh Airport Ltd will make. The value of the airport's expertise in reducing the risks of the  tunnel construction cannot be underestimated and will go a long way towards ensuring that the project does not impact adversely on the operation of the airport. That was a concern that many members, including me, previously expressed. Another concern that was voiced at the preliminary stage was about the ability to provide the necessary rolling stock. We heard in evidence that rolling stock that meets the performance requirements for the EARL project exists and is currently operating in the UK—for example, the Virgin Voyager and the trans-Pennine express. The overall costs of the rolling stock have not been attributed solely to EARL because the rolling stock is being procured for the ScotRail network as a whole. However, I am pleased to report that the costs of leasing rolling stock and of the on-going maintenance relevant to the EARL section of the network have been included in the estimate of the cost of the EARL scheme. The question of how the inside of the new trains will be configured remains an issue. As the committee recognised in its consideration stage report, the internal configuration of seating and luggage space will be extremely important. There is nothing more infuriating to passengers than not being able to stow luggage properly. That is especially true for the elderly and anybody who is disabled in any way. The committee's concerns at the preliminary stage regarding the delivery of the timetable and the reliability of services are well documented. The committee therefore welcomed the confirmation by Network Rail that it could deliver the timetable of eight trains per hour in each direction. The committee acknowledges that some journey times may be marginally longer for trains that call at the airport. However, given the infrastructure changes and the results of modelling, most of those journey time increases may not materialise. On the overall merits of the scheme, the committee was not charged with deciding whether the funding for EARL would be better spent elsewhere. That is a matter for the Local Government and Transport Committee, the budget scrutiny process and the Parliament as a whole. The committee appreciates the high level of connectivity across most of Scotland that EARL will offer. It is true—as I pointed out during the preliminary stage debate—that the Turnhouse option would offer a similar degree of connectivity to EARL with the sole exception of Edinburgh Park. However, the huge popularity of the Edinburgh Park station means that there are obvious benefits from ensuring that, when services are diverted via the airport, they can continue to serve that station as well. Furthermore, the Turnhouse and Gogar options would entail significant four-tracking of the line between  Saughton and the new junction that will link with the Dalmeny chord north of the airport. The fact that that would require the compulsory purchase and demolition of many homes along the Saughton to South Gyle corridor is an obvious disincentive. Similarly, the committee was not charged with determining whether the predictions on air passenger growth that are made in the UK air transport white paper are accurate. The truth is that the number of air passengers at Edinburgh airport has risen dramatically over the past 10 years. Air passenger growth predictions would need to reduce by 55 per cent over the next 30 years, or by 70 per cent over the next 60 years, to reduce EARL's benefit cost ratio to 1. I was among the first to acknowledge the legitimate concerns that members have had about the scheme, the costs of which are extremely high. In light of the large number of other heavy infrastructure projects that are on the books in Scotland, we all have an obligation to ensure that public money is well spent. However, having subjected the scheme and the promoter to the closest possible scrutiny, and having unearthed revised figures on the alternatives, I urge those members who still oppose the scheme to look afresh at the evidence and to reconsider their position. The unique selling point that EARL has over and above the alternatives is that it will provide a genuine opportunity to create a transport interchange at Edinburgh airport where passengers from throughout Scotland can access the airport, bus and tram all from the one location. Air passengers will be able to access destinations throughout Scotland directly from the airport. That can only assist in growing tourism in Scotland. Such integrated public transport is important for the tourism industry, in which creating a good first impression with arriving passengers is vital. Therefore, I urge members to support the motion to pass the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The Inshore Fishing (Prohibited Methods of Fishing) (Firth of Lorn) Order 2007 (SSI 2007/186) was laid before the Scottish Parliament on 7 March 2007. Article 1, "Citation and commencement", states: "This Order ... shall come into force on 12 March 2007." That clearly breaches the 21-day rule that an order shall not commence until 21 days after it is laid. I have been informed that the Executive intends to replace this incompetent order with another correcting the date from 12 March to 29 March. At this stage, however, the order will clearly still breach the 21-day rule. Although I appreciate that the order is a negative instrument, and the 21-day rule is sometimes breached on exceptional grounds of necessity or in order to fit in with United Kingdom laws, no such necessity or urgency exists in this case, especially as the research that the order seeks to protect has already been going on for months. The only necessity or urgency seems to be that the Executive wishes to get the order through before the Parliament dissolves. What is the point in having a 21-day rule to allow time to inform the public of a change in the law if it can be breached for no good reason?

The increase in the incidence of severe weather events mentioned by Mr Gibson, increased pressures on the Scottish fishing industry and the hoped-for growth in maritime tourism in the north of Scotland mean that more vessels are likely to find themselves on the seas in bad weather. Will the minister ensure that the matter is given priority? Will he join me in congratulating the Royal National Lifeboat Institution on its excellent life-saving work? The bad weather is placing more burdens on the institution, which in 2006 rescued more than 1,000 people from danger at sea.

Does the member agree that a great many of those so-called unused sites are in fact used—or could be used in future—by the fish-farming industry for fallowing, which is a way of improving the environmental impact of the aquaculture industry?

I appreciate what the member says, but does he not agree that action that is taken once the parasite appears will be too late?

The Scottish Conservatives are pleased to be supporting the bill today, primarily because of the package of measures relating to fish farming in part 1. Aquaculture is an extremely important industry in the Highlands and Islands, which is the part of Scotland that I represent. Across Scotland, salmon farming supports some 10,000 jobs, chiefly in the rural areas, and is estimated to be worth around £300 million a year. That is why I pressed my amendment for mandatory compensation for fish farmers, which would simply have brought the rights of fish farmers into line with those of terrestrial farmers in cases of slaughter by Government. I would like to pay tribute to the excellent code of good practice that regulates about 97 per cent of the industry in Scotland. That is a welcome alternative to the myriad statutory regulations that govern other sectors. Although I support the Executive's intention to provide a legislative backdrop to the code, ministers must ensure that the provisions of the bill are used to reinforce and encourage the voluntary approach rather than to usurp it. Nonetheless, the legislative powers in the bill are important and necessary, not least because we have an obligation to protect an equally important industry: recreational angling. It is vital that aquaculture and wild fisheries can live together. Sometimes, that requires compromise on both sides. Scotland is famous for having some of the best salmon and trout angling anywhere in Europe. Although views about the extent to which escaped farmed fish are harming native stocks vary enormously, we must ensure that all reasonable steps are taken to protect the reputation of Scotland as a first-class destination for game angling. Therefore, I have no hesitation in welcoming the tougher measures on fish farm escapees that the bill puts in place. I trust that ministers will ensure that those measures are rigorously enforced and, possibly, tightened at a later date, if that is deemed to be necessary. I also hope that they will watch over the times when smolt, when migrating out of rivers and into the sea, have to go past fish cages that are home to sea lice that can kill them. That is another big issue that the bill addresses.  I have spoken about my strongly held belief that we have to put in place the toughest possible measures to prevent GS parasites from entering Scotland. As the Executive's summary report from October last year says, the prevalence of GS in this country would "destroy" salmon angling. The economic impact of that in terms of lost revenue and jobs would be devastating. It is truly a nightmare scenario and we pray that it never happens. Scotland's rivers and their diverse ecosystems are the envy of the world and the industries that depend on them—notably angling, tourism, whisky and, of course, hydro—are among our most precious commodities. GS could destroy all that and rip the heart out of rural Scotland. I therefore plead with the Executive to ensure that the measures contained in both the Environment and Rural Development Committee's report and the Executive's own expert report on GS are implemented without delay. The other undoubtedly controversial aspect of the bill is the use of live fish as bait, on which I have already outlined my party's position. I simply add that there is much potential in marketing Scotland not only as the top salmon and trout fishing destination, which it is, but as a leading coarse fishing destination. I hope that ministers will ensure that the powers in the bill relating to coarse angling will be used to promote and grow, rather than discourage or undermine, coarse angling. In conclusion, I welcome the balance in part 1 of the bill in seeking to protect two of our most important industries—aquaculture and angling. I simply hope that our efforts are not nullified by the sudden appearance of the GS parasite in Scottish waters. Once again, I plead with ministers to ensure that steps are taken to prevent that from happening.

Amendment 3 is the same as an amendment that Ted Brocklebank lodged but did not move at stage 2. Having considered the remarks that the minister made at that stage, Ted Brocklebank decided to lodge the amendment again at stage 3, and I am glad to speak to it.  Section 29 merely allows for compensation to be paid to fish farmers who lose their stock as a result of a ministerial action—in the event of slaughter, for example. In such circumstances, fish farmers should, however, be entitled to compensation. Amendment 3 would make compensation compulsory rather than its being at the whim of the minister. After all, fish farming is every bit as much farming as terrestrial farming and some 10,000 jobs in Scotland depend on it. Some people do not like fish farming, but it is only right that it be on a level playing field with terrestrial farming. Amendment 3 would help to ensure that that was the case. In the interests of fairness and equity, I move amendment 3.

Does the minister acknowledge that, although there are no diseases at this moment, there have been diseases that required slaughter in recent years, such as infectious salmon anaemia? Does she also agree that they brought havoc to the fish farming industry, particularly to producers of eggs and small fish?

I listened to what the minister had to say. Although a discretionary power is better than nothing at all, it would be better to have provisions that were good for the industry and which put it in line with ordinary terrestrial farming. Therefore, I will press amendment 3.

Amendment 2 seeks to remove the paragraph—section 21(2)(aa)—that was inserted by an amendment in the name of the minister at stage 2. Section 21(2)(aa) implements the Executive's intention to ban the use of live fish as bait. I totally understand that the minister's primary concern in introducing the provision in section 21(2)(aa) is to prevent the contamination of waters with alien species that are used as live bait, but I am far from convinced that such practices are responsible for any more than a small percentage of the alien species that appear in our lochs and rivers. I would support the minister if she were to  introduce a Danish-style ban on live bait by banning the use of live bait that had not been caught on the same day and in the same waterway that is being fished. However, I worry that, in outlawing completely the use of live bait, we may be using a sledgehammer to crack a nut. The fact remains that the use of live bait is a thoroughly well-established practice among pike fishermen, who travel from far and wide to Scotland's lochs to enjoy some of the best pike fishing anywhere in the British isles or the world. In my view, the Parliament should do all that it can to further the growth of coarse angling generally and pike fishing specifically. Therefore, I worry that including the provision on the face of the bill will send out all the wrong signals to the coarse fishermen who currently come to Scotland and to those who are considering coming here in the future. I fully understand the minister's concerns, but I ask her with all sincerity to consider whether there might be a better way forward to deal with all our concerns about alien species without implementing a total ban on the practice of using live bait. As well as supporting amendment 2, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, I will support amendments 12, 10 and 11, in the names of Richard Lochhead and Dennis Canavan. I move amendment 2.

I hear what the minister says and I certainly agree that the movement of fish from one catchment area to another in which they are an alien species should be avoided. However, I do not see why that means that a method that has been used by pike fishermen since time immemorial should have to be banned. Surely the ban should be on bringing fish from one catchment area to another water. As I do not agree with what the minister has said, I intend to press amendment 2.

Presiding Officer, may I give way?

I will happily give way.

Presumably, if someone came to a Scottish airport, they would declare the items there. We would not have the power to make them declare the items at a UK airport, but the same measures could be introduced at Westminster by a Sewel motion or some such method.  Members will agree that £6 million is a small price to pay to ensure that we do all that we can to prevent the awful GS parasite from getting here. We may not succeed, but surely we have a moral obligation in Scotland to give it our best shot. I move amendment 1.

I listened closely to what Mr Finnie said, but I still think that we should take further measures to strengthen prevention of the parasite ever reaching Scottish rivers. For years,  the Atlantic Salmon Trust and others have issued leaflets about Gyrodactylus salaris, and I feel that the Parliament should be strengthening their arm. I re-emphasise to members the fact that amendment 1 would merely insert into the bill the cross-party recommendation of the Environment and Rural Development Committee—a recommendation that was also cited in the expert report that was commissioned by ministers last year. Gyrodactylus salaris has destroyed river systems in Norway. If it ever came here, it would not only destroy our rivers, but could badly damage the whisky industry, fish farming, the recreational angling sector and associated tourism all over Scotland. We simply cannot allow that to happen. That is a nightmare scenario, and we should do our best to prevent it from happening. I therefore urge members, despite the assurances from the Executive, to back amendment 1, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, and amendments 1A and 15, in the name of Richard Lochhead.

This Parliament passes laws on all sorts of things, but only rarely can we honestly say that it is faced with an issue as important as that of Gyrodactylus salaris, the infamous salmon parasite that has devastated fish stocks and river systems on the continent. Although GS has not yet appeared in Scotland, it might be only a matter of time until it does unless we take action to combat the threat. At present, if anglers take a fishing trip to Norway, there is nothing to stop them, upon their return to Scotland, continuing to fish with equipment that might be contaminated. The threat is obvious, but what should we do about it?  Let me quote directly from the Executive's document on GS, which was produced for ministers by experts at the institute of aquaculture at the University of Stirling and Glasgow Caledonian University business school. According to that document, which I have with me, the cost to the economy if GS became widespread would be £34.5 million per year in lost household income, £44.8 million in lost expenditure, and a staggering £633 million in net economic value lost. The document also estimates that almost 2,000 full-time equivalent jobs would be lost annually.  What does the excellent document suggest that we should do to prevent such an economic and ecological catastrophe? I quote: "The probability of GS entering the UK could be reduced considerably by the provision of disinfection stations at ports". It also says: "The total estimated cost of these measures ... is £6m". That cost is small in comparison with the net economic value of £633 million. Furthermore, the measures that are outlined in amendment 1 were enthusiastically endorsed by every member of the Environment and Rural Development Committee in its stage 1 report. At that time, the deputy minister was convener of the committee. Paragraph 99 of the report states: "The Committee does not see why more robust measures should not also be developed at ports of entry—such as a requirement to make a declaration at customs points if carrying fishing gear or other water-sports equipment". We know who the convener of the committee was, so why, when Ted Brocklebank heeded the committee's recommendation and duly lodged an amendment at stage 2, did the deputy minister reject it and her Labour and Liberal Democrat colleagues on the committee vote it down? The measures that are outlined in amendment 1 may not be enough to stop GS, not least because it could arrive via England or Wales, but they would send a signal to the United Kingdom Government that we are deadly serious in combating that parasite and that similar measures must be implemented across the country.

I declare an interest, as I have had a sheep and cattle farm in Argyll for some 30 years. I say to Andrew Arbuckle that, during that time, I have accumulated a lot of mud but, luckily, it has not all stuck. The Scottish Conservatives acknowledge the growing interest in organic produce. We welcome new products such as the organic whiskies of Islay, Campbeltown and Moray, and the organic smoked salmon of Loch Duart. As David Cameron said recently, we need to take a balanced approach for a thriving agriculture industry, ensuring that both organic and traditional farming play a big part in providing our population with high-quality produce. I believe that any nation—especially an island nation—should keep its barns full and never rely too much on imports. Not only is it wise to be self-sufficient in food; it is wise to use farming methods that encourage wildlife and help the environment. More and more, farmers are being requested to steward the countryside, and no group of people are better equipped to do that, but it is essential that they are given a fair field of play to continue to produce food—organic or conventional—for our nation and other nations. That is especially important in the light of predictions of global warming and climate change that point to countries in southern Europe becoming arid deserts. It is, surely, up to the northern regions—which, it is hoped, will still have the rain and water—to ensure that they are prepared to produce the food that may be needed for the whole of Europe and elsewhere. Farming requires a long-term policy, and no sector more so than the organic sector. For example, for livestock farmers and crofters in the area of the Highlands and Islands that I represent to be persuaded to go organic, they need assurances that their store market products will gain a premium for being organic and that there is a buoyant market in which to sell. I spoke to United Auctions today. It told me that the deadweight price for organic lamb is 40 per cent above the price for non-organic lamb and that the deadweight price for organic beef is 35 per cent above the price for non-organic beef. That price is being paid to organic finishers, but many of the producers in the hills of the Highlands and Islands cannot finish their products. That is why I am asking the Executive for a long-term policy to couple primary organic producers with organic  livestock finishers—it is vital if we are ever to inspire real confidence in a prosperous future for organic livestock store farmers. Where better to grow organic produce than in the heather-clad, unfertilised hills of the Highlands and Islands, but as anyone who has eaten good Scottish lamb, beef or venison will know, it does not have to be labelled organic to taste delicious or to be extremely nutritious. Although we are prepared to support organics as a choice—albeit, dare I say it, a choice for the better-off among us—I am wary of demonising other types of production provided that they follow best farm practice. Like Karen Gillon, I would rather see Scotland's children eat local, healthy food and be thrilled by the unmistakable taste of freshly grown potatoes and other vegetables than get hung up on whether they are organically grown. Freshness is what really matters in fruit and vegetables. Alex Johnstone is right to recognise the high quality and the environmental and welfare standards that are achieved by most Scottish farmers. Although I wish in no way to denigrate organic production, it should be pointed out that a recent report by the UK Government noted that organic milk production requires 80 per cent more land and creates almost double the amount of substances that could lead to acidic soil. Nevertheless, bearing in mind the fact that we strongly support organic farming as part of a healthy agriculture industry, we believe that we should address the greatest concern among organic producers—the potential undermining of their produce and reputation by the presence of genetically modified organisms. We think that the Lib-Lab pact's line on GM is a bit of a fudge. They seem to be happy that the trigger point for GM labelling of a product should be a GM content of 0.9 per cent. The Conservatives do not believe that that properly protects organic farmers, especially as scientists tell us that they can trace the GM content of a product to 0.1 per cent. We have, therefore, taken the position that 0.1 per cent—not 0.9 per cent—will be the trigger point for GM labelling. We hope that that will be welcomed by organic growers and producers when we get into power. We want to encourage organic produce but also to give consumers the choice when it comes to purchasing. We want to see local food economies. We especially want the Executive to lobby the European Union on the many benefits that can be derived from local procurement.

Is that why you are sitting behind him?

You will have to resign.

I, too, congratulate Phil Gallie on securing this important and long overdue debate. His motion congratulates the Clyde Fishermen's Association on its attempts to conserve stocks—and rightly so. The Scottish fishing industry has done far more for conservation than any other European fishing fleet; it has gone through a great deal of pain and has made many sacrifices in the process, but instead of being rewarded for its efforts, the industry has often been further penalised by bodies that seek to micromanage fisheries from afar. The Clyde Fishermen's Association has always taken the lead in conservation. I well remember its efforts with regard to special gear for scallop fishermen that would allow small scallops to slip through the rings. Moreover, the association proposed a limit on the number of scallop dredges that are used by fishing boats. They were the Scottish pioneers of that method of fishing and, of  course, they want scallop fishing to remain sustainable. They were forced to live through a period when scallop fishing was banned in many areas, even though there had been not a single case of illness attributable to consumption of scallops. Little thanks did they get for their patience during that desolate period. I know well the areas of Loch Fyne and Loch Shira that Phil Gallie mentions in his motion because I have often swum in them. They are important to trawlers from the Tarbert fishing fleet. It is a credit to the Clyde Fishermen's Association that it has voluntarily ceased trawling to protect biodiversity and to conserve the shallow tops of the sea lochs. Trawlers come in for a lot of stick: they are sometimes blamed for overfishing prawn stocks in comparison with the softer method of creel fishing. However, having been out in prawn trawlers and done creel fishing, I am bound to say that the bycatch of trawlers is minimal. Also, trawlers often fish the prawns when they are down in their burrows in the mud and not up on top. Sometimes, therefore, they do not catch fish, whereas a creel will fish for 24 hours a day. Fishermen with too many creels are more likely to overfish than trawlers. Creel fishermen on Loch Fyne have, on the whole, managed to live with trawlers. Trawlers can avoid snagging and damaging creels as long as the creels are properly marked. If people act sensibly, there is room for both methods of fishing. I am disappointed that the CFA was not properly consulted on the closure of the Firth of Lorne. George Lyon spoke of the difficulties that one family is facing—there are particular difficulties for the industry on the island of Luing. The closure has led to the loss of livelihood of a family that has happily avoided for 40 years the coral reefs that the ban seeks to protect. No sensible scallop fishers would dredge near the reefs for fear of losing their gear. The firth could easily have remained open while experiments were done. I hear the CFA's plea for a United Kingdom approach to marine spatial planning based on the regional sea. The CFA played an important role in the Irish sea pilot, which was a Department of the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs initiative to review and propose improvements to marine nature conservation in UK waters. It would be tragic if the sensitivities of the devolution settlement led to the sabotage of a team effort of such importance to the protection of our marine environment. I ask the minister to examine the matter without further delay. I also ask the minister to consider the CFA's proposal for a marine laboratory at Holy loch, where the fishermen wanted to stop fishing after demilitarisation. It may have been that they were worried about what they might pull up in their nets,  but a marine laboratory could act as an open window on the effects on fish and shellfish of climate change and global warming. The Executive should examine the CFA's proposal and liaise with it more closely.

As well as the significant capital costs, swimming pools are often expensive to run and maintain, to the point that most of them operate at a loss. Is the minister doing anything to support operators with on-going costs? Given high energy costs, what effort has the minister made to support the introduction of more efficient and greener systems of energy use in sports facilities?

The Royal Zoological Society of Scotland also owns the extremely successful highland wildlife park at Kincraig in my region. Given that Edinburgh zoo attracts more visitors per year than all the other science-based organisations in Scotland put together; that, each year, it educates 25,000 children on conservation and the natural world; and that it acts as an essential barometer with regard to the effects of global warming and climate change on animal and bird species, will the minister explain why there is no official dialogue between the Executive and the zoo's management, unlike that between the Executive and the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh? I know that she has recently met the zoo's management once, but would it not be a good idea if there was at least one meeting per year with the organisation?

Will there be enough money for Argyll and Bute Council to deliver free personal care for the elderly?

I congratulate Allan Wilson, the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, on securing the debate.  I listened carefully to what the minister said. Despite my delight that ministers have taken such an interest in my Scottish Register of Tartans Bill of late, I want some assurances that they will take forward the general principles of the bill, with which they say they agree, before I withdraw it. My bill is important: a national register of tartan would establish a publicly owned and managed register that would enable current and historical records to be recorded and preserved. Three years ago, I was approached by a steering group that had been meeting for two years with the request to facilitate the introduction of a bill. The steering group consisted of representatives of each of the existing registers, the Lord Lyon and others from the world of tartan. By the time I joined their discussions, they had sought, but not found, a non-legislative solution. I introduced the bill because of the underlying and overarching desire to secure the status of an independent and authoritative register for Scotland. At the time, there were also considerable rumours that, if Scotland did not produce such a register, another country—for example, Canada—might steal the lead. Tartan's roots are in Scotland, but its branches spread worldwide. Scotland is the Mecca for tartan, and it would be stupid for our country to lose that valuable status. Other countries would give their eye teeth for such a recognisable symbol of identity. Anyone who sees tartan anywhere in the world thinks about Scotland—and bagpipers, pipe bands, the historic Scottish regiments, the rugby supporters, the tartan army of football supporters, the Edinburgh tattoo, the kilt shops, tartan day in New York and numerous Highland games worldwide. Tartan inspires pride in Scotland's past and present. Tartan has been around for a long time and does not belong to a private section of the population. It does not belong to the weavers or to another section of the industry; it belongs to Scotland. That is why it is important to have a Scottish register of tartans. It is vital that such a register should be independent and publicly managed. That was the conclusion of the steering group with which I was involved, which is why the legislative route was required. A public register would not just secure important information for our nation but make that information accessible to the Scottish diaspora. The 30 million or so members of the diaspora will be pleased that the new Scottish Parliament is elevating such a beloved national icon. The proposal for a national register received strong support from many sources. Dr Andrew Cubie wrote in his submission on the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill to the Enterprise and Culture Committee:  "I believe that an official register of tartan would greatly benefit not only the limited number of commercial weavers who call themselves the 'tartan industry', but also the entire Scottish tourist industry and tourist related activities, including genealogy." VisitScotland said that tartan is Scotland's trademark and went on to say: "tartan conjures immediate associations with the scenery, our culture and heritage". Tartan adds value to the tourism industry. Shortly after I introduced the bill, I went to the excellent, revamped Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum. Attached to the interesting tartan display in the museum are the words: "When you see tartan, you immediately think of Scotland. It's a powerful symbol for the Scots—so powerful that Government"— a Whig Government— "once banned people from wearing tartan. Tartan is now a huge success story. It graces the catwalks of London and Paris, finding its way into the hearts (and the carrier bags) of most visitors to Scotland." That nicely states in a nutshell the importance of tartan. I am grateful to Allan Wilson for his kind remarks and I will search his opening and winding-up speeches for an assurance that both parties in the Executive will take action to create a national tartan register if they are returned to Government. His remarks so far have been encouraging. I will help in any way that I can, as I am sure will the people whom he intends to consult, who submitted evidence on the proposal at an early stage. I am grateful for their work and encouragement. I also thank David Cullum, Rodger Evans and Alison Wilson from the non-Executive bills unit for their invaluable guidance and assistance, and I thank my assistant, Joanna Mowat. If the Executive were to take forward the general principles of my bill, it would be churlish of me to demand more parliamentary time from an already overburdened schedule. Therefore, I will consider withdrawing my bill, but I reserve the right to bring it back if I am re-elected and the Executive does not fulfil its promise.

Chancellor Gordon Brown's latest tax increase came into force today, with another £10 being levied on every passenger who takes a domestic flight. I am concerned that, as well as being an extra burden on those who live in the Highlands and Islands, the extra tax will be a real disincentive to those who might be considering visiting some of the remoter parts of Scotland, many of which are very reliant on tourism. What representations has the Scottish Executive made to the United Kingdom Government on the tax increase? Will the minister assure me that, if it has not already done so, the Executive will fight to oppose the increase and any further increases that raise money for Gordon Brown at the expense of the north of Scotland's tourism sector?

Not only is 2007 the year of Highland  culture, it is the first year in which St Andrew's day will be a public holiday in Scotland. I congratulate Oban on being the first Scottish town to plan a St Andrew's day festival. However, the company that is organising St Andrew's day Oban 2007 is apparently experiencing difficulty in securing funding from the area tourist network and has been told that budgets for events and festivals have been cut. Will the minister comment on that and say how communities such as Oban can be helped with funding and marketing for St Andrew's day festivals?

rose—

No. I suggest to the minister that it might have been more appropriate for the Executive to listen before the bill was written.

It is sad that John Farquhar Munro's sensible amendments to do with building on the common grazings and not on the arable parts of crofts were knocked back. They were good amendments and it is a shame that they were not agreed to. A great many of the people from the 17,785 crofts in the crofting counties will see the bill as a missed opportunity because it has not enabled a true improvement of the whole crofting set-up. That is because no proper review was undertaken beforehand into the value of crofting to the Scottish economy and to the communities where it takes place. The well-known former Labour minister and Highland journalist, Brian Wilson, entreated the Executive to "go listen to the crofters". He stated in the West Highland Free Press that the Napier commission had done so in the 1880s but that the present Government had not done so and was not doing so, despite the fact that the Scottish Crofting Foundation and the Scottish Crofting Association, which preceded it, continually asked for that type of investigation. The Scottish Crofting Foundation told the committee: "We have consistently asked for the social and economic benefits that crofting has delivered to be measured—to be quantified and qualified from 1886 to the present day."—[ Official Report , Environment and Rural Development Committee , 19 April 2006; c 3041.] That work was never undertaken. Instead, the bill that was written for the Executive expressed, frankly, an outsider's agenda rather than one that came from the heart of crofting. The first time that the crofters were listened to was when the committee took to the road to the isles. At that point, it was a question of waking up and smelling the heather. By that time, however, it was a bit late. The bill had been written. The cart had been put before the horse. Next time—if the crofters get another go at crofting reform—I hope that whoever is in government gets things the right way round. In the meantime, I impress upon the minister the importance of ensuring that the many crofting issues that are not dealt with in the bill and that require urgent resolution are not put on the back burner. For example, the bull hire scheme is important to the quality of crofting livestock but, despite a promise of action by the then Deputy  Minister for Environment and Rural Development during a members' business debate that I secured two years ago, no effective new scheme has been put into place. On top of that, crofters have had to deal with crippling new transport regulations without any replacement so far for support schemes such as the crofting counties development scheme. Like other agricultural schemes such as the countryside premium scheme and the rural stewardship scheme, the CCDS is currently in limbo while we await advice on the future for farming in the Highlands and Islands. Ross Finnie often mentions, very wisely, the need to add value to crofting products to bring value back up the food chain, but what incentives does the Executive provide for local abattoirs and local marketing groups? Will the SCF be funded to help it to take a leading role in the future crofting inquiry? After all, the SCF represents the crofting industry's most important element, which is the crofters themselves. During the inquiry, the SCF must have the wherewithal and strength to put forward a good case on what is needed in crofting. How will that happen? The inquiry must not simply degenerate into an argument between the Crofting Foundation and the Crofters Commission. The minister must instruct the commission to address now, under existing legislation, the neglect of crofts that has taken place. I reiterate that the bill as introduced did not address the problems facing crofters. Although what remains contains little with which we disagree, it would have been better to have scrapped the bill to allow a new bill to be introduced after the inquiry. If we want the crofting system to continue to play a part—as it has done since the Crofters Holdings (Scotland) Act 1886, which was, incidentally, strongly supported by the Tories—in the social and economic fabric of remote communities by linking urban activity in crofting areas to rural and agricultural activity, if we want to ensure that important agricultural skills and knowledge are kept alive and if we want locals to continue to have the opportunity to produce local food, we will continue to need crofting and we will have to treat crofting land as a special asset. We need to pay attention to how crofting can best be used to support the Highlands and Islands economy in the present day. Basically, crofting is the use of a basic agricultural system in a manner that helps social and economic development in communities. It has worked in the past and it can still work in the future.

I congratulate Patrick Harvie on securing the debate, although I have mixed feelings about it. On the one hand, it is shameful that a special month is needed to highlight both the historical persecution that gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people have faced and the achievements of individuals from those groups. It is wrong to have to compartmentalise different sections of society; I would rather call for respect and tolerance for all. I have always tried to take people as I find them, rather than prejudging them by their labels. I was lucky enough to receive an enlightened education at school and from my very enlightened parents at home, which encouraged me to do that. Had I not done so, I know that I would have been a far poorer person. I am very encouraged that Scotland is now becoming one of the areas of the United Kingdom that is leading the way in tolerance. Historically, that was not always so. In the past, Scotland was not a good place for minorities, and we are still not perfect now. All too often, people experience prejudice when they do not conform to what many consider to be normal. However, I think that it is perhaps unproductive to castigate and vilify those who behave in an intolerant way. They are simply being ignorant, however unjust their views might be. It is better, through education, to turn them into a decreasing minority. I hope that that is what is now happening. As parliamentarians, we must take every opportunity to condemn intolerance. Tonight's debate will help to draw attention to the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender history month. I am sure that the many events planned for February will help to educate people about the important role that many LGBT people have played in history and the suffering that they have faced. They have suffered great hardship, especially under totalitarian regimes. In Nazi Germany in the 1930s and 1940s, homosexuals were sent to concentration camps alongside Jews, the disabled, the mentally ill, Roma, Jehovah's  Witnesses, freemasons, social democrats, anarchists and other groups. In the Soviet Union, homosexuals and other so-called deviants were regularly sent to the gulags, from whence they rarely returned. In addition to the persecution that the LGBT community has historically faced, people from that community who have made great achievements have not had that aspect of themselves properly recognised. It is only right that the whole person should be acknowledged when we celebrate their achievements. Personally, I am not entirely comfortable with labelling people as LGBT. I believe that a person's sexuality is only part of their identity and should not necessarily be the most important thing about them. There is also a problem with claiming LGBT identity for historical figures. For some historical figures, the issue is clear cut and well known, even outside the LGBT world. For others, the claim depends on the person's lack of a known partner. However, I can see that, if someone is having difficulty with coming to terms with their sexual or gender orientation, it might be of great help to be able to look to LGBT people who had achieved great things. Famous role models inspire confidence and pride. LGBT history month aims to educate people about the different standing that LGBTs have historically had and to celebrate the lives of those LGBT individuals who have made a contribution to society. I sincerely hope that the month will lead to greater tolerance and understanding, especially among those who are disinclined to change entrenched views. Personally, I have recently seen a big change in the views of younger people. I hope that events such as LGBT history month will bring even greater tolerance to future generations in Scotland, the UK and throughout the rest of the world.

The minister will be aware that ferry services are particularly important if we want to keep young people on our islands. Is he aware of what has recently happened on the island of Gigha, where there was a much-publicised community buy-out? On several occasions, dairy farmers have been unable to get their milk off the island and to the creamery in Campbeltown because the ferry could not get into the harbour at Tayinloan because it was too silted up. Will he please ensure that something is done about that?

This has been a good debate about a bill that I hope will prove to be a good piece of legislation. As my colleague Ted Brocklebank said, the Scottish Conservatives will support the bill at stage 1, although we have a small number of concerns about what its implementation may mean in practice. I will reiterate a few of those concerns. An important issue that is dealt with in the bill is the control of Gyrodactylus salaris, the parasite that has devastated salmon stocks in Norway. The impact of the parasite in Scottish waters would be  awful, and it is right that the Scottish ministers should have the powers that are needed to deal with such an outbreak. However, I cannot help but worry that the available treatments may prove even more damaging than the parasite itself. For example, the chemical rotenone would completely destroy the ecosystem of some of our rivers, not to mention the impact that it would have on the whisky industry, agriculture, recreational angling and tourism. As Ted Brocklebank said, the point is surely that we must do everything in our power to ensure that the GS parasite does not come to Scotland. I simply do not accept the view of the Executive's GS task force that comprehensive screening of people who arrive in Scotland from GS-infected countries with fishing gear, canoes and the like is a step too far. I say that because the appearance of GS and the use of associated treatments in Scotland would be nothing short of a national disaster, and we simply cannot afford to compromise on prevention. I will also touch on the sections of the bill that relate to recreational angling. I have spoken before about the importance of angling to the Scottish economy, particularly the rural economy, and I believe that the Executive and VisitScotland should redouble their already commendable efforts to promote Scotland as a first-rate angling destination. Although I generally welcome the provisions in part 3 of the bill, I would like reassurances from the minister that the measures relating to close seasons for species other than trout will be used wisely. Will she consider establishing a close season for rainbow trout—which does not exist at present—to protect wild brown trout from being caught out of season? There could, of course, be a derogation for put and take rainbow trout ponds. Will close seasons for coarse fish be created in line with English coarse fish seasons? The suggestion of increasing the rod limit to four rods for pike fishing must have strict conditions—such as bite indicators, wire traces and large baits—attached to it to ensure that the increase does not impact on trout fisheries where both species are present. It would be a tragedy if the bill's powers were in any way to damage Scotland's reputation with anglers, which I am sure is not the Executive's intention. Anglers will be interested in part 1 of the bill and will no doubt be disappointed that the strict liability offence in relation to escapees from fish farms has been dropped. It would be good if the bill could ease the tension that has existed between salmon farmers and wild sea trout and salmon anglers for the past 20 years. That is far too long to have an argument. Both industries are vital to Scotland's rural economy and, given the length of Scotland's west coast, there is no reason why they cannot co-exist in reasonable harmony.  Good practice measures have helped, but the loss of many west coast sea trout stocks over the past 20 years is a tragedy that should be righted. The west coast fishery trusts employ scientists who do great work, but the problems of wild sea trout and salmon are complex and the scientists require further funding to do additional research, especially at sea. Although present funding for the trusts is welcome, it is inadequate to do that work properly. Sea trout fishing was a famous Scottish sport, especially in areas such as Loch Maree, and we ought to do something to get it back. Considering what the sea fishing industry has had to sacrifice to preserve cod, we should do something to bring sea trout back to Scotland. More needs to be done to ensure that fewer farmed fish escape and to trace where escapees come from. There is no point in legislating on that if we cannot police the legislation because we do not know where the fish have come from. In this day and age, traceability of food and livestock is vital, so surely it is vital that farmed fish be traceable as well.

It is poignant and perhaps appropriate that we are discussing disability this morning, following the sad death last night of Lord Carter, who was a remarkable public servant and champion of the rights of disabled people. I pass on the sympathies of the Scottish Conservatives to his friends and family. I am pleased to speak in the debate on the Equal Opportunities Committee's report "Removing Barriers and Creating Opportunities". The Scottish Conservatives support the report. We believe that disabled people's rights must receive the highest level of promotion and protection in Scotland, the United Kingdom and across Europe. We also believe that the barriers that are inherent throughout many facets of our society must be removed in order that we can all benefit from the wide range of skills and talent that disabled people have to offer.  As David Cameron said on 16 October to Capability Scotland, five million people are "left on the scrap-heap while British firms deal with the resulting labour shortage by employing migrant workers." There is nothing wrong with employing migrant workers but, as David Cameron went on to say, that is "economically stupid and it has to stop ... We have a social responsibility to help disabled people into the workforce." I welcome the committee's report and I am glad to be a signatory to it. I also welcome the committee's recommendation that "the Scottish Executive establish a task force, along the lines of that suggested in evidence, to consider all the recommendations of the report in a Scottish context". One of the main issues that was raised in our consultation events was that, although a lot of information is available, much of it is not always easy for disabled people to find or access. Many disabled people therefore miss out on the things to which they are entitled, and something needs to be done about that. The committee proposed a central source for information and recommended that much more accessibility should be built into websites. Disabled people need better access to information and better signposting of services. I am proud to be the honorary president of Highland Disabled Ramblers. The group is based on the Black Isle and has made great strides in increasing the ability of disabled people to benefit from leisure activities. Members meet regularly for rambles in the Highlands and Islands, using robust electric scooters that are carried from place to place in a bus. I have been on some of those rambles, including one along the footpath of the Caledonian canal, where I was forced to run to keep up. The group, which has been helped greatly by generous local businesses, is a glowing beacon. The Executive should consider that model when it looks at ways of helping disabled people to access leisure and the great outdoors. I agree entirely with Margaret Smith's remarks on transport. The Executive should take on board all our recommendations in that regard. We need to have an integrated transport system that includes provision for disabled people. Much of our transport infrastructure, including many of our train stations, is difficult enough for enabled people to access, but poses a nightmare for disabled people. That has to change: we need to give more help to, and focus customer care on, disabled people. The Executive must address the current abuse of disabled parking spaces. There should be more adequate provision of spaces and severe punishment should be meted out to those who misuse the spaces.

I am sure that we will do so. The committee welcomed the proposed changes to building regulations, which, if properly utilised, will bring great improvements in accessibility. Those new measures must be closely monitored, and advice from disabled people must be used to ensure that improvements are being generated. The Scottish Conservatives wish to help disabled people to work whenever possible. We feel that the benefits system should be simplified, because the current system is complex, relies too much on Government agencies and often does not provide sufficient incentives for work. What is needed is a radical simplification of the benefits package for the disabled, replacing all the various forms and conditions with a single assessment and possibly a single benefit that is easier to access. It is good that we are debating this important subject. Let us all strive for a real difference for disabled people in Scotland.

From all reports, ample numbers of haddock are being caught at the moment. Iain Smith says that there is nothing left to catch. The Executive's policy would mean that there is nothing left to catch them with.

At what level will the fishing fleet be sustainable?

Will the member take another intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Although I wish the minister well in his negotiations in Brussels, I hope that this year's meeting will not be a repeat of previous years' meetings, from which the minister emerged clutching a piece of paper on which Britain's concessions were written large. I do not need to remind the minister of the reduction in the size of the Scottish fleet since 1999 or of the loss of associated jobs in the fish processing industry. The Scottish fishing industry cannot afford any more cuts; it must be with that in mind that the minister journeys to Brussels next week. Since Labour came to power—power that it still shares with the Lib Dems—we have seen the loss of three boats a week from the Scottish fleet. Fishermen are taking more risks and fishing further from shore so that they can fill their quotas in areas where they are allowed to fish. Where is the health and safety in that? Enough is enough. The systematic destruction of the fishing industry by cuts passed down from Brussels has destroyed livelihoods and is destroying communities. We have suffered for long enough while the common  fisheries policy has been handed down from on high. I hope that the minister will go to Brussels next week with fire in his belly and steel in his spine, because we cannot afford to see further cuts. The fishing industry has had enough. In Scotland, it is situated mainly in fragile and remote areas where the loss of any jobs has a disproportionate effect. Often, little alternative employment is available.

With respect, if the minister goes on for much longer there will not be any fishing industry left.

I will carry on. The Scottish fishing industry needs a period of consolidation and a Government at home to bring forward new ideas. For example, we know that it is set in cement that Brussels sets the TACs for all species in December. Why could not regional management groups throughout Scotland work out between them who gets what of the Scottish TAC? Let us have different groups dealing with each other so that Scotland's full TAC is taken up. They could decide who fishes where and when. This year, Scottish fishermen have not taken all the haddock and prawn TACs. Local catchers and processors could work out locally how the full TAC could be taken. That is what the processing sector is asking for. It does not have the product to process, which is extremely frustrating. How can businesses survive in those circumstances? Given the dreadful weather in the past two months, fishermen have been unable to catch all their quotas, which cannot be carried forward. The processing sector is frustrated. Let us not forget that it employs many more people on land than the boats employ at sea. George MacRae of the Scottish White Fish Producers Association estimates that there are four to five jobs onshore for every one at sea. If we cannot have local management of TACs, perhaps we could have more local management of Scottish quotas, so that the share of the cake handed out to Scotland is consumed fully by the Scottish fishing industry. There is another important reason for that: because the west coast prawn TAC has not been fished out this year, the commissioners just might try to cut next year's TAC. I hope that they will not follow that illogical step, which would punish Scottish fishermen for  fishing responsibly—but with them one just never knows. Why should our fishermen be sacrificed on the altar of a cod recovery plan that is broken and discredited—a plan conceived by Franz Fischler, who will go down in Scottish history as a destroyer of jobs rather than as a saviour of cod? The Commission cannot get the cod recovery plan by garrotting our white fish industry, so it is turning its gaze towards the west coast prawn industry. The minister must point out that hardly any cod are caught by that industry on the west coast. Areas where there is a concentration of spawning cod, such as in the Firth of Clyde, are rightly closed to fishing to protect the cod stocks. There are no grounds for a cut in the prawn industry and nothing less than last year's TAC is acceptable. I hope that the minister agrees with that and with the Scottish Fishermen's Federation which, when discussing nephrops, said: "Contrary to the statement in the Commission's July paper"— which said that there would be a rollover of the 2006 TAC— "an arcane argument has begun between ICES and the EU's own STECF committee over what should be the harvest rate. This has resulted in the first proposals containing an unacceptable reduction.  This must be challenged. " I agree with Alasdair Morrison, who called for a big increase in the monkfish quota, which is entirely justified by whatever brand of science one cares to look at. I wish the minister good luck in Brussels and ask him to please come back with a good deal for our fishermen.

I congratulate John Swinney on securing the debate and, like Jamie Stone, agree with every word that he said. As another MSP for the Highlands and Islands, I am aware of the importance of rural post offices—from Southend in Argyll to Unst in Shetland, and especially in the remoter areas of Caithness, Sutherland and on the north-west coast of Ross-shire. The more rural the area, the more important the post office is as a focal point. The post office in Dalmally in Argyll, which is near where I live, has joined the new pharmacy in a new building, which has brought enormous benefit to the community. I ask the minister to consider that model, because it is good. It is, in fact, the only pharmacy for 70 miles in one direction and its linkage with the post office has been a great success. Moreover, it has also forged links with a major bank to provide the only cash machine in what is a huge area. However, only last week, the postmistress told me that her clients are not being advised that they can still pay for many services at the post office. That is death by a thousand cuts to rural post offices. Frankly, it is dishonest, cynical and wholly incorrect of any Government not to let people know that they can still use the post office to pay for those services. It is trying to save money at the expense of people who live in remote and rural areas. The attitude at the centre of Government is incorrect—although it knows the cost of everything, it does not seem to know the value of keeping rural post offices in place. They are crucial to the well-being of so many people, particularly the elderly. I absolutely agree with Murdo Fraser's assessment of the situation and with Roseanna Cunningham's comment that the heart will be ripped out of a thousand communities. It is simply shameful. The Government must think again and, in order to regenerate rural communities, encourage more business opportunities and partnerships in rural post offices.

Compared with Scotland, film making in Ireland has enjoyed huge success in recent years. Indeed, with a few exceptions—such as Peter Mullan, who pulled off the converse with "The Magdalene Sisters", which is a film that is set in Ireland but which was made in Dumfries—the makers of films that are set in Scotland often take their films to Ireland. Since the locations that are available are so similar, has the minister evaluated why that is the case? What has he done to reach the point at which Scotland can offer financial and payment-in-kind incentives comparable to those that are available across the Irish sea?

I am glad that the First Minister thinks that everything is rosy in the garden for pensioners. However, in the light of the Scottish public  services ombudsman's recent decision to order Argyll and Bute Council to pay the costs of personal care to a 90-year-old man, will the First Minister kindly take steps to ensure that the hundreds of other people in Argyll and Bute who are waiting for their rightful payments for free personal care will also be paid, or will they all have to write to the ombudsman too?

The minister will have seen motion S2M-4916, in the name of my colleague, Murray Tosh, which welcomes the Scottish Executive's recognition of the cost of at least £42 million that farmers and hauliers may incur because of the new regulation and the need to balance correctly animal welfare benefits and the costs of compliance. Given that Scotland already has a very good reputation for animal welfare and that quality meat assurance schemes demand a high level of competence, will the minister take a pragmatic approach and ensure that new rules that are necessary are fit for the purposes of the Scottish crofting and farming industry, especially in the  remoter areas of the Highlands and Islands, where distances and climatic conditions are such that the new rules might not be appropriate?

The Executive's national strategy for sport, sport 21, set a target of sustaining 150,000 volunteers in sport by 2007. The strategy document put the 2003 figure at 150,000 to 160,000 volunteers but, in August, the sport 21 monitoring update revealed that the number of volunteers had dropped to 146,000. Will the minister make attracting more volunteers a priority for sport funding? Can she guarantee that voluntary organisations will retain their exemption from paying fees for disclosure?

I echo the words of my colleague Ted Brocklebank, who emphasised the importance of  preserving not only the environment and fisheries but the fishermen, processors and others who make their livelihoods from the coastal marine resource. Marine parks are, in fact, an old idea. Indeed, they long precede the more modern idea of marine spatial planning. That idea, which I believe is now the subject of discussions between fishery managers and the Executive relates to codes of good practice and management for all Scottish waters, not just one or two areas. I remember Ross Finnie telling us in no uncertain terms in a fisheries debate that fish do not respect boundaries but move around the sea bed as they think fit. That suggests that it might be better to concentrate on marine spatial planning rather than emphasising a marine park too much. Why conserve only one area when we could instead ensure the better management of all areas? There might develop a situation in which half of the people want to be in a national park and half do not. That would be a bit silly. However, in the interest of the areas that have been suggested—four of which lie in my region—I will try to be positive about any benefits that a marine park might bring. SNH has shortlisted the five strongest candidates. I notice that they are all on the west coast. The east coast did not get any fish farms either. I feel a bit sorry for the east coast—why is it missing out on so much? It is worth noting that the present legislation was designed for terrestrial parks not marine parks. As it would be unwise to suggest a terrestrial solution to a situation in a marine environment, it will be necessary to introduce special legislation that is a bit more appropriate. As a marine park will be a new venture, it would be wise to consider any problems that have been experienced in the terrestrial parks. Some say that there is a difficult extra layer of bureaucracy and others are not so concerned. However, the bureaucracy can be disruptive to residents and I hope that that will not be the case in a marine park, where at present everyone has freedom of access and the definition of boundaries and ownership will be a bit more difficult. Will the price of boat moorings suddenly go whooshing up? Will there be restrictions on previous freedoms? That is what people want to know. I know of pilot projects to do with marine spatial planning that are already taking place in the Argyll islands and coastal area. For example, there is the Scottish sustainable marine environment scheme in the Clyde estuary, which the minister will know about. There has also been a degree of co-operation between the Community of Arran Seabed Trust and the local fishermen with regard  to Lamlash bay. Recently, fishermen in Loch Fyne and Loch Shira have agreed not to trawl within certain limits in order to help wild salmon and sea trout interests in the area. That sort of agreement is sensible for local stakeholders and does not require any input from civil servants. The impression is being given that fisheries management will not be in the remit of the management of the marine national park. I am glad that the minister said that. However, that must be made absolutely clear. Although the marine park authority might not be able to define the gear or methods that fishermen may use, it will be able to decide whether any fishing can take place. In the Firth of Lorn, 90 per cent of the area is now closed to scallop dredging even though there is no UK rule to prevent such dredging. The recent ban emanates from the European Union habitats directive of 1993. One person who is affected is a fisherman from Luing who has been fishing the area for 40 years. He makes the point that the coral reefs, which he has studiously avoided, are still there. He would not want to lose his gear by going too close to them. However, he has now lost his livelihood and has lost the means to support his family. So far, I have spoken mainly of the water area. If a marine national park is to bring increased and sustainable tourism benefits to the terrestrial coastal area, we will certainly encourage that. However, that is surely a job that VisitScotland is meant to be doing already. I note that the two existing land-based national parks receive £10 million between them. I would be interested to know how much of that goes into supporting local enterprises and things that benefit rural communities. I will also be interested in the results of the consultation. I am glad that the minister has said that he will not impose anything on a community that is totally against it. The jury is still out. It is all very well for those in ivory towers here and in Brussels to talk about conservation but, as my friend Ted Brocklebank has said, we will support a park only if it does not impose a national concept against the wishes of the people who have lived and worked in a local coastal environment for generations. After all, they are the people who, over generations, have created the environment that a marine national park is supposed to protect. They are the ones who know the local environment and who will continue to manage it best. I can think of many things that fishermen have done. Alasdair Morrison mentioned the V-notching and returning of female lobsters. There is also the modification of trawl gear and dredgers to lessen the impact on the sea bed.  I want to conserve the communities as well as the land that they live on. Any park will have to do that before it will get my support.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I agree with what the minister has said about our marvellous marine and coastal environment, but does he agree that there is such an environment because of, rather than in spite of, management by local people in the past?

I, too, congratulate Jamie Stone on bringing the debate to the chamber. It is a subject of enormous importance in the far north. One in five jobs in Caithness depends in some way on Dounreay, and Dounreay creates 10 per cent of the economic output of the north Highlands area. It generates £80 million for the local economy, so it is still a very big player in the Scottish economy. I have visited Dounreay on different occasions in the past and have often been sent briefings by the company. The Scottish Executive must not be ostrich-like; it must face up to the fact that there will be significant job losses in future. In this case, the Executive has the advantage of time to plan for alternative industries and employment sources. That would not be the case if some private company went bankrupt and shut down. In the case of Dounreay, the future is visible on the horizon and can be planned for. It does not, however, give me great confidence to hear that Caithness and Sutherland had the worst record in the HIE area for new business start-ups in 2004-05. We must ask whether HIE is the right vehicle through which to pass the many millions of pounds that will be needed to reinforce Caithness's economic infrastructure. Small and growing businesses will need direct help. Has the minister considered approaching the chancellor to see whether it would be possible to institute tax breaks in this sort of situation? Perhaps he could remove some of his 84 stealth taxes. There is no reason why Caithness should not prosper; it already has a highly skilled and professional workforce. There are two deepwater ports that have not yet been exploited to their full potential. There is the North Highland College and there is still a strong agricultural industry, if it is allowed to survive. Thurso is also famous for its veterinary skills and services. There are also good engineering companies such as Dunbeath Engineering Ltd, which makes a range of workholding products for the world market. That company is growing at 15 to 20 per cent per annum. It exports goods to China and 30 per cent of its business goes to local subcontractors. It is a high-tech company that fulfils a need for high-tech precision engineering. Kongsberg Simrad in Wick makes underwater cameras, sonar systems, and echo sounders. In Castleton, Icetech Freezers Ltd specialises in low-cost refrigeration. We should not forget JGC  Engineering, the experts in decommissioning work whose experience at Dounreay will hopefully lead to sales of its technology to other firms in other parts of the world. On 10 October, HRH Princess Anne opened Britain's first purpose-built nuclear clean-up testing, training and research centre at Dounreay, and that is an exciting development. The decommissioning of Dounreay should breed experts who will have the potential to make this country a world leader in decommissioning. That could be one silver lining in the cloud, mentioned by Jamie Stone, that might hang over Dounreay. Like many other companies all over rural Scotland, those companies need a good infrastructure to let them prosper and grow. Dualling the A9 from Perth to Inverness and improving the rest of the A9 to the far north would help dramatically, as would the removal of business red tape and a reduction in business rates. With its links to Orkney, Caithness is a beautiful, clean area and a wonderful place in which to live. It has good business and tourism potential, and great amenity through its rich trout and salmon fisheries. It is environmentally a hugely important area with much flora and fauna, and it has the ability to produce good food from some very rich land. However, to continue to attract people of the calibre that currently live and work there, it is vital that there are good health services, including a hospital with a maternity unit, and good schools, good roads and decent air services.

I am delighted that the figures that we were published yesterday show an increase in visitor numbers, especially from America. However, I point out that most of those bookings would have been made when the old area tourist boards were still in place, so the figures are not a strong argument for the bill. Furthermore, I have heard recently that tourism bookings for this year may be considerably down.

It is my sincere hope, and that of my party, that the changes that will be made by the bill if it is passed will be good for the people who make their living out of tourism, which is, after all, Scotland's largest industry. It is possible that the ATB model that was set up by the Conservatives in 1995 needed some modernisation. However, although I accept that the main players who are now employed by VisitScotland are very professional operators, we are concerned that the integrated model that has been produced by the Executive will result in a loss of local knowledge and leadership. The hubs and area tourism partnerships have  been running since April 2005, despite the fact that only now are they being put on the statute book, so we can listen to what tourism operators think of their experience of the new model so far. There is no doubt that many of them are not happy—it is precisely because of that that the Conservatives abstained at stage 1. Not much has happened since then to change our minds. I have an example. I was recently rung up by an operator in Oban who said that they could not tell me how frustrating it is to be asked whether they are within walking distance of Stirling town centre when they are based in Oban. Many doubts were expressed at the Scottish Tourism Forum, which met in Pitlochry two weeks ago. We have severe concerns that the new model is too centralised. As I said at stage 1, I and several of my colleagues have conducted tourism surveys in our areas that suggest a high level of discontent with the new model. Since then, people have told me that the silence between the newly constructed hubs and the tourist operators on the outside of the wheel is deafening; there is not enough dialogue. We should not forget what the Enterprise and Culture Committee said in its report: "the current local area tourist boards are a repository of a significant amount of skills and knowledge. It will be important that in any new structure for tourism in Scotland, VisitScotland does not lose this local expertise in its drive for increasing professionalism in the sector." We are worried about that centralisation. The bill will simply rubber-stamp what already exists, but if Scottish tourism is to improve then tourism growth must be profitable. Public sector support is important for that, but business investment and efficiency of Government and regulation are indispensable. The new structure is overcentralised. Although it has improved some aspects of VisitScotland's marketing and, I admit, contains some good elements such as EventScotland and EatScotland—Scotland tastes delicious—the overcentralised nature of the new structure risks alienating the smaller tourism businesses that are the lifeblood of our more rural areas. Small tourism businesses make a huge contribution to many communities. The effects of the failure of such businesses are proportionately greater in rural areas than is the case in more populous areas. I am especially concerned that new structure does not seem to provide a voice for that part of the industry. Time and again, I have heard it said to me that the restructuring is about the bigger companies in the major cities and offers little to operators in remote areas. It seems ridiculous to abolish the tried and tested "Scottish Tourist Board" as the legal title, given that the trading name could obviously be  changed at any time. I have no objection to the name "VisitScotland", but I am reminded from photographs of my youth that trends and fashions pass on. "VisitScotland", with its grammatical oddity, may look outdated all too soon. I have no concern about the increase in the size of the board as long as the board members are the best that we can get and have professional knowledge that will benefit the industry. I hope that the minister will listen to the industry when it calls, for example, for the dualling of the A9 between Perth and Inverness—which my colleague Murdo Fraser and others in my party have also have called for—and the need for profitable growth. We also need training schemes for employees in the tourism industry and for tourism students so that what is now our biggest industry can grow even bigger. Scotland will always sell itself well, but the Scottish Executive must also do its best to bring that about.

In areas facing severe economic difficulty, it is important that public and lottery moneys fund a higher proportion of the total cost of regeneration. Such areas find it difficult to draw as much funding from the private sector. Will the minister consider moves to increase the support that Historic Scotland gives through its historic environment regeneration fund to projects that are receiving funding under the lottery's townscape heritage initiative?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, George Lyon is not the local MSP for the Western Isles.

On that point, does the member agree that a Campbeltown to Ballycastle ferry might increase co-operation between Scotland and Northern Ireland and that the fact that the Executive has held up such a service for eight years is not a good thing?

Will Andrew Arbuckle clarify whether he is insulting simply Fife farmers or all farmers in Scotland?

I declare an interest as the owner of a hill farm in Argyll that still produces store sheep and beef cattle. I welcome the debate, which is on a subject vital to my region of the Highlands and Islands and other parts of rural Scotland. All the constituencies in my region produce high-quality food and drink. Although the whisky industry is  apparently doing all right, our producers of beef and sheep—famous Scottish industries—are going bust. That is because prices in markets are still at 1980s levels, while costs have soared. I admit that the businesses receive subsidies, but producers are still going bust. Last week, I visited Dalmally auction market in my home county of Argyll, where I saw correct cast ewes selling for as little as £10 per animal and some feeder ewes selling for as little as £5. It is hardly worth taking animals to market at those prices. Sheep farmers are wringing their hands in despair wondering how they can tighten their belts even further to survive another year. The lamb price may have been slightly up on the previous year, but, to be honest, it would have to double to give hill farmers a fair income and allow them to reinvest in improving their land and livestock. The number of animals in the Highlands and Islands is already dropping dramatically. For example, the number of animals entered at the lamb sales in Lairg in Sutherland, which is the most famous market for north country Cheviot sheep in Scotland, has declined hugely. The number of sheep in the Western Isles and Shetland has almost halved in the past 10 to 15 years and the number of cattle is going the same way. It is impossible to meet sustainably the costs of over-wintering animals, when all the costs have gone up but prices for the product have remained static for 20 years. That seems doubly unfair to farmers and crofters, who see the prices supermarkets charge for beef and lamb, much of which appears to be imported from countries with poorer animal welfare regimes. I have asked the minister what percentage of red meat we import. The same story comes to me from Dingwall market in Ross-shire, which is the main centre of livestock agriculture in the north. Obviously, the livestock auction companies themselves suffer as a result of a drop in prices and numbers. If we consider the transport companies, all the feed suppliers and those who sell animal dips and medicines, it is easy to see why that disastrous slump in agriculture is affecting a huge part of the economy in the Highlands and Islands. We must remember that one in 10 of all Scottish jobs is dependent on agriculture. I have heard Mr Finnie committing himself to a prosperous future for Scottish farmers and crofters. I have heard him talk about bringing added value to the food chain. I do not doubt his sincerity, but the situation has worsened progressively since devolution. I speak from practical experience, as do others all the way from Shetland to Campbeltown. One area of livestock farming that used to stand alone as remaining profitable when others were failing was the dairy sector. However, I have spoken to the dairy  farmers of Kintyre, Islay and elsewhere and it is obvious that that sector is also in the doldrums. That is why I note with interest that the Environment and Rural Development Committee, in its summary of recommendations, requests that the minister explain in detail how the revised agriculture strategy will contribute to farmers and food processors being able to create more market power and increase margins by adding value to the primary product, which they need to do. I ask the minister to explain that now, or as soon as possible, because hill farmers are desperate to know how his plans will affect their futures. For example, the Executive talks about its concern to minimise the regulatory burden but as far as I can tell there is, disappointingly, no commitment actually to cut or ease any existing regulations. The primary producers of beef and lamb off the hill areas of the Highlands and Islands have always concentrated on providing the best possible product that the fodder from disadvantaged land can create. They have to import expensive winter keep. They have to buy expensive medicines to improve animal welfare and they endeavour to stay inside numerous new Government regulations. Surely it is only fair that those unrecognised stewards of our much-acclaimed open Highland landscape, which is so valuable to our tourist trade, survive. Without those farmers and their animals that graze our landscape, the picture-postcard perfection of the Highlands and Islands would degenerate into a tick-infested tundra that is difficult to walk through. Those hill animals have traditionally been sold through store markets to low-ground farmers with better land, who can fatten the animals and thus make themselves a profit at a later stage. That agricultural system has held Scotland in good stead for a long time, but if the primary producers of quality beef and lamb in the Highlands and Islands do not get enough of a share of the cake to be sustainable, the system will collapse and the land on our hills will no longer be properly looked after. That is the danger facing us. The skills learned over generations in livestock handling, dog handling, fencing, stone walling, draining and land improvement will melt away like snow off a dyke and it will be blamed on a Government that has failed our farming industry by ignoring the crisis and failing to plan a proper food chain strategy for Scotland that gives Scottish hill farmers a fair deal.

Does the member agree that some of the people who could not get into those schemes had paid the modulation tax that was meant to fund them?

Can the minister tell me how much red meat we import?

Does the minister agree that keeping agriculture in crofting is essential?

Crofting and crofters are very dear to me. Crofters have struggled for centuries to maintain a tough way of life, from which is derived much of our Highland culture—the music, the poetry and the song. Crofters' huge practical knowledge of livestock agriculture and of the biodiversity of their neighbourhoods is invaluable. They were important to our past and are important to the future. It would be a sad day if Scotland were to lose its crofters. However, having experienced the recent debacle in Taynuilt—where the best land, in the middle of a crofting township, was used for the development of new housing, despite the fact that young crofters were queuing up for it—I have realised that crofting, left undefended against open market forces, would quickly be swept away and would become part of Scotland's history. It is extraordinary that, whereas on the day in question the developers appeared at the public hearing in Taynuilt with a notable Queen's counsel at their side, the Crofters Commission did not have its lawyer—or any other—with it, since apparently he was on loan to the Executive.

Not at the moment. As a member of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on crofting, I have spent much time with members of the Scottish Crofting Foundation, individual crofters and crofting associations. For years, many have called for an evaluation of what crofting means and of what it should mean for the future. Surely that evaluation should have preceded the introduction of the bill. We must ask why it did not. If it had, we could have legislated sensibly to help crofting. It did not, so now we cannot. There was no evaluation, only a draft bill that few seemed to want and which no one would admit to having written or asked for. Alasdair Morrison has just told us who wrote the bill, but I cannot believe that he did it on his own. The member could have helped him, if he had so wished. I have described the background to the Environment and Rural Development Committee's report on the bill, from which I will quote. Paragraph 325 states: "There has been criticism of what the Bill does not do, and a concern that it represents a 'hotch-potch' that does not seem to point to a vision for crofting. It has certainly not been able to command any sense of widespread support amongst those affected by it."  Paragraph 326 states: "The Scottish Crofting Foundation stated that the Bill's fundamental flaws outweigh its positives, and that new opportunities offered by the Bill should not be used to gloss over deficiencies." It continues: "A significant portion of witnesses argued that the Bill should, therefore, be withdrawn—as proceeding with a Bill on the basis that it is better than nothing is not an acceptable approach." I agree. The conclusions of the good committee report would have been useful if we had had them before the bill was drafted. They would surely have been reached much earlier if the Executive had taken any notice of what Sir Crispin Agnew and John MacKintosh said in 1998. The Executive could have listened to Becky Shaw and the Scottish Crofting Foundation when the first white paper was published in 2002, but again, it did not. Nor does it appear that much attention was paid to the deliberations in 2005, before the bill was introduced. Rob Gibson was right to say that much time has been spent on false trails and that the true evidence seems to have been ignored. The bill in its current form is indeed a hotch-potch that is not worthy of the Parliament. We need practical solutions to practical crofting problems.

I am afraid that I disagree. We should not proceed with the bare remnants of a hotch-potch, as that would be dishonest. Instead, we should go back and start again. We need practical solutions. That is why, two years ago, I instigated a members' business debate on the bull hire scheme, which is important to the crofting community. On that day, I was promised action by the honourable minister, Allan Wilson. Members can read what he said at the time. Those were good words but, in reality, the number of available bulls has dropped from 196 last year to 118 now. There are fewer bulls to choose from and they are far more expensive. If the Executive is supportive of crofting, why has that been allowed to happen? The extraordinary lack of vision with regard to the scheme will soon result in inferior cattle and even less income for crofters, who struggle to survive on the ludicrously low prices that their cattle and sheep fetch at  auction markets. If I may say so, that is the main problem that crofters face. We must keep the crofting counties agricultural grants scheme separate from the new land management contracts, or the money for crofters will disappear into bigger farmers' pockets. CCAGS grants may be a tiny part of the national agriculture budget, but they are hugely important to crofting townships. Crofting land must be treated specially, or it will disappear. Housing development should be restricted heavily in the arable or inby areas, which are the best agricultural land, but it could be encouraged in the rougher common-grazing areas. That might mean a need to help crofters with access roads and water and electricity infrastructure to encourage new housing in areas that are away from main roads. Such measures would produce new houses, new crofts and new communities—the opposite of a Highland clearance—which would be real support for crofting. Glens that are full of ruins would be repopulated, which would indeed be a journey back from the other side of sorrow. The committee's report brings a refreshing honesty to the political process in the Parliament, because it admits that great mistakes were made in the preparation of the bill. I agree with Eleanor Scott that the committee did its job well. Let us not proceed with the barely acceptable rump of a hotch-potch; let us go back to the drawing board to carry out a real evaluation of the needs of crofting in the 21 st century, consider new suggestions and come back in the next session of Parliament with a bill that is genuinely useful to crofting.

I welcome the opportunity to speak on the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill, having spent the past few months as deputy convener of the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link Bill Committee. As members will have seen from the committee's report, I am unable to endorse the project as it stands. I say that with some regret, because I believe strongly that there is a strong case for connecting Edinburgh airport to the national rail network.  As the report explains, Edinburgh airport is becoming an increasingly important transport hub. It is predicted that, by 2030, between 21 million and 23 million people will be using the airport—up from 8 million in 2004. It is therefore essential that we invest now to ensure that public transport links are in place to cope with future demand. Unfortunately, the fact that the case for a rail link is so strong makes it all the more tragic that the tunnel option that is being presented to us today is not the correct one. I do not make that statement lightly; I do so for several reasons, some of which are highlighted in the committee's report. The chief reason is the committee's concern over funding. Paragraphs 268 and 269 of our report say that "The Committee therefore remains exasperated that at this stage it can only confirm that the Scottish Executive will provide funding but not at what level nor whether such funding will be sufficient to meet the estimated cost of construction", and that "the Committee has major concerns that the Bill could be passed without the level of funding attributed to each source being identified." I have to ask how we, the Parliament, can lend our support to the bill as it stands when we cannot be confident about how the project will be funded. That is doubly significant in the light of the plethora of heavy infrastructure projects on the Executive's books, meaning that cost overruns and delays are a real possibility if the funding is not 100 per cent robust. As our report makes clear, "a delay in any one of these ... projects could have a major impact on the ability of EARL to begin operating in 2011." Ultimately, with the cost of the tunnel already estimated at up to £650 million, even a slight cost overrun could put the whole project or other projects in jeopardy. Members may call me pessimistic, but I cannot help feeling—based on the Executive's past record and in the light of the scale of the project—that the final bill for the tunnel could well exceed the figure that the promoter has been circulating in recent days.

Not just at the moment. We should not fall into the trap of believing that an Edinburgh airport rail link means that we have to have the massive project that is being debated today—the rail link need not equate with the tunnel option. Having sat on the committee, I do not believe that the Executive or the promoter have done sufficient work on considering alternative schemes, in particular on what has come to be called the Turnhouse option. I simply cannot accept paragraph 144 of the committee's report, which states:  "on the basis of this appraisal the Turnhouse option does not offer superior benefits to that proposed within the Bill." The appraisal being referred to is the Scottish transport appraisal guidance 1 appraisal that the promoter carried out on the Turnhouse option. That document is flawed, so it is not, I regret to say, credible for the committee to dismiss the Turnhouse option purely on the basis of that appraisal. The appraisal is flawed on several grounds; David McLetchie spoke about that in detail. It is sufficient for me to say that it is all but impossible to read the appraisal and not be struck by the fact that it is less the objective assessment of the options that it should be and more a deliberate shooting-down of the Turnhouse option, based on some extremely dubious assumptions. Those assumptions include the claim that it would take 41 minutes to get from the city centre to the airport terminal if there were to be a station at Turnhouse that was connected to the terminal by shuttle bus. That claim is ridiculous. Given that trains currently take only 9 minutes to get from Waverley to South Gyle, it is safe to say that a train could get to Turnhouse in 10 minutes. If a shuttle bus could use a designated bus lane around the perimeter of the airport, it could easily get to the terminal in 10 minutes, which means that the total journey time for the Turnhouse option would be about 20 minutes—a mere four minutes more than using the tunnel option. The promoter claims that a shuttle bus would need to use public roads because the airport is a restricted area—hence the claim about the 41 minute journey time—but I simply do not accept that a designated bus route could not be created around the airport's perimeter. To do so would certainly not be as difficult as constructing a tunnel under the runway. Even if the bus had to use the A8, it would not take as long as the promoter claims. A total journey time of 25 minutes—not the 41 minutes that is claimed in the appraisal—would be more realistic. It has been suggested that the Turnhouse option would mean that there was less connectivity than the tunnel option. However, if we constructed a small cord between the Fife line and the Winchburgh to Dalmeny branch, the Turnhouse option would provide direct connections to all the stations that would be connected by the tunnel option, with the exception of nearby Edinburgh Park station, which will be served by the tram anyway. If connectivity to the rest of Scotland is the point of the project, why are we getting so worked up about a slightly longer journey time into the centre of Edinburgh? The Turnhouse option could be up and running within a very short time; the tunnel is five years away at best and I believe that even that timescale is optimistic. Therefore, I urge members not to  endorse this flawed, massively disruptive and very expensive scheme, so that we can instead refocus our efforts on developing a better alternative.

Yesterday, along with the Minister for Environment and Rural Development, Ross Finnie, and others, I attended a tasting that was put on by Quality Meat Scotland. We tasted the meat from nine different lambs and a six-year-old mutton. It was all delicious. I grew up on a sheep farm and have eaten lamb and mutton all my life. I had never realised the subtle—and sometimes rather glaring—differences in flavour between meat from the same type of animal that has fed on different areas of heather or grass or a combination of the two. Farmers markets can illustrate and exploit differences in the flavour of local meats in the same way that whisky trails, for example, highlight different whiskies from different distilleries for whisky connoisseurs from all over the world. Local food has a local taste and history that tourists find truly interesting. Many of Scotland's tourists come from England or France. Given that the English eat twice as much lamb per head as the Scots—and the French probably twice as much again—farmers markets are the perfect vehicle for promoting that new kind of food tourism. I also stress the importance of buying vegetables, especially organic ones, at farmers markets. They can be a dream to eat, and can be used to encourage young children to eat healthily. Indeed, my own young children, who used to hate vegetables, love going on sorties to farmers markets and carrying home healthy local produce that they have bought at enormous expense. They eat every morsel of it. I visit farmers markets in Oban and Cairndow in Argyll and, if I am in  Edinburgh at the weekend, I enjoy visiting the excellent market on Castle Terrace, which sells the most delicious venison pies that I have ever tasted. I congratulate John Scott on securing this debate on an important motion and on all that he has done for farmers markets, which are, after all, important for farmers, fish farmers, fishermen, shellfish growers and, in particular, deer farmers. They are also important for tourism and health. Mr Finnie has often called for producers to add value in the food chain, and farmers markets play a major role in doing exactly that.

I echo Fergus Ewing's sentiments. The world championships will bring in 700 to 800 competitors from 70 different countries, and there will be some 50,000 extra visitors to the Fort William area. Does the minister agree that the Off Beat Bikes downhill course on the Nevis range is fit only for people who are extremely experienced in the sport? Does she therefore agree that at  least one other course should be built in the area to encourage people with less experience to take up the new sport, which promises so much for Scotland, and to take advantage of the gondola transport that facilitates the sport in that area?

The minister may be aware that, this coming Saturday in Beauly, the shinty teams of Fort William and Glenorchy will battle it out for the Sutherland cup, which is an important fixture in shinty's annual calendar. What is the Executive doing to provide more facilities for shinty and to give general encouragement to the game in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive which local authorities in the Highlands and Islands are fully meeting the Executive's commitment to free personal care for the elderly and which are not. (S2O-10342)

I asked the minister which authorities had and which had not fully met the commitment; he did not answer the question. Recent figures show that 382 people in the Highland area and 43 people in the Moray area are waiting to be assessed. I have heard that Lorne and the Isles hospital in Argyll and Bute has record bed blocking, that there are no referrals to residential or nursing care and that there are no direct payments for home care packages other than attendance allowance. People have been waiting months for an assessment. They are giving up hope. They do not know when funding will be made available. The Executive says that it is not its fault; the council says that it is not its fault. When will someone take responsibility for this crisis? Will the minister give a commitment today that all those who are entitled to free personal care will receive it and that he will reverse the current situation that sees elderly people suffer while national and local politicians squabble over whose fault it is?

The minister will be aware of trusts such as the Argyll Fisheries Trust, the Lochaber Fisheries Trust and the Western Isles Fisheries Trust, whose research and groundwork have recently been so valuable to the wild freshwater angling industry and the setting up of area management agreements, which allow the wild salmon and sea trout industry to co-exist with the farmed salmon industry. Will the minister consider extra funding for her countryside agencies to help those trusts with their work, which is so valuable to Scotland's rural economy?

Tourism people heap praise on the tourist information centres. I have asked the minister in the past whether those centres will be kept. Will she give me a concrete assurance that they will be kept?

I agree totally with Mr Stone's points about local control and the importance of tourist information centres. He mentioned a human face. Does he agree that visitscotland.com is somewhat less than a human face and more of a robot-like call centre?

It is something of an irony that we have before us today a bill entitled the Tourist Boards (Scotland) Bill the central purpose of which is to abolish area tourist boards and wholly absorb what remains into VisitScotland. As we ponder  that outcome today, it is only right that we take a moment to acknowledge the outstanding contribution that area tourist boards have made to the success of the Scottish tourism industry since their establishment in 1995. Many members have enjoyed close relations with their local boards and will want to join me in paying tribute to the work that they did. The Executive might also wish to reflect for a moment on the frankly shabby treatment that was dished out to the ATBs during the early days of the restructuring. There is no need for me to repeat the strongly felt concerns that were raised by the ATBs during the Enterprise and Culture Committee's inquiry because they are adequately dealt with in that committee's report from last year, but it is only right that as the Executive fires home the final nail in the ATB coffin in the form of the Tourist Boards (Scotland) Bill, it does so with some humility and perhaps a little repentance. Notwithstanding the undoubted strengths of the ATB model of the past decade, I fully accept that the time had come for some changes to be made—indeed, I have sympathy with much of what the minister said in that regard. Although I agree that fragmentation was a problem, I disagree that the new structure is the right one. There were weaknesses in the ATB model and it is right that we address them, but there were also strengths that are being unnecessarily forfeited under the new plans. My chief concern about the hubs model relates to a loss of local knowledge and, more precisely, a loss of local industry leadership. That point was made strongly by the committee, which said in its report: "the current local area tourist boards are a repository of a significant amount of skills and knowledge. It will be important that in any new structure for tourism in Scotland, VisitScotland does not lose this local expertise in its drive for increasing professionalism in the sector." I know that VisitScotland plans to retain its offices in the former ATB areas, but I detect a fear in the industry that those offices will be mere satellites of the mother ship rather than genuine local bodies.

For example, I quote Douglas Logan, the managing director of Speciality Scotland Travel in Edinburgh, who said in The Scotsman in August last year: "Since the demise of the area tourist boards, there has been nobody to speak up for small businesses ... To my  mind VisitScotland's local offices are just clones of the central organisation, representing a central big brother at a local level." His views are not unique. Again and again I have received negative comments about the overcentralisation of the new model and the fear that local knowledge is being lost. Indeed, I have carried out an extensive survey on the new structures among tourism businesses in my region, as have a number of my colleagues. We found a high level of discontent with the new model. I will quote from a number of responses to those surveys from throughout Scotland: "The previous situation was far from perfect, but it's been taken away, with nothing to replace it." "We were not very happy with our previous ATB, but the current arrangement is worse, and it is not getting better." "We need local people 'selling' the local product. These hubs are too big and impersonal." "As a former director of Aberdeen & Grampian Tourist Board, I have to say a change was needed. My view, however, is that the new structure is too centralised ... I don't want a return to the former ATB, but can report a strong and growing feeling of being 'left out' by businesses. This may lead to breaking away and fragmentation—which is the worst model of all." The Executive must heed that last point about the worst of all worlds. Although I agree with the minister that under the old model there was perhaps too much of a gulf between the ATBs and VisitScotland, there is a danger now that by pursuing a policy of total centralisation, more and more communities and businesses will feel isolated and disengaged from VisitScotland and will instead set up their own marketing bodies. That has already happened to an extent in areas such as Dumfries and Galloway. It would be ironic if the Executive's attempt to unify the industry served to perpetuate division. I accept that, as far as they go, the new area tourism partnerships that the minister mentioned are doing an excellent job, but their influence has been overhyped by VisitScotland. They have no statutory or decision-making powers and they are a poor substitute for the former boards when it comes to genuine local control. I will touch briefly on the other provisions in the bill. I am not convinced of the necessity to change the name from the functional and descriptive Scottish Tourist Board to the hip and trendy VisitScotland.

I am sorry, but I cannot. I am reminded by photographs from my youth that, like hairstyles, trends pass and the VisitScotland name could look outdated rapidly. I have no objection to using the name VisitScotland in the meantime, but  if the trading name can be changed at any time, it seems ridiculous to abolish the tried and tested Scottish Tourist Board as the legal title. That plea for common sense to prevail has been made not only by the Scottish Conservative Party but by COSLA. I draw the minister's attention to its submission to the Enterprise and Culture Committee, in which it makes those arguments forcefully. I have no concerns about the proposed increase in size of the VisitScotland board from seven to 12 members, although its effectiveness will depend entirely on the ability of the appointees, who I hope will be brilliant. Presiding Officer, I hope that you will permit me in my closing minutes to touch briefly on two concerns that are not directly affected by the bill, but which are nonetheless of major concern to the tourism industry.

The first concern is about visitscotland.com. People have written to us with the following comments about the site: "Long-winded and complicated, difficult to find named property" "It is appalling" "A national disgrace" "Please highlight the website, it does more damage than all other aspects for self-catering". The final comment is that "It works very badly ... it has provided no business." I have to stop now, unfortunately, but I hope that the minister will take on board those comments about VisitScotland.

No one can argue that racism is anything other than ugly and wrong. The Conservatives recognise the Scottish Executive's efforts to promote race equality in this country. Any initiative that promotes race equality should be welcomed. However I found a number of areas of concern in the summary of the race equality review. One such concern is the grant of £2.3 million—the largest named sum of money—to support public  agencies in meeting their legal responsibilities. I have nothing against public agencies meeting their legal responsibilities, but why is the largest sum of money that is being granted under the strategy being spent on meeting bureaucratic targets that are imposed by the Government. There are those who might cynically say that the Executive promotes strategies and then creates the jobs that will ensure that the strategies are met. They might go on to say that those jobs will be filled by like-minded people who become dependent on yet more Government strategies for their work to continue. Of course, that is the cynic's approach, but what we do not need, in any strategy that promotes race equality, is too many managers and not enough people doing the job on the ground. At present, we are seeing a lot of immigration from the new countries of the European Union, especially Poland. We welcome the workers from those countries, as they are contributing to the economy all over Scotland. In the Highlands, following requests that were made at a local population summit, Inverness library now stocks the Polish Express , which allows Polish immigrants to keep up to date with the news from home, and the Highland Council library service is printing leaflets on its services and how to access them in Polish, Russian, Bengali, Arabic and Chinese. That was done in response to the needs of local communities. Although it may seem a simple thing, all too often such examples of good practice are stifled by bureaucracy or prejudice. I recognise the initiative that Highland Council library service has shown and its welcoming attitude. I am not sure whether Executive strategies can ingrain such a welcome into the fabric of Scottish life, but that is what is needed. Visitors should be welcomed, whether they are visiting for days, weeks, months, years, or indeed for the rest of their lives. In the Highlands and Islands, we have a phrase that is translated from the Gaelic: there are no strangers here, only friends who have not yet met. I like that approach. We recently witnessed the encouraging example of many Shetlanders campaigning vigorously to prevent the deportation of Sakchai Makao, who was arrested and detained and has now been released on bail. Sakchai is widely accepted as a Shetlander and has even competed as a Shetlander in the island games. It is outrageous that the immigration system is so shambolic that a person who has lived in Scotland for 13 years—most of his life—and who is integrated in the community should be told, "You're no longer welcome. Go back to where you came from." That is dreadful. I hope that the Westminster Government will see common sense and rescind the order to deport Sakchai Makao.  There must be something wrong with the immigration system under Labour, if it is necessary to make dawn raids on people who have been living peacefully in Glasgow for more than five years, who have integrated into communities and whose children have integrated into schools. If the system was fair and efficient, such situations would seldom arise, but unfortunately there has been a series of Westminster Government blunders on immigration and asylum under Charles Clarke, who presided over 1,000 cases of wrongful release. I recently saw a film that was made by the Scottish director and actor Peter Mullan and Robina Qureshi of Positive Action in Housing, which followed the deportation of the Vucaj family from Glasgow to Albania. It is a harrowing and informative film, which opens eyes to the results of a failed Government immigration and asylum policy that brings desperate unhappiness to young children whose lives have been firmly rooted in their Scottish homes. I feel strongly that innocent children have become the victims of bad policy. We cannot put up with that in Scotland; we must work for a fair policy in Westminster. Too many racist incidents take place in Scotland. I am alarmed by attacks on football fans who have shown support for England during the world cup. Although most people condemn such attacks, especially the vile attacks on the seven-year-old boy and the disabled man, some people are not so quick to condemn the sentiment behind the attacks. How would Scots feel if we were attacked by the English for wearing a Scotland football shirt or for displaying the saltire? Surely any UK flag should be tolerated with good humour throughout the union. However, the English seem to be fair game for a vocal minority in Scotland, which includes people who are in positions of influence, whose inappropriate remarks give credibility to racist views. Sometimes when I read articles or listen to commentators' remarks about the English, I think that if "English" were replaced with any other nationality or race, the Commission for Racial Equality would investigate the matter. Fortunately, the English take such slurs with good humour for the most part, but the phenomenon concerns me because it shows a lack of respect for our closest neighbours, on whom we depend for the major part of our tourism industry and much of our other business. It is not a good example to young Scots and could easily result in anti-Scottish sentiment in England, which would be detrimental to the Scottish economy and to the welfare of the Scots and the welcome that they receive when they visit England. I am glad that Malcolm Chisholm's motion mentions Scotland's Gypsy Travellers. During the inquiry that led to the Equal Opportunities Committee's report on Gypsy Travellers, I visited  many sites and learned about the problems to do with health, education and security that Gypsy Travellers encounter. Gypsy Travellers have been part of the Scottish culture for a long time and their problems are just as important as those of anyone else who lives in this country. It is important that we send a clear message that the Scottish Parliament thinks that it is unacceptable to attack or bully anyone. I support the sentiments of the one Scotland, many cultures campaign. We have a multicultural society in the UK. Our society might not be perfect, but since Cromwellian times we have had a history of tolerating the beliefs and habits of the people of different cultures who make their homes here. We are a happier country than France, where I lived for a short time. There, the attitude is, "You can have any culture you like, as long as it is French." The first responsibility of our Governments is to protect law-abiding citizens of all cultures. That can be done only if we have a fair and transparent immigration and asylum system, which aids immigrants who want to contribute to improving the quality of life in the British isles. I support the amendment in Dave Petrie's name.

Will the new cultural entitlements legislation include a statutory duty on local authorities to deliver those entitlements? Can the minister confirm that the proposal will be cost neutral to local authorities?

I have no problem in supporting the motion. The trunk roads that Fergus Ewing mentioned—the A9, the A96 and the A82—were all mentioned in the Conservative manifesto as requiring upgrades. I thank the minister for the improvements to the dangerous junctions on the A9, and respectfully remind him that the last survey on dualling the A9 was done under the Conservatives in 1996. Dualling would have cost £275 million then and I suspect that it would be double that now, but I hope that he will look into the possibility. On Monday evening, I drove from Perth to Aberdeen on the dual carriageway and was extremely envious of that road compared with my normal drive from Perth to Inverness on the A9, which, as everyone knows, is a two-lane road interspersed with sections of dual carriageway. I do not see why the citizens of Inverness and the people of the Highlands and Islands should have a road inferior to that available to the people of Aberdeen and the north-east. The comfort and feeling of safety of driving on the dual carriageway from Perth to Aberdeen left me still alert and relaxed, which was in sharp contrast to the fatigue that one feels having travelled the A9, especially when it is full of heavy lorries. I can tell anyone that the experience of overtaking a long pantechnicon with spray blowing on to the windshield is extremely hairy, to say the least; sitting behind one is equally frustrating and stressful. Such conditions on two-way roads undoubtedly lead to the large number of fatal accidents that sadly happen on the A9, the most dangerous road in Scotland, and it should be any Government's priority to dual the A9 to save lives and improve interconnections for people in the Highlands and Islands and for our important tourist industry. The northern A9, from Inverness to Scrabster, is also sorely in need of upgrading. I referred to the number of heavy goods lorries on the A9. It would make a difference if more freight could be taken off that road and put on to the rail network. Tesco and Safeway used to run their goods on rail, but when Morrisons took over Safeway, the firm pulled out of rail and went back to the road. Tesco found that to be competitive it had to follow suit and go back to road transport. That has added a large number of lorries to the road that, frankly, need not be there, and encouragement should be given to get those  companies to take their goods off the busy A9.

The A96, which was recently voted the most unpopular road in Scotland, is a main transport link for commuters in the area and needs a major upgrade to carry the increased volume of traffic. That is vital to those who live in Moray. The road sees many accidents that would not happen if some of the black-spot areas were improved. The economy of Moray depends on the A96, but the road's capacity cannot cope with the present demand. Dave Petrie and Jim Mather both spoke about the A82, but one of my main worries is about a spur of that road, the A85, of which a stretch between Tyndrum and Dalmally has recently, at great expense, been resurfaced without being realigned. I spoke to the contractors who did the job, and they informed me that many of the dangerous corners and bends that have taken numerous lives in car crashes could easily have been straightened out using the type of machinery that is now available. It goes through that kind of rock like a knife through butter. Instead, another layer of tarmac has been added, which simply makes people go faster round those same corners, making them even more dangerous. Good planning and realignment are the operations that are required, rather than the sticking-plaster solution of just more tar. Our train services in the rural Highlands are quaint, but they lack the speed and regularity to form a real alternative to road transport in many areas, except for those who have time to sit and relax and look at the marvellous Highland scenery.

I am finishing, Presiding Officer. I would love to see a link from Crianlarich through Glen Ogle from west to east, but I do not suppose that that will be very high on the minister's list. At the start of the first session of Parliament, Sarah Boyack told us that we would get an integrated transport policy—

I am afraid that we are still waiting for it.

Will the member give way?

A few months ago, one of the remaining high-rise blocks of flats in the Gorbals was blown up, laying to rest another part of the era of 1960s jerry-build. Some 123 flats became 125,000 tonnes of rubble in an instant to make way for 100 new flats to be built in the area. I hope that past experience will teach planners and architects to build homes that complement rather than experiment with people's lives, as the 1960s high-rise projects certainly did. I hope that no one will have to throw jeely pieces from 20-storey flats any more. We can learn a lot from the past. Architecture should not just be governed by a policy of contemporary design for the future; it is also about making the most of fine existing buildings and remembering that today's architecture is tomorrow's building stock. It is disappointing to note that there seems to be very little in the Executive's document about existing housing stock or the importance of our architectural heritage; it is all about designs for the future. The  centre of Edinburgh, for example, is a world heritage site of huge importance to the rest of the world, but there is little mention of the future guardianship of such a jewel. The document is very light on that. The whole country is pretty famous for special buildings. There are architectural gems all over Glasgow, Dundee and Aberdeen, which all have fine examples of civic architecture. Many wonderful houses were destroyed after the '45 throughout the Highlands and Islands, but there are still many fascinating historic castles and houses that should be treated as cultural and tourism assets. It seems only right that, wherever possible, those buildings should be alive rather than dead, employed in an active role and allowed to earn their keep. That is not happening in some keeps—in Castle Tioram in the Highlands or Rowallan Castle in the south of Scotland, for example. It appears that those two buildings, both of which should be salvaged and renovated, are being left to die because of Historic Scotland's refusal to grant scheduled monument consent or to relinquish guardianship.

I am glad to hear that there has been some movement on that situation. I am, however, surprised to hear it because Historic Scotland normally gets things right. Perhaps the Scottish Executive is in the driving seat. Nothing has happened at Castle Tioram whose owner would like to put his historic building to use for himself and the local community instead of leaving it to fall into further ruin. I recently visited Acharacle, where Castle Tioram is located, and found that the majority of the community around the castle are in favour of development. Why let that gem deteriorate any further when it could be salvaged and brought to life again? Is Historic Scotland bowing to Scottish Executive policy or is it, for some inexplicable reason, content to play legal games that cost both sides huge amounts of money while it continues to treat buildings as a philatelist might treat prize pieces of his personal stamp collection, hiding them away to gradually decay? I hope that Historic Scotland will change its policy, but there is little evidence that that will happen. In the first century AD, the famous Roman architect and engineer Marcus Vitruvius, who is generally considered to be the father of architecture, described it as "commodity, firmness and delight". He meant that buildings should be functional; should be able to earn their keep; should be soundly and sustainably built; should  please the eye; and should add beauty to the surroundings. In earlier centuries, the construction industry was much more environmentally sustainable. Not only were renewable materials such as wood and thatch used; stone and slate were quarried using human labour and materials were transported by horses. Such processes were environmentally benign. However, the production of modern materials, particularly steel, is a pollutive process. Because using processed materials such as steel, cement, plastics and glass is not environmentally benign, architectural policies must pay more attention to the economy of non-renewable materials and the use of renewable materials to construct environmentally sustainable buildings. Surely that is our duty to future generations. It is extraordinary to think that we import steel from China—indeed, did we not import some granite from China for this very building?

Okay, then—we did not. On that point, I wish to congratulate the architects and builders of the National Assembly for Wales building for producing an honest building on time and the Welsh AMs for having the courage to stop the building of the Senedd and to renegotiate the contract. I have no wish to add to the criticism that has been heaped on our Parliament building. Indeed, who am I to talk when it has won the prestigious Stirling prize for architecture? However, some say that the concepts of buildability and discipline were not top of the list of criteria for those who conceived and built our Parliament. Indeed, some think that they were not on the list at all. Last week, I attended a debate in our old chamber in the assembly building at the top of the Mound. I very much enjoyed the quality of the debate, although I must confess that I began to question why it was necessary to build a new Parliament when so many exceptional—and empty buildings—in Edinburgh could, with adaptation, have easily suited the purpose and followed the admirable Scottish tradition of prudence and common sense. I move amendment S2M-4477.1, to leave out from "through partnership" to end and insert: "in this area by independent and voluntary organisations including the Lighthouse and An Lanntair; notes the importance of the efficient use of existing building stock, and believes that a strong economy and a fair planning system are integral to a successful built environment."

Oh. Has the minister, like me, encountered a degree of scepticism about the performance of visitscotland.com? Does she agree—

My question is question 9, Presiding Officer, but I thank the minister for her reply. Does she agree that if visitscotland.com is to be of value, it must make a substantial difference to the small establishments that are the backbone of the industry? Does she believe that the fact that only 15 per cent of inquiries to visitscotland.com last year actually generated bookings represents good value for money?

That is right.

It is good to hear Jackie Baillie ask about issues in Argyll and Bute. I will refer to the north of  Argyll and Bute. The Scottish Executive continually boasts about its record on the delivery of free personal care, so can the minister explain why there is an embargo on free personal care in Argyll and Bute? For example, only two people have left Oban hospital to enter residential or nursing care homes since Christmas, despite the fact that homes in Oban have vacancies and there remain 13 delayed discharges in the hospital. Why have some people waited five months for an assessment? Why are there no direct payments for home care packages? Why is the Scottish Executive not delivering free personal care in Argyll and Bute, despite repeated questions on the subject and an election pledge to deliver the policy throughout Scotland?

Will the member give way?

rose—

This is an animal welfare bill. The docking of puppies' tails in infancy is an animal welfare measure, which is designed to stop dogs such as spaniels going through excruciating agony in later life if they injure their tails when working in thick undergrowth and brambles or elsewhere. Dogs are docked for the avoidance of tail injuries. As anyone who knows about dog injuries will tell us, a tail injury is one of the most painful things that a dog can suffer and it is one of the most difficult injuries to heal. I used to work and breed springer spaniels. They are the most loyal and courageous of breeds and are great companions. I would sooner cut off my own hand than deliberately cause injury or pain to one of my dogs. Most dog owners feel the same way, which is why we dock tails. I was always present when my spaniel puppies were docked. I never saw any reaction at the time or ill-effects later on. The tails are docked for the avoidance of future tail injury. I wrote to Mr Finnie on March 15. He acknowledged in his reply that spaniels can endure split and broken tails when they work in thick undergrowth. His reason for deciding that he would no longer introduce an exemption for working dogs seems to be that breeds such as collies would come under the same exemption. However, I am sure that he knows—as most people do—that no one docks collie dogs. They work in open fields, so there is no reason to dock their tails.

Hang on a minute. Ironically, every ewe and lamb that the collies are rounding up is docked as a welfare measure. Surely it would be disgraceful to fail to exempt certain breeds such as spaniels, which need to be docked as a welfare measure, because a way cannot be found to write the correct words in a bill. Our actions in the Parliament would allow dogs to  go through pain and suffering. That cannot be right. Right here in Scotland, we have the best working springer bloodlines of anywhere in the world. If docking is disallowed, we will lose those bloodlines to England, where breeders will still be able to dock. I beseech members not to disallow docking for working dogs. I beseech members to support Ted Brocklebank's amendment 4.

As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I welcome any support that the Executive can give to game or coarse angling in Scotland, and to tourism angling, which is so important to the rural economy and to my region. At the moment, there is speculation among Scottish angling bodies that the Scottish Executive is considering introducing a new rod licence for anglers in Scotland as part of the forthcoming aquaculture and fisheries bill. Can the minister confirm or deny that, or can she shed some light on the origins of the rumours of a new fishing-pole tax on anglers?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Scottish Water in respect of the connection of properties in the Highlands and Islands. (S2O-9743)

Is the Executive putting pressure on Scottish Water to take on more connections, so as not to hold up urgent projects in the Highlands and Islands? Will the Executive and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency insist that Scottish Water take on connections from private properties when installing new sewage works in areas such as Connel and Taynuilt in Argyll, where the continued discharge of raw sewage into the sea loch Loch Etive is a threat to the Food Standards Agency's classification of the water quality? A downgrading of that classification would prevent the harvesting of mussels in a designated shellfish-growing area that at present produces 40 per cent of all the mussels that are grown off mainland Scotland.

Is the minister aware of the continued unhappiness in the tourism sector about the centralising of power to VisitScotland and the corresponding loss of local control? Will she give a commitment to revisit the Tourist Boards  (Scotland) Bill with a view to reforming VisitScotland so that it becomes a genuinely bottom-up organisation that can allow communities to exercise at least as much power over tourism in their areas as they were able to exercise under the old area tourist boards?

I congratulate Frank McAveety on securing the debate and applaud the sports minister, Patricia Ferguson, for saying that football clubs should bring football closer to the communities from which they draw their support and for allocating £200,000 of taxpayers' money to Supporters Direct in Scotland.  The Conservatives also applaud local government and community action on the issue. We support the Enterprise and Culture Committee report that emphasised the value of Supporters Direct. Supporters Direct said in its evidence to the committee: "It is clear that football clubs are on the one hand private companies, while on the other they are viewed as community assets. In our work we have come across examples where the tensions between these two, sometimes conflicting, views have created pressures that undermine the ambitions of club and community alike. It is in areas such as ownership of the football ground, access to the decision making process and community use of facilities that we feel there is scope for serious investigation." We agree with that and with another point made in the report. The report said: "a central issue that has emerged is the need for supporters to be more involved in the decision-making processes of their clubs. ... supporters' trusts can be a viable and progressive model enabling fans to contribute financially and vocally to the running of their clubs. Moreover the supporters' trust model enshrines the principles of democracy, accountability and good corporate governance which many respondents believed should be the key principles informing reform of the Scottish game more generally." Supporters Direct is a marvellous body. There are more than 100 supporters trusts in England, Wales and Scotland, which have been involved in saving a lot of clubs that were going down, which is incredibly important.

Yes, I agree. I have always been a Rangers supporter, but my son, who is only seven, is a Celtic supporter. He insisted that I buy him an expensive Celtic strip, which he wears all the time. During the Easter recess we went to the Isle of Tiree. He wore the strip to the playground and, unfortunately, ran into one or two of the local boys, who were Rangers supporters and gave him a slightly hard time. I said to him that I supposed that he would not be wearing the Celtic shirt so much now. He replied, "Oh no, Dad. I just want you to buy me a Rangers one for that place." We fully support the motion.

It is undoubtedly important for us to debate the European Commission's work programme because more than three quarters of the work of the Scottish Executive and Scottish Parliament is, to a greater or lesser extent, influenced by decisions that are taken in Brussels. In Germany, the figure is more than 80 per cent. The Westminster Government admits that more than half its major laws and 80 per cent of all UK laws now originate in Brussels. We also know that no law that has been passed in Brussels has been successfully overturned by our Parliaments. That leads me to wonder whether this Parliament can influence anything European. I for one am not fooled by the propaganda that claims that this Parliament can scrutinise and change EU legislation. We can debate it until the cows come home—or even go abroad again—but we cannot change a single comma. The truth is that once Brussels has been given control of any area of our national life, competence can never be returned to our national Parliaments—although the same might not be said about incompetence—because of the famous acquis communautaire, which keeps moving towards ever-closer union of the peoples of Europe regardless of whether those peoples want it. It is quite obvious that a great many people do not want ever-closer union. The French and the Dutch both recently threw out the proposed European constitution most emphatically. Rather than ever-closer union, they want to be free to determine their national state futures democratically.

I do not imply that they want to withdraw from Europe. They voted not to accept the constitution.  It is extraordinary that, in some European quarters, the emphatic "No" vote is now being translated as "Yes". The fact that the constitution has not gone away despite its being democratically thrown in the dustbin—or Abfalleimer as the Germans call it—does not inspire confidence in democracy. Despite the stinging rejection of the constitution, European leaders such as Austria's Wolfgang Schüssel keep trying to revive it. That seems to be their misguided priority. The priorities for European leaders should be to ensure that European countries can compete, and to foster the security of their citizens in today's globalised world. Their priority should be to develop policies that deal with the long-term challenges of the 21 st century rather than bring back to life an out-of-date project to build a United States of Europe that has been soundly rejected by the European people. How can we, and why should we, have confidence in European leaders who will not respect a democratic verdict? Another, and in many ways more important, priority should be to sort out the failed European accounting system and deal with the allegations of fraud and financial mismanagement that have blighted the European Commission. The conclusion of the report of the wise men said of the European Commission: "It is becoming difficult to find anybody who has the slightest sense of responsibility". We can add to that the opinion of the European Court of Auditors, which stated: "In the absence of a comprehensive accounting system, financial statements are drawn on the basis of records which are not part of the accounts, nor linked to the entries on the budget from which they are derived." It continued: "The European Court of Auditors cannot provide assurance on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying 95% of the payments out of the budget." That beggars belief. The key is that there is no double-entry bookkeeping. I listened recently to a brave lady called Marta Andreasen, who was the chief accounting officer to the European Commission. She joined the Commission in January 2002. She was never given a job description, despite asking for one, and within a month of arriving in her new post she was asked to sign off the 2001 accounts. Not unnaturally, she decided to have a look at them, together with the accounts for 2000. When she was comparing the net asset figures for 2000 in the 2001 accounts with the 2000 accounts, she noticed a difference of £140 million. She asked what had happened to that money and was told that some loans had been written off. She asked  why those were not shown as a charge in the 2001 income and expenditure account. No one could say why, so she said that she could not sign off the accounts. Tremendous pressure was put on her by senior people, including the budget commissioner, Michaele Schreyer, who broke down in tears and said that there would be terrible repercussions if Marta did not sign. However, Marta knew that by signing she would be implicated, so she held her nerve and refused. Marta Andreasen soon found out that the Commission's accounting systems had none of the control systems that we in Britain take for granted in well-run public limited company finance departments. Instead of a system of double-entry book keeping, she found a single-entry accounting system that was run on a complicated series of spreadsheets, whose integrity simply could not be relied on. She was asked to sign cheques for billions of euros for expenditure that had not been properly authorised. She asked Neil Kinnock for an independent Treasury audit, but that was turned down on the ground of cost. I will not go on, but in 2004 she was sacked. It is to the eternal shame of people such as Neil Kinnock that Marta Andreasen's honest, courageous and honourable attempt to highlight and repair a rotten accounting system meant that she was pilloried and hounded for four years. It appears that so much money has gone astray that the figure can never be disclosed, but how can the European Parliament turn a blind eye to the appalling fact that the Commission's accounts have not been signed off for 11 years? Think of the difference that the missing billions could make to legitimate European projects or to the starving millions in Africa. How can that money just disappear? The first priority of the work programme should be reform of the Commission's accounting system. The programme gives us a glimpse of what Brussels has in store for us. As far as I can see, there is nothing in it to help the farming industry or the tourism industry in my region of the Highlands and Islands. There is a proposal for full accomplishment of the internal market for postal services, which may be relevant, but will it be helpful to the many rural post offices in Scotland? There is a paper on better training for safer food. I have memories of the scallops fiasco. Millions of pounds were lost despite there being no evidence of food poisoning. There is a green paper on the future of European maritime policy, which hardly inspires confidence when one thinks of the damage that has been done by the common fisheries policy.

I am about to finish. In conclusion, there is plan D for democracy, dialogue and debate, which is still trying to force-feed Europe a constitution that it has already spat out. Plan D is really for deceit, domination and disaster. Although Bill Aitken is right to say that Europe is here to stay, I think that we should snack lightly on it and not be dominated by it.

Will the minister explain why it has taken so long for the ban to be lifted?

Michael Matheson spoke about my amendment; the only thing wrong with it is that it should have a comma after "infrastructure". I was minded to lodge the amendment because I had a sense of déjà vu regarding the SNP's previous constant demands for a Scottish Olympic team, which were soundly rejected by Parliament as recently as 6 October, although Nicola Sturgeon was all for it the other day at First Minister's question time. Far be it for me to suggest that the Scottish National Party is seeking to gain political capital on the backs of the truly amazing Scottish athletes who have done us all proud in Melbourne; it just looks that way to some people. I wonder whether the SNP has surveyed the opinions of the athletes and governing bodies—particularly the Scottish Institute of Sport—that have done so much to help secure the medals, particularly the medals in swimming. Perhaps it has, which might be why Michael Matheson seems to be dropping the SNP's previous call for a Scottish Olympic team, which is a U-turn, indeed.

That intervention speaks for itself. Michael Matheson does appear to want a Scottish Olympic team.

I ask him to tell us, because we are not clear.

None of the experts wants to dilute the potential of team GB, which through collective strength might even be able to challenge the might of Goliaths such as team USA. They are inclined to agree with the cycling gold-medal winner Chris Hoy, who, when asked whether he supports the idea of a Scottish Olympic team said: "I think if we do that it would dilute the resources and the expertise we've got in the British team." The Scottish Conservatives agree with him and with Simon Clegg, the chief executive of the British Olympic Association, who said: "The British Olympic Association also strongly believes that we are stronger collectively than as individual countries." In Athens, teams of mixed British nationalities worked together, as in the case of Shirley Robertson, the Scot who achieved the ultimate glory of an Olympic gold in sailing with her two English crew members, Sarah Ayton and Sarah Webb. Incidentally, as with many Scots athletes, most of her training was carried out south of the border. Different loyalties do not have to be divided loyalties; the Conservatives echo the view that Chris Hoy expressed when he said: "I am a very proud Scot, but I am also proud to be British and I think they don't have to be mutually exclusive. You can be part of a Scottish team and part of a British team." He is dead right. The SNP does not have a monopoly on patriotism, even if it would like to. The Saltire is a symbol for every party in Parliament and, if I may say so, is the smartest part of the union flag. Even our First Minister, Jack McConnell, and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, agree on the importance of Britishness—and they do not agree on much. The Scottish Conservatives have put their whole-hearted support behind Scottish sportsmen and sportswomen. We are thrilled by the recent successes of Scottish athletes and we realise that that success has been brought about by clever planning. Unlike the SNP, we do not want to change a winning formula. It has taken Scotland a long time to achieve such success; political distractions could easily upset a delicate balance. We recognise the value of sport—at the grass roots and at the elite level—in promoting good health, improving self esteem and fostering a sense of community and teamwork. Successful  Scottish athletes have enjoyed the best training facilities and coaching that the United Kingdom has to offer. Special congratulations must go to Chris Martin, the swimming coach, and to the Scottish Institute of Sport, which was clever enough to employ him. The institute's long term plan of good programmes, good coaching and high competition levels, combined with expert medical and scientific support, has been bedded in to provide a wonderful infrastructure for our Scottish swimmers. The valuable training camps that were set up in Bendigo in Australia, in Mexico, in the USA and in Perth in Australia have brought the swimmers together in a highly competitive environment of great intensity.

I am sorry—not at the moment. All those factors have contributed to the phenomenal successes that Scots achieved, so I say to the SNP that we should allow the new system to bed in and to continue, and that we should not change horses in midstream. The Executive can improve the grass-roots situation, in which only one primary school pupil in 20 receives the Scottish Executive target of two hours of physical education a week—Peter Peacock admitted as much in June 2004.

I am sorry—I do not have time. Schools and head teachers need greater autonomy to pursue the priorities on PE, and local authorities must ensure that there is suitable funding for that aim. As Bill McGregor, head of the Headteachers Assocation of Scotland, said: "If more money was devolved to heads and they were given the freedom to spend it then there would be a far better chance of matching resources to the needs of pupils." I agree with Michael Matheson that the sportscotland audit of local sports facilities should be published—it is a disgrace that that has not happened. I also hope that the Scottish Institute of Sport will review the nine core sports and that it will consider adding cycling and shooting, which are sports at which Scots excel. The Scottish Conservatives want the best interests of athletes and Scottish sport to be served. It appears that that is happening at the elite level, so politicians should leave the successful formula as it is and the SNP should stop playing political football with the issue. I move amendment S2M-4196.1, to insert at end: "notes, however, the words of Simon Clegg, the Chief Executive of the British Olympic Association, who said that  "the British Olympic Association...strongly believes that we are stronger collectively than as individual countries...Any distractions, dilution or further fragmentation of sport in the UK will seriously undermine the once in a lifetime opportunity British sport has to capitalise on the unique benefits of hosting an Olympic Games", and therefore believes that there is a need to support both grass-roots sport infrastructure and elite athletes through the valuable work of the Scottish Institute of Sport which aims to change the culture and raise the ambitions and aspirations within sport in Scotland."

In her statement, the minister said that 42 per cent of European bird species are found in Scotland. That includes the unique and rich population of ground-nesting birds in the Western Isles, particularly in the Uists. A few years ago, £1.6 million was made available to SNH for a mink eradication project to protect ground-nesting birds from non-native predators such as the mink. That funding was for stage 1 of the project. Can the minister explain why the funding for stage 2 of the project is apparently no longer forthcoming? Why is SNH now unable to attract that funding from Europe?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it is holding with tourism stakeholder groups in the Highlands and Islands on the future of the industry. (S2O-09278)

The minister might be aware that Golf Scotland has been charged with reviewing regional golf. However, is he also aware of concerns in the Highlands and Islands tourism industry that funding is being awarded only to new tourism initiatives, often at the expense of long-established, successful and tried-and-trusted projects such as Golf Highland? That organisation, which represents many smaller courses in the  region, is apparently unable to apply for funding and is therefore forced to rely on its membership. Will the minister examine the situation and ensure that Golf Highland and other such well-established groups are not penalised by their success?

In the Highlands and Islands there are many areas, such as the Black Isle, where access to swimming pools is limited. In the light of population increases in those areas, what is the minister doing to remedy that situation?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to encourage new ferry routes to the Highlands and Islands. (S2O-9186)

In light of the Executive's failure to find a bidder for the Campbeltown to Ballycastle ferry route, which was a major disappointment to many people in Argyll and Bute, why was Dalriada Shipping, which was willing to take on the contract, rejected? It was classed as a new entity, despite the fact that the company is owned by Pentland Ferries, which successfully runs services between the Scottish mainland and Orkney without any subsidy. Dalriada has again offered to run the Campbeltown to Ballycastle service using the boat that previously operated on the route. Will the minister give me and those in Argyll and Bute who would benefit from the service assurances that Pentland Ferries' excellent track record will be taken into account this time when Dalriada's new offer is considered?

Does the minister agree that farmers' use of agri-environment schemes such as the rural stewardship scheme can have a helpful impact on spawning areas? In the light of that, will she ensure that such schemes and grants are maintained?

I congratulate Maureen Macmillan on securing a debate on one of Scotland's national treasures: the salmon. At this point, I declare an interest as the owner of a one-sixth share of a fishing syndicate on the River Awe. When I joined the Scottish Parliament in 1999, there was a real fear that the Atlantic salmon was declining to the point of extinction or, at any rate, to such low numbers that wild river and loch fisheries would become unsustainable, which would have been a major disaster for rural Scotland. However, after 200 years and despite the huge catches that can be made on Russia's Kola peninsula, despite the exciting and rewarding fishing in the rivers of Iceland and despite the monstrous salmon that can sometimes be captured in Norwegian rivers, Scotland still holds the prize for being best for salmon fishing because of the quality of its expertise in practical fishing management, the romance of its beautiful scenery and the Highland hospitality that goes along with the sport. Some Scottish ghillies are the fifth generation in their families to be ghillies and have no equal in the fishing world. Their knowledge is simply huge. Scotland and salmon are synonymous and now Scottish salmon fishing is improving once more. However, there is still much to be done. Before I say anything about NASCO, I want to pay tribute to the man who got it all going, Orri Vigfússon. This Icelander, who knew all about salmon and recognised the peril that the species was in, persuaded not only Governments to sign treaties and part with money; he also persuaded an endless list of private individuals—including me—to part with money to buy out netters and to do something practical to save the king of fish for future generations. This man has given so many hours of his life to, and done so much for, salmon. Quite frankly, he is a giant. There have been other giants who have helped, including Lord Hunter and his colleagues, who wrote the extremely well-informed Hunter report in the 1960s, and Lord Nickson and his colleagues, who produced the salmon strategy task force report, which contained 69 sensible recommendations to help our wild stocks of salmon and sea trout. I do not know how many of those recommendations have been implemented by the Executive.  I hate to introduce a slightly sour note, but the only real blot on the landscape is Jack McConnell's refusal to add Scottish Executive money to the kitty that was used to buy out the east coast drift nets. That was a scandal, considering that most north Atlantic Governments involved—including the UK Government—and huge numbers of organisations and private individuals chipped in, and considering also that most of the fish that were saved were going to Scottish east coast rivers. I and many other Scots found it highly embarrassing that the Scottish Government failed to support that measure. Scottish angling and tourism bring in substantial money, and can extend the tourist season in areas such as the Tweed valley, Tayside, Deeside, Helmsdale and Strathnaver, and on rivers such as the Halladale, the Borgie, the Cassley, the Oykell, the Carron and the Shin, to name but a few. A survey in the Western Isles a few years ago showed that angling brings £5 million to £6 million into the economy of that area alone. Salmon and trout fishing can greatly extend the normal tourist season, which produces a huge return for hotels, clothes shops, tackle shops and petrol stations. Angling produces considerable sustainable employment in remote areas, so I am glad that wild-angling interests and salmon-farming interests seem to be getting closer to living together in sustainable co-existence. Many of the meetings and talks that are currently taking place between organisations such as the Association of Salmon Fishery Boards and the Rivers and Fisheries Trusts Scotland have been instigated by fish farmers who have a responsible attitude. It is important that those talks be translated into practical measures. Work on the land and the waters will improve lochs, rivers and spawning areas and a code of good fish-farming practice will help to end the scourge of sea lice and discourage diseases and escapes of farmed stock, which can harm our wild fish and their gene pools. The Scottish Executive failed to support NASCO over the east coast drift nets, but it is not too late: it could make up for that by putting pressure on the Irish Government to stop illegal drift-netting off the Irish coast and between Ireland and Scotland, which would help our west coast rivers. The Executive could also create a single regulating body for the fish-farming industry, so that fish farmers would no longer have to be entangled by the red tape that is produced by the nine different organisations that presently regulate them. Those are measures that the Executive could take to help NASCO and to help Scotland's wild fisheries. I commend the work that has been carried out by NASCO in the past, and I wish it more success in the future.

On 8 March 2000, I spoke in the debate in the Parliament on international women's day, and I am pleased to say that I have survived long enough to do so again now. It is 95 years since the first international women's day was held in some countries in Europe. We have made a lot of progress since then. Women have been granted the vote in many countries, not least our own, and have been elected to Parliaments. The first woman to be elected to Parliament in the United Kingdom was, of course, Nancy Astor, for the Conservative party. The Conservatives have also produced the only female Prime Minister, in the shape of Margaret Thatcher, a lady who certainly did not consider that glass ceilings were a barrier to progress. As I said in the debate in March 2000, only when there is no need for an international women's day will we know that women are truly equal. In the new developed world, the struggle for society is to try to ensure that women and men can combine having families with a fulfilling working life. It is sometimes difficult to accomplish that in a satisfactory and beneficial way for all the parties—women and men, employers and employees. Companies that have taken the leap to put in place enlightened and forward-thinking business practices reap the rewards that come through having happy and secure employees. It is important that we support women's choices when it comes to combining family with work. Attention should be focused on issues such as pay inequality and inadequate child care provision. The creche in the Parliament could be used more to help MSPs and their staff. We should recognise that there are many ways of juggling the mix. Government should respect and facilitate women's choices. There is, after all, no best way to bring up children. Anyone who has looked after children—I have helped to look after five—will know that from one year to the next there is no agreement; the advice is always different. The Conservatives think that instead of imposing a choice on mothers, we should support the choices that they make for themselves. Mothers who work should not be made to feel guilty; nor should mothers who stay at home. Let us stop telling families how to live their lives and instead support those that get on  with their lives and bring equality between men and women. Despite progress, we must not rest on our laurels and pat ourselves on the back, saying, "Job done." This is international women's day, and we must remember the women of the world who are not so fortunate. There are women throughout the world who have no choices about how their bodies are abused, their work or their education—if they receive an education. I share Sandra White's concern about the trafficking of women across Europe and support her call for the Executive to do everything it can to end that horrific practice, which has echoes of the worst kind of slavery. We should also remember the women closer to home who have no choices or voices, who are mired in poverty and can see no way out for them or their children. It should be the clarion call to all politicians at every level to work towards ending poverty. We all joined together last summer to call for an end to world poverty, but we must not forget those who are suffering on our doorstep. We in the Conservative party are committed to empowering local communities and to helping them to find solutions to their problems. While the state can assist individuals and communities to combat poverty and its afflictions, it is really effective only when communities become actively involved in providing the solutions that bring real, lasting change. Positive discrimination or affirmative action should be used only in emergencies; they should not be policy. The policy should be to grow the seed and to produce the employment and the equal opportunities that really matter. I am glad to have spoken in this important debate to celebrate international women's day. As I said in a previous international women's day debate, when full equality has been achieved we will no longer need a special day to celebrate women. I know that the new leader of the Conservative party, David Cameron, wants more women in his shadow Cabinet, because he announced the other day that he had five Daves and only four women.

I thank Jim Wallace and welcome tonight's debate on an important issue for Orkney. The  provision of air ambulance cover for the islands was one of the key issues that council convener Stephen Hagan raised with me when I met him in Orkney last summer. It is of real concern to local people and I raised it with the Minister for Health and Community Care by writing to him on 15 September. In his reply in a letter to me dated 19 October last year, Mr Kerr admitted that there had been some teething troubles with the service. I wonder whether the teething troubles to which the minister referred included the case, which is documented in Orkney Islands Council's report on the trials, in which the air ambulance was requested to transfer a patient with a severed artery—apparently with blood pumping from the wound—to hospital. Because the helicopter was on another mission, the air desk staff said that they would reply shortly with an estimated time of arrival. The doctor advised them that the case was urgent, but it was nearly an hour after the original request before even an ETA was given. The helicopter arrived 108 minutes after the request, and the time factor that is recorded on the statistics sheet is 120 minutes. However, in the statistics that Orkney Islands Council received from the SAS, the case was classed as being completed as planned. Perhaps the minister was referring to another case in May—again, I will paraphrase the official document about the case. The air ambulance was requested to transfer a patient with a terminal condition to hospital. According to the doctor, the pilot stated that they would not fly due to cloud conditions. The air desk said that it could move the patient to Kirkwall but that the air ambulance might get stranded there due to the weather, in which case it would not be available for the rest of the evening. The doctor felt that he could not deprive someone else who might be in a life-or-death situation so he decided to wait. I appreciate that those examples might be the exception rather than the rule, but they do little to instil confidence in the much-vaunted new level of cover. The chief executive of the Scottish Ambulance Service, Adrian Lucas, says that the claims that Islander aircraft based in Orkney and Shetland can respond more quickly are based on flight time rather than overall activation time. He based that view on the fact that the Inverness-based EC135 helicopter will be in the air in two minutes and, because it flies much faster, the overall response time from the initial request to arrival at the receiving hospital will meet the time standards. Does that mean that, if both the Islander and the EC135 were alerted at the same time, the EC135 would be able to travel all the way to Orkney, pick up the patient and return to Inverness in the same time—or less—that it takes the Islander to do the one-way trip from Kirkwall to Inverness?  Perhaps the Executive will provide us with a comparison of the average time for an Islander-based response and the average time for an EC135-based response, from the alert time to the patient's arrival at the destination hospital. Does the Executive have any figures on that? I fully support the concerns of Orkney Islands Council convener Stephen Hagan, who said: "Many people living in the isles will feel vulnerable when the new contract starts, especially those in our more remote areas. This goes against everything we're doing as a council to halt depopulation ... Without adequate air ambulance cover this will be at risk. Everywhere in the Highlands and Islands area will have the service or back-up service based locally, except Orkney, which obviously raises great concerns." People in Orkney feel that the Executive is not listening to their local concerns. Communities such as Orkney need to have confidence in their emergency health provision and the air ambulance is a crucial part of that. When I met Stephen Hagan, he suggested that the estimated cost of retaining the Islander on an emergency-only basis was about £100,000. I am not sure whether there is an updated figure, but given that the new contract to run air ambulances will cost £70 million over six to seven years, surely funding can be found to keep the Islander for use in emergencies. Unless action is taken by 31 March, the security that the well-trusted Islander gives Orkney will end. Orkney Islands Council is concerned; politicians from all parties, including the Executive parties, are concerned; doctors are concerned; and, most important, local people in Orkney are concerned. The Executive should reconsider its position and allow the retention of the excellent Islander aircraft, which can land on a sixpence, to ensure that Orkney continues to be covered by its well-proven service.

I congratulate Bruce Crawford on bringing this important debate to the chamber. A few months ago, I attended a packed meeting in Beauly at which most of the hundreds of people who had gathered were obviously against having a power line close to the villages of Beauly, Kiltarlity and Kirkhill. I also attended a meeting of Glenurquhart community council, which was held in Cannich village. People there are deeply concerned that the new pylons, which are twice the size of existing pylons, will impinge on the lives of local residents and affect tourism. The main reason for people's antipathy towards the new power line is the visual impact that it will make on the dramatic scenery of the Highlands. Health concerns were also raised; the question of childhood leukaemia is certainly causing worry  to many parents. There has long been a rumour that proximity to pylons can be dangerous. My local village of Glenview by Dalmally in Argyll has an enormous pylon that is situated 80m away from the primary school, which is attended by 80 children, two of whom are my children. The local village shop is practically underneath the pylon; there is not a house in Glenview that is more than 100m from the pylon. In the past, doctors told me that the cancer and leukaemia figures for Glenview are very high. However, planners at the time that the pylon was built were ignorant of the possible link between pylons and leukaemia, just as people in the 1950s were ignorant of the link between smoking and cancer. As Brian Monteith pointed out, the Government is now banning smoking; perhaps it should also think of using the precautionary principle to ban the siting of overhead pylons near residential areas. The cheapest option is often not the most economic or safest in the long run. The area of the Highlands around Beauly has been a growth area of late. If these huge pylons are placed close to residential areas, there could be a detrimental effect on the price of residential property. Also, the possibility of an increased risk of leukaemia in children could cause depopulation, which is exactly what we are trying to avoid happening to our rural areas. The pylons will undoubtedly take something away from the scenic beauty of the area, yet its scenery is the major asset of the Highlands in terms of tourism, which is now Scotland's largest industry. That was not the case at the time that the pylons were first built, but things have changed. The Beauly to Denny line will carry wind farm generated electricity. If we were not quite so reliant on so many wind farms, the new line would not be necessary. With only minor upgrades needing to be made, new wind farms could be accommodated using existing infrastructure. Debates on pylons are nothing new. The interconnector to Northern Ireland required the construction of 200 pylons in Ayrshire and the same number in Northern Ireland. There was enormous pressure to bury the pylons, but the then Labour Secretary for State for Scotland—later First Minister of the Scottish Parliament—Donald Dewar, discarded that option, choosing instead the option of using pylons. His decision came despite the fact that the previous Secretary of State for Scotland—the well-known Conservative, Michael Forsyth—had favoured the underground option. Donald Dewar made his decision following a public inquiry and after enormous opposition from the stop the overhead power lines campaigning group. I assume that the decision was taken on  the ground of cost. We are told that undergrounding is far more expensive, but although it is more expensive to put drains and sewers underground, we put them underground nevertheless. We know that it is beneficial to mankind to do so. Planning rules in this country are so strict that they disallow the construction of inappropriate buildings in sensitive or scenic areas. However, for some reason, they do not give a damn about ugly pylons and dangerous overhead wires. Looking to the future, we are told that climate change will produce more hurricanes and lightening across Scotland, which will cause endless costly damage to overhead wires and interruptions to power supplies. That is not only expensive but can be dangerous in crucial situations. There are enough reasons not to use overhead cables to convince me that undergrounding is a far better option. If there is even the slightest risk to innocent children of leukaemia, which the Draper report suggests, why do we take a chance?

It is disappointing that more members were not in the chamber to hear the excellent speeches that have been made, especially the speech by Trish Godman, who was a respected social worker. It was good of her to share her knowledge with the rest of us. I am told that one of the aims of the review of social work was to reassess what a social worker is. My experience is that social workers are good people. They are well intentioned, but they often get a bad press—they are damned if they do and damned if they do not. They often get the blame for mistakes that happen even if they are not responsible for them. When things go wrong, it is easy to blame the social worker. Most social workers at the coalface are extremely conscientious and they work well with other sharp-end workers such as the police, doctors and district nurses. The problem seems to arise at the management level, where collaboration breaks down because of fights over budgets and work territory. At times, there appears to be a clash between child psychologists, nurses, health visitors and social workers even though, ultimately, they all want the same outcome for their clients—that is, the removal of the problem. That appears to be due to the way in which services are run, rather than the fault of the people who provide them.  We Conservatives have continually called for a unified budget for health and social care and for improved interagency care. If we want social workers to deal with the minefield of problems that arise in child protection, they must have high-quality training so that they are competent to do that work. It is imperative that the protection of the child is the priority, even if that means removing that child from the family from whom he or she may be at risk. Most of the failures in the system, such as the case of Michael McGarrity, who survived trapped and alone in a flat for three weeks after his mother had died, have involved bad interagency work and poor communication between different agencies. My colleague James Douglas-Hamilton mentioned a report about the assessment of children in need in Ayrshire and West Lothian. That report found that concerns remain about standards of recording and the depth of analysis of the evidence on how agencies work together to complete assessments. The 21 st century social work review identifies too much bureaucracy and information gathering as weaknesses. We therefore need strong leadership that will unify the different agencies into giving social workers the detailed information that they need to do their jobs properly. They need not only the information, but the funding. It is all very well to expect social workers to work hard to complete detailed assessments of the needs of a child or an elderly person. However, what is the point of that work being done if the funding is not there to fulfil those needs? How incredibly frustrating and what a blow to morale it must be when social workers see their efforts blocked by the Scottish Executive's failure to properly fund its promises. The Executive will blame the local authorities, but it cannot get away from its promise to provide free personal care. Both of my parents have recently been in four different hospitals, and during my visits I talked to many doctors, nurses and social workers. I was horrified to learn that in Argyll and Bute not one home care package has been arranged since November and that there have been no referrals from the Oban hospital to nursing homes since Christmas. That has impinged on the hospital, resulting in bed blocking and delayed discharge. That in turn has caused fury and low morale among the hard-working people in Argyll and Bute who are trying to do their jobs. I know that other councils in Scotland are in a similar position. As well as the problems that the doctors, nurses and social workers face, what about the angst, misery, pain and disillusionment that are caused to those people who suffer because their needs are not being fulfilled? What about those who believed in the Liberal Democrat and Labour Party promise  on free personal care? They now realise that that was perhaps a hollow promise to win votes—the Scottish Executive is not delivering what it promised to the people of Scotland. I would be delighted if the minister were to offer an explanation for that fiasco. We Conservatives cautiously welcome the response to the 21 st century social work review, which is overdue. However, we reassert that the Executive must work harder to create a more helpful infrastructure in which our social workers can produce real and rewarding results from their undoubted labours. The Executive must not continue to let down our social workers. Highly qualified social workers must be given the autonomy to use their considerable powers of judgment, and ministers must create the conditions that will encourage successful outcomes. I agree with Willie Roe, the chairman of the review group, who said: "We need to harness all our resources and expertise to design services around the needs of people, delivering the right outcomes for the people who use them. That means finding new ways of working that position social work services alongside the work of their partners in the public, voluntary and private sectors. Together we will need to shift the balance towards a much greater focus on preventing problems and intervening early to resolve them." Those are wise words, but will the Executive listen to them? Above all, the Scottish Executive must ensure that social workers' assessments can be followed through with action. Is it not time for the blame game between the Scottish Executive and the councils to end? Adequate funding must be provided so that councils can meet the Scottish Executive's commitments.

To ask the Scottish Executive  what discussions it has held with the chief constable of Strathclyde police in respect of rural policing in the Strathclyde police area. (S2O-8994)

Is the minister aware that, because of the expected increase in the movement of people between the upgraded Oban Connel airport and the islands of Colonsay and Coll when the new airports there have been constructed, Strathclyde police is seeking additional funding to provide police services and police accommodation on those islands? Will she give me assurances that those requests will be met favourably and that, when there is so much media focus on crime in the Glasgow part of Strathclyde police's area of responsibility, manning levels for rural policing will not be sacrificed in the pursuit of lowering city crime levels?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the leader of Argyll and Bute Council. (S2O-8766)

I am sure that the minister will be aware that Argyll and Bute's population of 91,306 is spread over the second-largest council area in Scotland. Argyll and Bute is the third most sparsely populated council area in Scotland and has 25 inhabited islands. Around 16 per cent of the area's population live on islands, from which access to the mainland is dependent on a ferry or a personal vessel. What discussions has he held with Argyll and Bute Council about whether the area should qualify for special islands needs allowance? What is the Executive's position on that at the moment?

It is about tourism, Presiding Officer.

Not in Ayrshire—or possibly in Ayrshire. Yes, in fact it is.

Does the minister agree with me about the importance for Scottish tourism of events such as Celtic connections having exposure on film and television abroad? Why do some foreign film companies choose Ireland as a film location instead of Scotland, even when the film's stories are by Scottish authors and are set in Scotland?

It has been reported that NHS Western Isles failed to report costs accurately and made late adjustments to its accounts. In that light, what will be done to strengthen financial management in NHS Western Isles? Will the minister reassure the public that the health board will not go down the same path as NHS Argyll and Clyde, which, as we know, lost £80 million of public money?

This has been a good debate—or it was for a while—on an important subject. At a time when it feels as though the public's confidence in politicians is low, it is critical that we make the right decisions about how we conduct ourselves as representatives of the public in this Parliament. Surely we do not need too detailed a description of members' interests and lives. After all, the purpose of the register, according to paragraph 4.1.1 of the "Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament", is "to provide information about certain financial interests of members which might reasonably be thought by others to influence members' actions, speeches or votes in the Parliament, or other actions taken in their capacity as members." It is important that the right balance is struck between the need for transparency and the need to protect the privacy of members and their families. It is unfortunate that a number of aspects of the bill fail to strike that balance correctly. We risk creating an awful environment with a demand for every aspect of an MSP's life to be declared and where everything, no matter how trivial or irrelevant, should be in the public domain. That  would be a gross intrusion of members' privacy and, at a time when the Parliament needs to increase its credibility by encouraging new faces, it would risk discouraging potential MSPs from putting themselves forward for public service. Although we must maintain adequate standards, we should not poke our noses unnecessarily into other people's business, nor should others poke their noses into ours. This is a free country. This is Scotland. This is a country where people have always respected dignity and privacy. It is the country that ushered in the age of enlightenment. Surely this country is not moving towards George Orwell's "Nineteen Eighty-Four" and the age of Big Brother, although sometimes I fear that it is. I have two key concerns, which were highlighted by my colleague Alex Fergusson. The first is the proposal that MSPs should be required to register non-pecuniary interests, such as membership of the freemasons. The second is the proposal that the requirement to register heritable property should be extended to spouses and partners. On the first point, the committee aimed to ensure that the register of members' interests would contain all the relevant interests, while stopping short of requiring that grossly intrusive information be included—such as close personal friendships—as some have sought. My close personal friendship with Mike Rumbles, for example, does not mean that I will always vote Liberal. The bill rightly aims to ensure that members register matters of genuine interest that might prejudice their actions or the work that they do as MSPs. However, it has been argued by my Conservative colleague Phil Gallie that it should be up to an individual MSP's judgment whether a non-pecuniary interest is relevant to their parliamentary duties, and I agree. I declare an interest, such as my involvement with the Disabled Ramblers when I talk about disability, or with the National Farmers Union Scotland when I talk about farming. I do that when it is relevant to a debate, but not as the norm. That is more than sufficient to ensure transparency of my position and interests. The key test is for MSPs to consider not whether they would, or even might, be influenced by membership of the freemasons, for example, but whether a fair-minded and informed person would conclude that the MSP's impartiality would or would appear to be prejudiced by such membership. I think that the committee has shown sound judgment in adopting that objective test and believe that it will work well in practice. In relation to the second concern, the current situation is that unless a member has specific  legal rights in relation to the spouse's property, there is no requirement to declare it. The bill's proposals would change and tighten the existing legislation so that a member would have to declare a heritable property in which a spouse or partner has an interest. Those proposals invade the privacy of people who are not even members of the Scottish Parliament. It is one thing to require that my interests as an MSP be disclosed where relevant, but it is quite another to ask that of my wife, who has not chosen a career under the full glare of public scrutiny, thank goodness. That is an unacceptable proposal. Although the Conservatives will support the bill in principle, because of the legislative requirement for it under the Scotland Act 1998, my party will seek to clarify and amend it as it progresses. As a prospective member of the ad hoc committee that will be established to scrutinise the bill at stage 2, I will do my best to ensure that those concerns are expressed. A reasonable balance must be struck between the transparency that is needed and the privacy that should be respected.

I congratulate Helen Eadie on securing the debate. Until I read her motion, I had little knowledge of John Thomson, but since then I have found out how much he meant to so many. I was reminded of the lyrics of a John Lennon song: "A working class hero is something to be". This man was certainly a hero and he is a legend. It was a tragedy that he was accidentally killed, aged only 22. They say that only the good die young. The epitaph on his gravestone says it all: "Honest and upright he played the game Loved and respected he made his name". People today would do well to follow that inscription if they want to live a useful and happy life. I agree with Helen Eadie that John Thomson should be in the Hampden hall of fame. I was lucky enough to spend a day at Hampden recently, at sportscotland's annual general meeting. Afterwards, I visited the excellent museum, which includes the hall of fame, where I was asked to nominate a player. I looked at who was already in the hall of fame, and I chose wee Willie Henderson—the Rangers and Scotland right winger—who I believe was never really recognised. In the 1960s and early 1970s his dribbling and passing skills brought gasps of admiration. I come back to John Thomson. He is the man who, as the Celtic goalkeeper, put Bowhill on the map. It is staggering to think that 30,000 to 40,000  people went to his funeral and that people from all over the world attended it. As Bruce Crawford said, the Bowhill pipe band and the Bowhill silver band were there and an aeroplane arrived and landed in Daisy park. John Thomson's excellent record on the pitch speaks for itself at domestic and international level. It interested me that John Thomson, the miner's son from Fife, was—unlike most of his team-mates—a Protestant. I did not know that. One would think that in those days he might have found it difficult to win acclaim, but that was not the case, because people like John Thomson are bigger than religious intolerance. He inspired respect: people like him set a shining example, on and off the field, which is worth following. His huge fan club is the best testament to that. In 1993, he had a street—Thomson Court—named after him. I agree with Helen Eadie that since we have a hall of fame, John Thomson should be in it both as a footballer and as a man.

rose  —

I start by thanking the minister, Andy Kerr, for responding to me directly about my letter that was published in the Argyll and Helensburgh newspapers. I am delighted to know that he reads the Argyllshire Advertiser . Unfortunately, he did not answer my question about where the £60 million—or is it now £80 million?—have disappeared to. In the past two and a half years since the debate on the Argyll and Clyde health service problems began, I have attended and spoken at health meetings in Oban, Dunoon, Campbeltown, Helensburgh and the Vale of Leven. I remember the west Highland project, which was produced by students from Birmingham, and which told us that  the status quo is not an option. That provoked such an outcry from those dependent on the hospitals in Oban and Fort William who feared losing their core acute services that the approach was dumped in favour of the Lib-Lab solutions group's wishy-washy compromise that broadly supported the status quo. Not surprisingly, nothing came of that. In any case, it was overrun by the report by Professor David Kerr, which pronounced—correctly, in my view—that local hospitals should supply core services. In that time, Argyll and Clyde NHS Board lost £60 million. If the people are being asked to make up their minds about options, they should be told what caused the debt in the first place. How did the overspend occur? What items went over budget? The minister has referred to structural problems affecting Argyll and Clyde, but he has not explained what they are. In his letter dated 5 December, he says that resources are allocated to all NHS boards on the same basis. In that case, and given that there were structural problems, why was less money allocated per head in Argyll and Clyde than in NHS Greater Glasgow or NHS Highland? Was that a main factor in the overspend? Did the urban percentage of Argyll and Clyde stop the rural upgrade from kicking in and/or did the rural percentage stop the urban upgrade from kicking in? In other words, did the Arbuthnott formula come up with the wrong answer for Argyll and Clyde, despite the minister's refusal to accept that it might have been flawed? At a recent meeting in Oban that was attended by about 300 people, including a representative from the Executive and another from NHS Scotland, the audience was told that a recording of the meeting would be sent to the Minister for Health and Community Care and that answers to all the questions would be in the public domain. Will the minister now tell us where the £80 million went? It could have been used to build three or four hospitals or to do wonders for community care. In his letter, the minister also talks about the geography of Argyll and its mix of urban and rural communities with their very different challenges. I can tell him that Campbeltown depends on its own hospital, whose rehabilitation unit has been cut, and, for specialisation, on hospitals in Glasgow and Paisley. Because Dunoon's local hospital has been much downgraded, it relies heavily on Inverclyde. North Argyll and some of Argyll's 26 inhabited islands depend on Lorne and the Isles hospital in Oban, the Vale of Leven hospital and other hospitals in Glasgow and Paisley. The psychiatric hospital in Lochgilphead is extremely important; Helensburgh depends on the Victoria infirmary, including the Jeannie Deans unit; and  for the people of Helensburgh and Lomond, keeping an integrated care model up and running at the Vale of Leven is an absolute must. At this point, I congratulate Jackie Baillie on making a rather brave speech about the people of Helensburgh and Lomond. The situation is not that complicated and should fit in with the findings of the Kerr report, which highlights the importance of keeping core services local. Does the minister know, for instance, that Oban hospital recently had 1,200 applicants for four junior doctor posts? Who says that rural hospitals cannot attract doctors? The minister has chosen option 1—I have already mentioned George Lyon's choices—but he now has to convince the huge majority of people in Helensburgh and Lomond who wanted option 2 that they will not have to go to Raigmore hospital in Inverness and that NHS Highland will have enough money to buy services from NHS Greater Glasgow. In the past, NHS Argyll and Clyde received about £80 less a head than NHS Highland, and changing that situation is vital. Will such a change happen with the merger with NHS Highland? The north Clyde group said: "it is critically important for health services in Lomond that we do not again make the mistake of drawing boundaries on maps that are without adequate regard for natural community, direct lines of responsibility, local knowledge, and the facts of geography and transport." Given that, I hope that the minister listened to the people at this morning's meeting in Helensburgh, which I have to say was called at remarkably short notice. It has been recognised that local services should not be taken away to service the needs of centralised specialisation. On that point, the Kerr report is helpful. It takes a special kind of incompetence to spend billions more in the NHS only to preside over a significant increase in waiting lists and times and still not know where the £80 million disappeared. Will the minister please apologise to the people of Scotland for the loss of their money; to the people of Argyll and Bute for the anxiety that they have suffered over the past two and a half years; and to the doctors and nurses in the Argyll and Clyde area who have somehow kept services running despite appalling executive management?

Does the member agree with the minister's choice of option 1, or does he go along with his colleague George Lyon, who said that he backed option 1 but then said that he would not reject option 2, and finally said that option 3 might be the way forward? Admittedly, that was his second shot at the question. Does the member agree with George Lyon or the minister?

Will the minister take an intervention?

To ask the First Minister what actions the Scottish Executive has taken to address the potential impact of severe storms, such as those that affected the Western Isles in January 2005. (S2F-1985)

Does the First Minister realise that Western Isles Council put a conservative estimate of £15 million on the cost of repairing damage caused by the January hurricane, but the Executive has allocated only £9 million, and that little work has been done because of red tape and the need for planning permission? Does the First Minister understand the fear in South Uist communities such as Iochdar and Stoneybridge that they will be cut off by the sea again? Will he ensure that safe exit routes are built, so that the tragic loss of life that occurred in January will not be repeated? Will he assure other vulnerable communities in the Highlands and Islands that the Scottish Executive is logistically and financially ready to deal with the consequences of further severe storms this winter?

Is the minister aware that Western Isles Council has bent over backwards and, indeed, has allocated £75,000 to reduce fares by a third on the CalMac routes on the Sound of Harris and the Sound of Barra? However, CalMac cannot lower those fares, apparently because of Scottish Executive policy. Even the minister's Westminster counterpart, Alistair Darling, has said that he sees no problem with lowering the fares. Will the minister reconsider his position and help the businesses in the Western Isles?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The minister has misled Parliament—I prepared my question this morning.

rose—

Although I wish the minister every success in Brussels in salvaging something for our hard-pressed Scottish fishing fleet and for the people in the north-east, the Shetlands and other parts of the country that rely on the fishing industry for their livelihoods, I have a sense of déjà vu that does not fill me with confidence. Frankly, that should not be the case. The ICES report states that "Haddock in the North Sea and Division IIIa" were at "Full reproductive capacity" and that the haddock stocks were "Close to target" for "Fishing mortality in relation to high long-term yield". Given that the Scottish demersal fleet depends on haddock, the ICES report should be good news. Why, therefore, has ICES recommended that the quota be cut by 41 per cent—from the current 66,000 tonnes to 39,400 tonnes next year—despite the fact that, as Ted Brocklebank pointed out, the fleet has been cut from 400 boats to fewer than 130? We could face a drastic cut in the TAC for haddock, which is the main white-fish species on which the Scottish demersal fleet depends, despite the drastic decline in our haddock fleet. I do not see how the Scottish fleet or, for that matter, the UK fleet—I agree with Tommy Sheridan on this—can be expected to kowtow to unelected European commissioners who clearly have no regard for the future livelihoods of people who continually risk their lives to bring fish to our tables. I hope that Mr Finnie—and Mr Bradshaw, too—will stand up for our fishermen. They must not simply accept Brussels diktats with a handshake and a smile. The industry's leaders are shocked by the proposed cuts in haddock quota. George MacRae, who is the head of the Scottish White Fish Producers Association, has stated: "There was no previous warning of this, no discussion with the industry and no consultation with those affected ... Everyone has regarded the haddock stocks as being in good condition. The catch reduction is not due to inadequate stocks of haddock". The fishermen's feelings were put in a nutshell by Alex Flett, who is the skipper of the fishing vessel the "Courageous 3". He said: "We fishermen never see ICES taking marine samples in our working areas of the North Sea, where it is clearly  evident that the cod stocks are in a far healthier state than the scientists claim ... Assessing the cod stock is one thing but to try to get them back to the level of the glory days is pure fantasy. With global warming and sea temperatures rising, and new species such as squid appearing in abundance in our waters, it is obvious that major environmental change is under way ... As the Gulf Stream continues to slow and sea temperatures gradually rise, the cod will naturally migrate slowly north, as they have been doing for many years. Cod stocks in Northern waters are big and at an all time high in Northern Norwegian waters".

There has been a great deal of discussion about it. I remind Mr Finnie that that was a quotation from a fisherman—and I would like to know who is listening to the fishermen. Turning to the subject of prawns, I am obviously glad about the increase in the nephrop TAC, which has been promised to our fishermen for many years. Last year, a 12 per cent increase was achieved for the west coast, which brought us back to 1999 levels. A further increase of 30 to 40 per cent was within the TAC guidelines. The fishermen of the Western Isles, Mallaig, Oban and the Clyde estuary have continually been calling for such an increase for years—it is better late than never. I turn to the situation in the area west of 4° . Scottish boats have been unable to fish for monkfish because of a lack of TAC and a lack of quota, despite the much-lauded 47 per cent increase last year. Hardly any of the deep-water fleet boats from Lochinver and Kinlochbervie have been fishing the area west of 4° , or area VIa, since April. That is because most of the 47 per cent increase went to area IVa. Instead of fishing in their traditional areas, those boats have been forced to fish in areas 250 miles west of Ireland on the Porcupine bank, which is a highly dangerous area. When that fishery finished, they moved over to the North sea and fished for haddock. They could not fish their traditional Scottish waters for monkfish because of the lack of quota, and they were unable to take advantage of deep-sea species—particularly black scabbard, whose fishery ended in February, and blue whiting, whose fishery finished in March—because nearly all the quota for deep-water species was given away to other nations by Franz Fischler two years ago. It is galling for those Scottish fishermen to know that French boats are still fishing Scottish waters, particularly given that they are fishing valuable species such as monkfish. The French are monitored only once in every four landings at their home ports and, like the Spanish, they get a fuel subsidy; I do not think that they carry many on-board observers, either.  I note that the Green amendment calls for "marine protected areas". I have some sympathy with that, but I remind Eleanor Scott that the west of Scotland already has four areas that are partially closed. One is in the Clyde, and one is the so-called windsock between Scrabster and Lewis. There are also the Darwin mounds, north-west of Lewis, and there is a further area near Rockall. Those are all existing protected areas. On stocks, I heard Euan Robson mention seals. I remember that the minister, Ross Finnie, mentioned the possibility of a seal commission about four years ago. Has anything happened on that? People sometimes blame fishermen for the depletion of stocks, but we should never forget that many more fish are taken from the sea by seals, cetaceans, fish-eating birds and other fish than are ever taken by fishermen. Ted Brocklebank is right. Our fishermen are suffering because of the rules of the CFP. TACs and quotas work for pelagic stocks, but not for a mixed demersal-bottom fishery. The only way that we will get that changed is through a Conservative Government and, thank God, that will not be too long now.

Does the member know how many transmitters there are in Scotland?

I congratulate Roseanna Cunningham on raising this important matter. The period during which the whole television industry will change from analogue to digital reception is 2008 to 2012. Originally, the switch-over was to be finished by 2010, with 95 per cent of consumers having digital equipment in their homes before the analogue switch-off. That was the published target of Chris Smith when he was Secretary of State for Culture,  Media and Sport in 1999 and it has been repeated by the current secretary of state, Tessa Jowell. However, Office of Communications findings cast severe doubts over whether that level of take-up is achievable. Why has the secretary of state promised completion to 95 per cent of consumers at the new later date of 2012 when, according to Ofcom, and as Roseanna Cunningham has just said, it will not be possible for technical reasons to extend digital terrestrial television to more than 75 per cent of households before the switch-over? There is no doubt that digital should improve most people's television reception and should probably improve coverage, but there appear to be severe losers. Something must be done about that. Many people will need expensive aerial upgrades. Many want Freeview but do not want to purchase pay TV services. What about people in Orkney and Shetland? What about people in the Western Isles? What about people in the Highlands from John O'Groats to Campbeltown? Why should many in those areas be left bereft of TV and faced with the single option of installing Sky? Some will simply find too that expensive and will, as a result, have no television at all. Yesterday, I met some constituents from Ardfern on the Craignish peninsula in Argyll, one of whom explained to me that the peninsula receives the signal from Mull. He bought a digital box for a one-off £20 payment and now receives a good digital Freeview reception of all the terrestrial channels. Delighted with that, he purchased a similar digibox for his 93-year-old mother, who lived nearby on the other side of the glen. As she, too, received the analogue signal from Mull, he was rather surprised to find that, when he connected the digibox to his mother's system, it did not work. Of course, that was because she received her signal through a repeater system, which acts as a reflector and turns the picture upside down. Because that process works all right with the analogue signal, but not with digital, people who live on the west side of the Craignish peninsula can get terrestrial digital television whereas people on the east side cannot. On the west side, people can simply buy a Freeview box for £20, but the only option for people on the east side is to install Sky at a minimum of £180 a year with the additional initial cost of installing a satellite dish. On top of that, they will have to pay the TV licence fee—which, incidentally has increased by 32 per cent since Labour came into power. As a result, the Government must ensure that it has an answer for people who find themselves in this predicament. Will the minister tell me here and now what will happen to people who receive their analogue signal from repeater stations? Tessa Jowell has conceded that many people who have yet to switch over to digital are  "exactly the people that the State has a duty to protect". Although that statement is a bit patronising, I am sure that the many people I know who are in this position will be delighted to know that the secretary of state has their welfare at heart. I just hope that she keeps her promises and I ask our minister to encourage her to do so. Obviously, the issue is reserved, but it is of the utmost importance that people all over the UK have decent television reception and do not have to pay grossly inflated costs for that. I have always thought of myself as a one-nation Conservative, and particularly so on this matter of life after analogue. Although broadband has taken ages to be rolled out, some areas in the Highlands and Islands still do not receive it. Ironically, analogue is being switched off first in the rural areas and it is vital that those who are affected receive adequate service from our broadcasting corporation.

Does the minister agree that it is imperative that the governing bodies of sport be consulted on how best to promote lifelong participation in sport and physical activity at grass-roots level? Will she undertake to ensure that the Scottish Executive sports division works together with sportscotland and the Scottish Sports Association in particular to ensure that the momentum that has been created by the 2012 Olympics is maintained?

I am standing in for my colleague Alex Johnstone, who is laid up with a back injury. However, I was a member of the Procedures Committee when the inquiry into Sewel motions was under way. The Sewel convention originated with remarks made by Lord Sewel, who was then the junior Scottish Office minister responsible for steering the Scotland Bill through the House of Lords. Referring to the provision in the bill that asserts Westminster's continued right to legislate on devolved as well as reserved matters, he said: "we envisage that there could be instances where it would be more convenient for legislation on devolved matters to be passed by the United Kingdom Parliament. However ... we would expect a convention to be established that Westminster would not normally legislate with regard to devolved matters in Scotland without the consent of the Scottish parliament."—[ Official Report, House of Lords, 21 July 1998; Vol 592, c 791.] I happily agree with that. In his evidence to the committee, Lord Sewel said: "The Sewel Convention is an essential part of the constitutional architecture of devolution and prevents legislative competence becoming a contested area." He warned against using Sewel motions in areas of major and controversial policy, saying that "The Parliament should be very cautious in using the Sewel route for those matters", because that was not what the Sewel mechanism was designed to do. The Scottish Conservatives' view is certainly that a Sewel motion should not express an opinion on the merits of a bill, because the Scottish Parliament is not given enough time to scrutinise properly the subject in question. Neither should there be a presumption against the use of Sewel motions. It should be up to the Scottish Executive to prove that a Sewel motion is necessary. We also think that the scale and scope of the proposed legislation should be considered and that there must be a consistent approach. A Sewel motion should not be driven by United Kingdom election timetables; we do not have to be driven by Tony Blair's agenda or by when he thinks that we should use Sewel motions. I mentioned consistency. We are introducing our own charities  legislation in Scotland—the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005—in which the Inland Revenue will play a key role, yet we used a Sewel motion to agree to the creation of a crime agency, which is a purely devolved matter. That seems a little inconsistent. The Conservative group basically agrees with the Procedures Committee's report. We agree that it may be necessary to rename Sewel motions, although as a keen historian I do not see why Lord Sewel should not keep his little moment of glory. We agree that the procedure should be set down in the standing orders of the Parliament, that the Executive should issue a statement after the Queen's speech on Sewels that are likely to arise, that memorandums should become formal parliamentary documents and that the lead committee report should be published five working days before the debate.

One would think that an Executive that is good at recycling its own rubbish in the chamber would be well equipped to deal with the rubbish that is produced by the Scottish public. Regrettably, that is not the case. This country is lagging miles behind the rest of western Europe, where recycling is taken for granted and the population is encouraged to take some responsibility and play its part in keeping the country clean. In France, for instance, fly-tipping is discouraged by the fact that it is made easy for people to dispose of excess rubbish in déchetteries, the equivalent of our rubbish tips but much easier to access and to utilise. Those local recycling centres in small towns are looked after by qualified people who proudly surround them with beautiful gardens. The Executive's record on waste is not good and is not going to be good enough to enable it to reach its target of recycling 25 per cent of waste by 2006. Some councils have done well and I  congratulate them. However, it is especially difficult for councils that manage remote rural areas to meet the targets that are thrust on them by the Executive, especially as we live in a throwaway society in which new buildings and new houses mean new furniture, leading to old furnishings and possessions constantly being thrown out in ever-increasing quantities. The Executive's obsession with targets and action plans is not having the desired effect and the amount of waste that is being sent to landfill sites is still increasing. Many councils would have to double their previous performance in one year in order to meet the Executive's 2006 target. It is all very well for the Scottish Executive to dictate to councils what they must achieve, but it should be up to the Executive, as the Government of Scotland, to ensure that there are markets for recycled products. "No targets without markets." That was what Highland Council told me in 2003. I remember saying that during a similar debate in our former chamber on the Mound. I am recycling that phrase now, because "No targets without markets" makes sense to me. As Sarah Boyack said, it is about joined-up thinking. I congratulate Moray Council, which hopes to achieve its 25 per cent recycling target. Western Isles Council, Highland Council and Argyll and Bute Council are working hard to reduce landfill and to increase the amount of recycling and composting. However, because of their huge geographical areas, their transport costs are much higher than those in the more urban areas. Moray Council tells me that paper and cardboard go to Fife, aluminium cans to Alloa and steel cans to Glasgow. It has sold 429 composters and has given away a further 168. Green compost is shredded in Moray and transported to farms in Aberdeenshire. However, Moray's real bugbear is plastics. There seems to be nowhere in Scotland that deals with plastic recycling, so plastics have to be transported to England and then sent by boat to China and the far east. Most plastics therefore end up in landfill—

In a moment. That is why the trees that surround rubbish tips in Scotland are often hideously adorned with plastic bags, in sharp contrast to the well-kept French recycling areas with their sweet-smelling rosebuds. Councils are trying to develop a new culture of recycling, but they face barriers erected by the Executive in the shape of bureaucratic delays caused by the creation of the waste strategy area groups and the area waste plans. Those plans will  be far too rigid and they will not be in place until January 2006. As John Scott said, that means that, if the Executive takes a year to examine the plans, the plans will not be working until 2007. Why not let the individual councils use their own initiative and expertise to make the best decisions for their areas?

Our feeling is that there should not be a tax on plastic bags in this country. One reason is that it is very wet in this country and, if a paper bag is used, shopping can fall out of the bottom. The Executive should concentrate on creating markets that encourage the recycling of plastics and hazardous materials in Scotland. I finish by commending the idea of advanced thermal treatment. As John Scott said, Japan uses ATT to dispose of 78 per cent of its annual waste. The technology has the potential to cut down on landfill and provide energy and new employment in Scotland.

Is the Executive doing anything to improve pier facilities at places where they have fallen into  disarray, such as Tobermory on Mull? That might encourage more cruise ships to visit such places and it would help marine tourism on the west coast of Scotland.

I find myself in agreement with practically everything that John Home Robertson said. Like many people in the Highlands and Islands, I am horrified by the number and sheer size of the new pylons that could be erected throughout the Highlands. If a subsea cable is planned to take electricity from Lewis to the Scottish mainland, surely it could stay subsea until it gets nearer to where most of the electricity will be used. I was interested to hear Shiona Baird's comments. I believe that the Government should encourage micro wind turbines, which provide on-site generation of electricity. Unobtrusive small systems, which make individual houses and buildings energy independent or at least partly independent and save CO 2 emissions, should be an important part of future energy policy. I want to talk about fuel poverty. Too many Scottish households on lower incomes spend too high a proportion of their income on fuel costs. It remains a serious problem. The Executive must act now to ensure that continued support is available for those who need assistance in upgrading their heating systems and in improving the energy efficiency of their homes. It must also ensure a far better delivery of the schemes. At the moment, I am dealing with more than 80 cases to do with Eaga Partnership applications in the Highlands and Islands. Constituents have experienced significant delays in getting work done; there has been shoddy or even dangerous workmanship in some cases; and people have simply been denied such work on dubious grounds. Although there seems to be movement in some of the cases that I am dealing with—I congratulate the Eaga Partnership on that—too many are still waiting to be resolved. I continue to highlight the issue and encourage more people to come forward with their experiences. Who knows how many more cases there are? Who knows how many elderly and vulnerable people in the Highlands and Islands face a cold winter without adequate heating because of the Scottish Executive's failure to ensure full delivery of its schemes? The Executive is always quick to congratulate itself; it must also take responsibility when things are not working. Although there are many cases in which work has been delivered successfully, there are just too many in which constituents have experienced real and potentially dangerous problems.  For example, a constituent in Grantown-on-Spey says that she feels that she is living in a "danger zone", with live wires protruding as a result of shoddy work. She calls it "a chapter of errors". A Shetland couple have waited two years for electric heaters to be installed. A lady in Campbeltown had a contractor who left a hot pipe uncovered and rubble under her carpets. Her carpets were ripped during the installation, her fire alarm was turned off for a week and a cable was left lying across the corridor upstairs at night. She ended up at the doctor's with stress. A constituent on Islay, whose heating broke down within a few weeks of its installation, repeatedly phoned Eaga and the local contractor to get the problem sorted out before she went to stay with her family for the winter. On her return, she was told that the guarantee had run out. A Caithness woman was told that she could not go on the scheme because she already had heating—a 20-year-old peat-burning Rayburn.

I am dealing with fuel poverty, which is mentioned in the motion. In too many cases, contractors turn up when they have been advised that no one will be at home. I ask the Executive to do something for senior citizens such as those I have spoken about today.

I end by reading out one of the letters that I received from a constituent. "Dear Jamie McGrigor, MSP, I kept your letter from the Northern Times about difficulties people are experiencing in getting help with central heating ... I am a disabled woman of 75 living with my disabled husband of 80. Because of my disability I am unable to move rapidly to keep warm or wear thick clothes. I daren't get cold or my pain levels rise to a point where I am confined to a chair. It has taken me three years to achieve the vertical. My central heating system was so old that it was repaired in January, February and March this year. I am lucky to have a plumber who understands my situation. I phoned EAGA on his last visit but they refused to replace the system because it had been repaired. I applied for a grant through Care and Repair who awarded me £1696. Unfortunately my heating finally died during a cold snap at the end of May. My gallant plumber put in a new system rapidly. It was his quote that had been accepted by Care and Repair. Unfortunately the grant hadn't been rubber-stamped before the work started although it was before the work was finished. Because of that the grant has been withdrawn.  I appealed to the Sutherland Committee who upheld the withdrawal because it would have set a precedent and have disastrous consequences on the Area Grant Budget. I have thought a lot about it and it seems to—"

"—me that a precedent must be set where a person's well-being is at risk. As the money was allocated, I don't—"

Would the Executive accept all the things that the minister mentioned—which I support—being damaged because the OFT does not take notice of regional monopolies?

I congratulate Kenny MacAskill on securing this important debate. My local branch of Ottakar's is in Oban. I often visit the shop both to buy books and to attend the launches of authors and their  new works. I must declare an interest; my mother, Mary McGrigor, is an author whose books are regularly and effectively sold through the company. I will not give members a list of titles now. Ottakar's has consistently been bookseller of the year. It allows its branches enough autonomy prominently to display the books that are important to their locality and region. It is famous for specialising in Scotland and in children's books. For example, many of the books that are displayed in the front window of the Oban shop feature natural history, water sports, sailing and fishing. Ottakar's has the biggest fishing and craft book sales in Scotland and has expanded its section on natural history, birds and marine life. In so doing, it has made itself an extremely profitable concern. It not only gives local residents and visitors what they want to buy, but gives tourists valuable information about the area and an incentive to go exploring. Ottakar's has sponsored a fresh talent tour of new Scottish authors, holding workshops to encourage people to buy and read books and to encourage would-be writers to create. The Oban branch also has an outreach service called out and about. It is run by the now famous Mr Neil Horn, who takes Ottakar's books in a mobile van to places such as Lochmaddy in Uist, Tarbert in Harris, Barra, Tiree and the Ardnamurchan peninsula. That is why it was possible for the most recent Harry Potter book to be launched in Lochmaddy at midnight—the same time as it was launched throughout the United Kingdom. Ottakar's and Neil Horn's mobile van made that act of inclusion possible. Ottakar's branches in Aviemore, Elgin and Inverness do the same for their areas. The Inverness branch has been particularly supportive of books that interest the Gaelic-speaking community. Ottakar's has provided and continues to provide a service to Scotland that would be sorely missed if local specialisation were to disappear under new management. Furthermore, through its book of the month promotion it has focused on new authors and promoted new books that would not usually be promoted in other bookshops. Ottakar's therefore also provides a valuable service to Scotland's new authors. What will they do if that policy changes? Where will they find similar opportunities? It is hard for writers to get going and Ottakar's has been a great help to them. My arguments for the independence of Ottakar's are all cultural arguments, which unfortunately may not affect the thinking of the OFT as it will doubtless be interested only in competition arguments. However, I put it to the OFT that the takeover will create a monopoly far greater than  Tesco's. One would think that that should be enough. I have nothing against HMV/Waterstone's. Unfortunately, the situation has come about because of a shift in the tectonic plates of the industry, mainly due to publishers giving too generous operating terms to supermarkets and to the internet booksellers. That development is forcing the specialist sector to consolidate and that could be harmful to Scottish culture, Scottish publishers and Scottish writers. Should the takeover go ahead, it will be up to this Parliament to persuade HMV/Waterstone's that the good practice employed by Ottakar's should be continued, not only for the cultural reasons that I have outlined, but because that practice has been a financial success.

Will the minister join me in congratulating the Scottish businesses that have already succeeded in entering the Olympic market, including the navyblue design group, which won the £500,000 tender to design the bid document and promotional literature, and Kirriemuir-based Hi-Fli Banners & Flags, which was involved in the production of the promotional and branding material for the bid? Will she provide assurances that the Executive will support Scottish businesses in strengthening the Scottish economy in the run-up to the 2012 Olympics?

What is wrong with a Scottish athlete winning a medal for a British team?

The Conservatives appreciate very much the enormous effort of Sebastian Coe and his team to secure the Olympic games for the United Kingdom, unlike the SNP, which said that the bid was a waste of money. The success was achieved against all the odds. Sebastian Coe came to the Scottish Parliament to lobby for our support and I am sure that the support that he gained here played no small part in that great victory. Had the bid been seen just as an English bid, I doubt whether it would have won. Once again, the strength of the United Kingdom proved its worth. The Olympic charter, which was established by Pierre de Coubertin, states: "The goal of the Olympic Movement is to contribute to building a peaceful and better world by educating youth through sport". That is particularly important during the turbulent and violent times in which we live. The Olympic goal of achieving excellence in a sporting and friendly atmosphere in which competitors strive to give their best and to be the best is thrilling. I do not like the SNP's politically motivated call for a separate Scottish Olympic team, as it questions the loyalty of past Scottish Olympic heroes who fought valiantly to win medals for the Great Britain team, as did their Welsh, English and Irish counterparts.

No, I want to make progress. Different loyalties to national identity do not have to be divided loyalties. Many sports have traditionally been played at GB level, a structure that has served the United Kingdom, athletes and Scottish sport well since the modern Olympic games started in 1896. Why change something that works well? I am afraid that the SNP motion is sour grapes from the party that would sacrifice Scotland's position as a big fish in a successful British union to become a far less significant player on the European or world stage.

Not at the moment.  The United Kingdom has greater influence in Europe and the rest of the world than an independent Scotland would have. In the same way, team GB is far more powerful in the Olympic games than a Scottish team on its own would be. Chris Hoy, a gold medallist in cycling, in commenting on Linda Fabiani's suggestion for a Scottish Olympic team, said: "I think if we do that it would dilute the resources and the expertise we've got in the British team." He went on to say that he is a very proud Scot. The SNP does not have a monopoly on patriotism and it should not try to make the Olympics a political issue.

The SNP has been consistent only in its blatant opportunism. First, Alex Neil called the UK's bid for the 2012 Olympics a waste of public money. Then, the SNP supported Glasgow's 2014 bid for the Commonwealth games, which we also support. However, the SNP called on the Scottish Executive to ask Westminster for lottery funding for the Commonwealth games, even though it had said that the Olympic games are a waste of money. By doing that, the SNP has shown a talent for muddling that has more to do with promoting its nationalist agenda than with promoting Scottish sport effectively in the UK, Europe and the world beyond. Successful Scottish athletes have enjoyed the best training facilities and coaching that the UK has to offer. Ask Shirley Robertson, the sailing gold medallist, or Katherine Grainger, the rowing silver medallist, where they trained. If Scotland were to go it alone, as the SNP would like it to do, our athletes would have reduced resources in terms of facilities and coaching expertise.

A Scottish team on its own would probably not get the English facilities, because in an independent Scotland those facilities would have to be paid for.

I ask the Scottish Executive to use the power and influence that it holds for the time being to promote areas of Scotland—

I move amendment S2M-3381.1, to leave out from "London" to end and insert: "the Great British effort, led by Sebastian Coe, which secured the 2012 Olympic Games for London; recognises that this will greatly encourage young people from Scotland, Northern Ireland, Wales and England to participate in sport and in the quest for Olympic glory for individuals and Team GB; acknowledges the pride of the many Scots who have competed successfully for Team GB; notes that different loyalties do not have to be divided loyalties and that many sports have traditionally been played at GB level, a structure which has served the United Kingdom, athletes and Scottish sport well since the first modern Olympic Games in Athens in 1896; welcomes the news that Hampden Park will host the Olympic football and urges the Scottish Executive to promote other venues in Scotland, such as mountain biking at Fort William, rowing at Strathclyde Park and equestrianism at Gleneagles; further notes that Scottish athletes who compete for Great Britain under the Union Jack do not cease to be Scottish, and believes that, by pooling resources and expertise, Great Britain can compete successfully against much larger nations, providing invaluable experience for the athletes and a source of great national pride for sports fans."

We believe that a strong cultural base is necessary for the health of our nation. Arts and culture are important for each individual. A basic foundation course that was attached to lifelong learning would inspire and educate some people and individuals would make their own choices of what they like and do not like. The excellent brief from the Scottish Museums Council states: "The reality for the user of cultural services in Scotland is a somewhat disjointed and potentially confusing experience. There are cultural black spots in local delivery and areas with a duplication of services." I am afraid that that is often correct. As anyone who travels the length and breadth of Scotland will know, the black spots are not in the more affluent areas of our major cities, but tend to be in the deprived areas and rural towns. In contrast, the duplication of services occurs because there is too much administration in the centres and not enough direct funding for the arts and artists. We should certainly talk about the importance of culture to tourism, which has become our biggest industry. It is vital that cultural attractions such as museums, libraries, theatres and centres of music exist throughout Scotland to cater for the increased market in tourism. I was interested in the minister's wish to involve VisitScotland as a ticket agent—that will be fine as long as the tickets are for the right shows, although I do not know what other ticket agents in Scotland will think about the idea. Rural Scotland needs more cultural focal points to celebrate the present and the future as well as local museums that tell exciting stories of the history in each area. Historical tourism and  archaeological tourism exist in abundance in Scotland and play a distinctive role in the make-up of Scottish culture; they should therefore play a lucrative role in Scottish tourism.

I certainly agree with that. The brief from the Scottish Arts Council indicates where many problems lie. It says that over the past 50 years its role and remit has greatly broadened but that the funding has not. The SAC says that the introduction of lottery funding by the Conservatives in 1995 gave increased opportunity for it to widen its investment in community projects, so the arts flourished. That has been successful to such a degree that lottery funds are currently oversubscribed by 100 per cent. The problem is that in 1995 the SAC provided core funding for 73 arts organisations on a budget of £23.7 million, but 10 years later it supports 108 organisations with a budget of £40.2 million. From those figures, anyone can see that its system is overstretched. Unfortunately, opera, music, dance, films and theatre in Scotland are suffering as a result. The fact that the lottery was used by the Labour Government for pet political projects such as land reform, instead of the projects for which it was originally designed, does not help because there is now less money for arts than there was previously. The SAC has difficulty in distributing too little to too many, which is why the tragedy of Scottish Opera has happened. The Jonas report that showed that funds for Scottish Opera were inadequate was ignored, and as a result the highest quality cultural icon that Scotland has possessed for the past 40 years has been severely damaged. We do not support the commission's preferred option of setting up a culture body and a culture fund because we do not believe that that would be of benefit to the public or to artists. National museums, national galleries and the National Library of Scotland have worked well with direct funding and direct accountability to the minister; I would suggest that Scottish Opera, Scottish Ballet, the National Theatre and even Scottish Screen should perhaps join that club. That would mean that adequate funding and a proper long-term strategy could be determined directly by the minister for the arts and the leaders of the main Scottish cultural organisations, with no need for expensive middlemen. That would also enable the SAC or any other arms-length delivery service to concentrate its resources on developing new themes for other branches of culture.  Culture Scotland and the culture fund will just necessitate more and more staff and large administration and accommodation budgets, which simply eat up money that could be used for direct funding of arts and artists, which is what we want. We think that the commission's political notion of enshrining cultural rights in law is impractical and ridiculous and would be a waste of Parliament's time. People already have rights to express themselves, which are noted in the United Nations's Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and local authorities already have a duty to provide cultural experiences. The problem with local authorities is that often half their arts and leisure budget goes on sport, leaving little for other sorts of culture. However, that is another debate. Let us never forget the importance of the voluntary and private sectors. The voluntary sector is a vital but often unsung element of Scotland's cultural scene. It is a source of huge experience, energy and talent. Voluntary groups are usually highly motivated by love of the subject, and therefore help to ensure the best possible access to cultural activity in Scotland. A comparatively small investment, covering the key issues of training, co-ordination and help to volunteers would bring a disproportionate payback to Scotland's cultural wealth. More funding should be available for that sector. The approach to the private sector in Scotland also needs to be rethought. True partnerships between business and culture, founded on strategic co-operation for mutual benefit, will benefit all. Less than £10 million is invested in Scotland annually from the private sector and most of that is spent in Glasgow or Edinburgh. In America, private sponsorship is huge; that could be the case here if tax incentives were used to encourage individuals and corporate bodies to get involved in stimulating culture and arts in Scotland.

What is being done to help those doctors in practices such as Appin and Lismore who opt in to cover for 24-hour services?

When the member says that he wants the whole length of the A9 to be dual carriageway, does he mean that he wants the road to be dual carriageway all the way to Thurso?

Will the minister take an intervention?

It would be a very brief intervention.

I am sure that most members who will speak in the debate agree that crofting is a good thing and should be encouraged to continue. Crofting is a way of life that has stood the test of time. Through eras of extreme poverty and of comparative wealth, crofting has always been helped by the Conservatives when we have been in Government. We feel that crofting must now be helped to ride the latest wave of trouble: a bill that, if wrongly drafted, could bring about crofting's demise. In areas such as Stornoway, crofting has knit together town and country and has developed the  skills that have enabled people to exist healthily under extremely harsh conditions. Crofting must move with the times. Given that agriculture happens to be at a low ebb in every department and that we are experiencing a housing boom, it is easy for people to give up, take the money and run. That is understandable, but many crofters do not want to go down that road. It is essential that crofting land is still available for those people and for young, would-be crofters, but it cannot be available if many of the best bits are under concrete and brick buildings that are inhabited by people who have never fed a cow, never dipped a sheep and never dug a drain. Although we certainly agree with the crofters' right to buy, I do not see why land that is owned by a crofter should be regulated differently from land that is rented by a crofter: it is still crofting land until it is decrofted. The inby land, at any rate, has been improved by endless hours of hard work over the centuries. The inby crofting land, where some crops can be grown, often fits in with environmental schemes that produce income. In places such as North Uist, the crops that are grown play a huge role in sustaining the richest stock of wild birds in Europe, which brings in tourists and attracts income—sometimes from Scottish Natural Heritage and RSPB Scotland. Income is important. The inby land is the heart of the croft land. It is wrong to say that new crofts can be created out of apportionments of common grazings—that is an ignorant suggestion. The inby land is where grazing animals can be fattened to achieve increased income for the crofter. If a croft is created on the common grazing, where is the common grazing for that new croft? Common grazings are often inaccessible, but where there is some access or where new access can be built, that land, rather than the inby land, is the place for extra houses. I know Taynuilt very well as I live close by. It is certainly a crofting community with different townships in the near vicinity but, above all, it is a crofting community. I was amazed by the decision of the Crofters Commission to decroft some of the best land in the middle of the village. The decision not only went against the view of the vast majority of the locals, but it stopped several young crofting applicants who would have been happy to take on the croft. That was a sad farce that I hope will not be repeated, but it could easily be repeated if the bill fails to protect existing crofting land. I cannot believe that the Crofters Commission, the remit of which, after all, is to defend the interests of crofters, has acted in crofters' interests in Taynuilt on this occasion, except perhaps in the interests of one absentee landlord crofter who stands to make an enormous profit.  I reiterate that the bill should protect land. Crofting land, or certainly inby crofting land, should not be available for planning purposes unless the land has first been decrofted or is for buildings that are relevant to the people who live on the croft or which are part of the crofting business. The process should be regulated by the Crofters Commission. It should check that crofts are kept in a fit state for agriculture, which it is meant to do in any case. Minister Brankin has stated that the Crofters Commission is powerless to refuse a decrofting once the local authority has granted planning permission. If a decision has already been taken by a body with no real interest in crofting—in other words, the local planning authority—why do we have reports from Scottish Executive Environment and Rural Affairs Department officials and public Crofters Commission hearings?

I start by saying that it is a good thing that two members on the Executive front bench actually live in coastal or island communities and use ferries. They must know something about them. That is about the best I can say for them—there is nothing else good that I can say about them. It is also good to hear Tommy Sheridan back in full cry; he is always better, I think, when he is on his own. It is a shame that his colleagues will not be here to vote with him against what he thinks is the privatisation of CalMac. I do not agree, however, that it will be the privatisation of CalMac. In fact, I think that it will be the opposite. On 8 December, the Executive's plans to tender the CalMac ferry network were defeated in the Parliament after a lengthy debate. I am surprised  that the Executive wants to bring the matter back for debate again, as it only highlights its shambolic handling of the whole process, which has led to an inexcusable level of confusion and uncertainty for CalMac and its employees, for any potential competitors and for the people in both mainland and island communities who depend on the ferry services. Furthermore, the process has wasted vast sums of taxpayers' money. The debate will once again highlight the fact that the main reason why the tendering process is going ahead is to appease unelected EU officials. Why will the Executive not take a far more robust view in relation to the European Commission's role? What is happening now sets an alarming precedent. Surely a devolved Scottish Government should be up to organising ferry services in Scotland. It seems, however, that the Government would rather that the EU performed that task for it. It is high time that the Liberal-Labour coalition put our interests before those of the European Commission. It is time that it stopped passing the buck and wasting money that could be spent on improving lifeline ferry services. We have already had this debate, so the Parliament's time and Scottish people's money are being wasted. The most important thing for politicians to ensure is that the people who depend on the ferries get a good service that is modern and flexible and which adapts to the changing needs of its users. We might think that the Executive could have learned a lesson from the sorry saga of NorthLink, whose contract to run the Orkney and Shetland ferry services should have lasted until 2007 but had to be retendered three years early because the company lost so much money. How can it be that Mr Andrew Banks can run an unsubsidised ferry service between Orkney and Caithness and stay in business when the NorthLink service costs the Executive £100,000 a day to keep going—and that is over and above the millions of pounds of subsidy that NorthLink has already received? Should we ask Mr Banks how he does it? Something has to change. Three weeks ago, I visited Shetland, Orkney and Caithness. Orkney farmers produce some of the best livestock in Scotland. Above all, they produce an abundant supply of quality beef that goes direct to the abattoirs all year round. That is exactly what the supermarkets are crying out for: an uninterrupted supply of a quality product. That is what Orkney can deliver. To do so, the farmers need reliable livestock freight transport, but that is not being provided to the standard that is required. That sector of business is so important to the Orcadians, yet the needs and details of livestock transport were never properly described in the previous tender process. The current proposals  will be very expensive and wholly inadequate. It is not just for Orkney but for Shetland, the Western Isles, Tiree and Coll and many other islands that livestock freight is so important. If ferry operators do not get a full brief on what they are expected to provide, how can they put in a realistic tender to fulfil the needs of a particular route?

I cannot take an intervention—I do not have time, I am afraid. Why has the Scottish Executive so far refused to divulge the costs for the various routes that are served by CalMac?

Not just at the moment. I would like to know which routes might be profitable. Would not other members like to know? In this new era of freedom of information, information on CalMac routes is not forthcoming. If it was available, the losing and winning routes would become clear and there could be smaller route bundles. I would hope that some healthy competition would build up, such as that provided by Western Ferries and Andrew Banks's Pentland Ferries. Such competition could mean that, in the end, the subsidies might go to the areas where they are most needed.

No. The minister would not take mine, and I do not have time. However, I will see if I have time at the end of my speech. The idea of subsidising a profitable route seems absurd. Western Ferries, which is an excellent company, has operated the Hunter's Quay-McInroy's point route with enormous success, and the people of Dunoon have benefited from the great public spirit that was shown by Western Ferries with its 24-hour help for the Scottish Ambulance Service. We are against the proposed tendering because it will do nothing to improve services and the process will simply waste money that could be spent on better disability access on ferries or on disability equality training for CalMac staff. Any tendering process should include improved access for the disabled. Things have changed. There are now more elderly people who need just a little extra care. Tendering will set routes and timetables in stone, when they must be flexible to suit changing conditions and needs. The people of Stendal in Germany managed to keep their buses free from  any tendering process, and Westminster supported the German position. Why can German buses get a derogation when Scottish ferries cannot? What would Winston Churchill, Nye Bevan or Jo Grimmond have said about the situation? CalMac is a famous old company with a safety record that is second to none, but this Government is undermining it. I really hate to say this, but the real hypocrites on this issue are the Lib Dems. Nicol Stephen told the business in the Parliament conference on Friday 9 September that we can "lobby the EU" and "not simply accept what the EU gives us". He went on to say that "we should engage and make a difference ... in the development of the regulations." Iain MacMillan, director of CBI Scotland, praised Mr Stephen's attitude, insisting: "just because a law has been approved by the Council of Ministers, that doesn't mean that we should accept it ... Nicol is quite right—we should be telling Brussels where they are going wrong." Why does the Executive not tell Brussels where it is going wrong?

Will the minister give way?

I must declare an interest: I am still a sheep and cattle farmer and have enjoyed the annual royal highland show for a great many years. I come at this debate from a distinctly rural angle. The royal highland show is of enormous importance to people in rural Scotland and to the agricultural industry. That is not just because it  offers a showcase for Scotland's livestock and machinery from Gretna to Shetland, but because it is held in Scotland's capital city of Edinburgh. Having the show in Edinburgh stresses the great importance to Scotland as a whole not only of farming but of the rest of the rural economy. Anyone who has been in the food tents at the royal highland show will have witnessed the huge expansion in local food products; there is the best meat, the best fish and the best shellfish in Europe. Edinburgh can produce the largest attendance figures and the perfect stage. It is therefore immensely important as the venue for what is an exceptional Scottish event. Many Scots come to their capital only once a year, and that is for the royal highland show. A move to a lesser site would almost certainly lessen the impact of the royal highland show and might do away with an event at which urban Scotland meets and comes to terms with rural Scotland, and vice versa. I agree with Fiona Hyslop's motion and with the sentiments that were ably expressed by Kenny MacAskill and—even more ably—by my friend James Douglas-Hamilton. James hopes for a meeting of minds to ensure that Ingliston is never lost to the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland.

Will the minister acknowledge that the activities of the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland bring an estimated £250 million to the economy of Scotland every year? Will he assure us that a compromise that is satisfactory to all parties will be reached in the planning of the Edinburgh airport extension?

Is the minister aware that Mull is one of the jewels in Scotland's tourism crown and that Duart Castle on Mull is one of the most popular tourist attractions in Scotland, but there has recently been a drastic cut in the number of buses going to the castle because of the condition of the roads? What will the Scottish Executive do to improve the roads on Mull so that the tourist buses and essential lorries that bring goods to local residents get to the places to which they intend to go?

It is a great honour for Scotland to host the G8 summit for the first time since the summits started in Rambouillet in 1975. It is apt that the summit will be held here because Scotland and Scottish people have always been famous for inspiration. Scottish minds ushered in the age of enlightenment and the creation of western civilisation as we know it. Perhaps the fresh climate and outstanding natural beauty of our country fosters thought on a very high plain. Let us hope that the same very high plain of thought will be achieved by the G8 leaders at Gleneagles when they meet in the heart of Scotland. That is what is needed to make poverty history and to deal with the other world problems that are on the agenda. I agree with Tom McCabe that we are showcasing Scotland to an international audience. I hope that the event will proceed in harmony and that it will make progress on the subjects that on its agenda, especially the two main topics that Tony Blair has chosen, which are climate change and Africa. If the event delivers progress, it will encourage more events to be held on Scottish soil. I am sure that Perthshire will benefit from the event for years to come.  I disagree with the notion in Mark Ballard's amendment about the "undemocratic nature of the G8, given that the G8 countries represent only 13% of the world's population". Surely the point is that the countries that are represented at the summit have the assets to make a difference to the areas of the world that are less fortunate. It may be an advantage that G8 is a relatively small committee because that will, I hope, produce clear decisions that attract consensus. That would have good consequences that would be felt worldwide and bring about practical improvements for people who are suffering. Mark Ballard's amendment also asks for more nanny state-style taxes, which will not stop global warming but will hinder wealth creation, and thus leave less money for charitable work and humanitarian aid when world disasters occur.

Global warming has produced a different climate, and practical measures must be taken in the short term to protect people in low-lying and coastal areas. Governments must ensure that there are sufficient early-warning procedures for storms, and that there is sufficient funding for flood prevention. To combat the causes of global warming, we must examine renewables technologies, such as wave and tidal power, as well as energy from biomass and waste. We must also realise the importance of new nuclear technology as a key way of reducing global warming. In the west, we should examine ways of saving power and of encouraging a culture of energy savers instead of energy wasters.

No. It is the moral responsibility of developed nations to try to improve the plight of the African continent, where one child dies every three seconds and one in six dies before his or her fifth birthday. I am pleased by President Bush's statement on elimination of debt—it was promising. It must also be remembered that the aid contribution of the United States dwarfs that of any other country. We Conservatives are committed to increasing Britain's aid budget by a fifth in the next three years, and to reaching the UN target of spending 0.7 per cent of our gross domestic product on overseas development. However, it is a depressing fact that no matter how much aid is poured in, the effects can be destroyed overnight by corrupt governments. If we take Malawi as an example, we see that there were corruption scandals during the presidency of Bakili Muluzi, including reports that in 2000 senior  officials sold 160,000 tonnes of reserve maize when there were signs of a coming famine. Look at what has happened in a short time in Zimbabwe, where Robert Mugabe's brutal policies have left a productive agricultural economy in tatters, with his people facing famine. I am all for the First Minister's attempt to help Malawi—a country that has such a long association with Scotland, which was started by David Livingstone—but he must be able to give the Scottish people a firm assurance that the money that they give in aid will be used on the ground and not networked into politicians' pockets. We must never forget the wonderful efforts of the current aid organisations. The Governments of the G8 countries must preach and practice the gospel that brought prosperity for their nations in the first place, which was free trade without protectionism. However effective our aid programme, it will never solve the problem of global poverty. History shows us only too clearly again and again that countries that create wealth are politically stable. Political stability is created through establishment of the rule of law, protection of property and promotion of free enterprise. The answer to making poverty history lies in that direction, with free markets leading to fairer trade. As David McLetchie said recently: "it is hypocritical of us to lecture third world countries about the importance of these principals if we then prevent those countries reaping the rewards by trading with us. Trade protection for developed countries at the expense of the developing world is immoral". Properly applied, those principles would bring an end to the neo-colonial world, where rich donor countries hand out cash to dependent poor recipients. I look forward to the great Scottish summit at Gleneagles, and pray that its aims will be driven solidly down the fairway for an eagle or an albatross or, better still, a hole in one.

I thank the Scottish Wildlife Trust for sending me a cuddly toy beaver. I have given it to my young daughter, who likes it very much.  The European beaver is, I am sure, a cute little animal, but its sharp teeth and appetite for felling young trees mean that we should not introduce it into south Knapdale even as an experiment. My main reason for saying that is the beaver's ability to eat 200 saplings a year, which could mean that the 20 beavers in the experiment will consume 4,000 young trees. Those would likely be deciduous woodland trees, as the beavers apparently find the Sitka spruce as unpalatable as I do and other conifers are not suitable for their purpose of building dams to create lagoons. According to Dr Kitchener and Dr Conroy and the work that Fergus Ewing mentioned, beavers were creatures of the south, so there is no historical reason for releasing them in south Knapdale. As someone who happens to live near south Knapdale, I know that we do not want anything that might cause increased flooding in the area. I would have no objection to a trial being carried out in the beaver's historic homelands of East Anglia and the Thames valley. Why has the reintroduction of beavers not been tried in those areas before introducing them into Scotland? There is evidence that beavers cause a lot of damage in parts of Scandinavia, the Baltic states and Bavaria, where they are thought of as pests. I understand that a recent introduction of the animal into South America resulted in enormous proliferation and chaos. It is important that we learn lessons from those countries that have already introduced beavers. Beavers undermine banks in a way that can be dangerous. For example, anyone who goes along the riverbank in a tractor could very well end up having a nasty accident if they happened to go over a stretch of ground where the beaver has undermined the bank. Beavers can also flood roads overnight if they build dams near bridges. Again, that can be dangerous.

I will in a minute. From a tourism angle, I do not understand why there is such a wish to have a new species in Scotland when the environmental bodies can perfectly well establish and encourage the watching of other animals, such as native otters, as a tourist attraction. There are plenty of otters in south Knapdale, so why not watch those? When the introduction of the beaver was last proposed, it was quite rightly resisted by Ross Finnie and Alan Reid, the local MP. At the time, the proposal was also opposed by the local MSP, George Lyon, as well as by the local National Farmers Union Scotland branch, crofting interests, land managers and angling interests.

I cannot, as I do not have time. As far as I am concerned, nothing has changed to make me reconsider my opinion.

Okay. I will give way to George Lyon if I am allowed to do so.

George Lyon has me wrong there. The damage would be caused not by the trial project but by the reintroduction of beavers into the wild. I doubt that much damage would be caused by only 20 beavers, but let me now come to that point. Apparently, the reason why George Lyon changed his mind was that he was satisfied that, this time, there was an exit strategy. If the experiment involves only 20 beavers, it will not result in much damage, because the people who introduce the scheme will be keen to protect their reputation for common sense. Although such an experiment may be good for science, it will not mirror what would result from a major release into the wild. Such a release would result in damage being caused to riverbanks and in an increase in unwanted flooding in a country that, after all, has a very high rainfall. Let us bear in mind the fact that farmers who are planting young native trees under Government and European grant schemes, using taxpayers' money, would see their work and investments devastated. The very trees that they are planting for water margins under the countryside premium scheme and rural development programme—in which we are all being encouraged to participate—would be chomped to pieces by the beavers in seconds.

Am I allowed to take an intervention, Presiding Officer?

I listened to a great deal of Mr Ruskell's speech. I was interested in the part when he said that he was thinking next of introducing lynxes and wolves. That might be a good idea after the introduction of beavers, because they would eat the beavers and stay on top of them. If we introduce beavers, there may well be a massive explosion in their numbers, because, apart from foxes, they have no natural predators in this country. I am sorry to spoil Mr Ruskell's party, but I am cautious. Farmers and people who manage rivers and things in this country face enough drawbacks already without added ones. I am just being cautious and I do not think that there are enough safeguards in place to make people think that there will be any advantage at all in introducing beavers into Scotland. That is why I am taking the line that I am taking. I say to Mr Ruskell, "By all means, have this experiment if you want, but have it in the Thames valley where the things were most prolific, and don't bring them to south Knapdale."

Will the minister give way?

rose—

Is the member referring to small hotels and bed and breakfasts as "the cheap end of the market"?

rose—

I congratulate the Enterprise and Culture Committee on its report and tend to agree with its criticism of tourism policy since devolution. In the light of the extensive upheaval that our Scottish tourism industry has faced over the past five years, it would be in no one's interests to go back to square 1 now, but we Scottish Conservatives remain deeply concerned about the centralisation of structures and the corresponding loss of local knowledge and expertise. That concern was highlighted in comments to the committee from the Scottish area tourist board network, which branded VisitScotland's management style as  "centralist and hierarchical with no ability to meet local needs." That must improve. We are particularly anxious about the future status of local tourist information centres because, especially in rural areas, they are focal points for tourists on the ground. It is ironic that, in its reorganisation, the English Tourist Board is moving away from a centralised system, in an effort to give back power to the shires.

All I know is that we were under an excellent tourist board—the Argyll, the Isles, Loch Lomond, Stirling and the Trossachs Tourist Board, which was known as AILLST—which was run by James Fraser. There was no need for change. I agree with recommendation 41 of the committee's report, which states that the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport should "ensure involvement at the highest levels within the new network from the private sector". It is paramount that industry operators feel engaged and that the Executive fully recognises both that tourism is Scotland's biggest industry and that tourism operators play a vital role in our country's economy. The private operators tell us that they need a playing field on which profits can be made so that reinvestment can take place. Recent wage increases and increases in gas and electricity prices of between 40 and 50 per cent have made life difficult enough, but the excessive regulations—which are typical of a Government that seems to think that private business can always bear the costs of its politically correct schemes—have made the situation even worse. The industry wants practical help that is delivered with speed, rather than endless top-down strategies on which it has not been properly consulted. I ask the minister what VisitBritain is doing to market Scotland and why the Executive persisted with visitscotland.com, which respondents to a poll for tourism businesses that the Scottish Chambers of Commerce conducted last November said had had no visible effect on Scottish tourism. Ten years ago, the same experiment was tried in southern Ireland with an operation that was called Gulliver. That did not work either, because practical tourism operators were not involved in the strategy. We should learn lessons from  Ireland, where the situation has improved since the Government and the industry started working together.

Scottish tourism, the vast bulk of which consists of smallish hotels and bed and breakfasts, cannot charge over the odds. The question on the lips of everyone in the tourism industry is: what will happen to that market—in which short breaks play an important part—as a result of the recent downturn in the retail trade? The crucial question is whether people who are deciding to cut back on items such as new clothes and other non-essential items will also cut back on short breaks. I have talked to industry players who think that they know the answer. We should ensure that a short break in Scotland is seen to offer value for money and to represent a saving for hard-working families. Any market focus should be on dealing with current obvious setbacks such as that which I have mentioned, rather than on strategies that affect only a few. Under the Government's strategy, 14 area tourist boards have been abolished to be replaced by 14 hubs. What was the point of that? The answer would have been to examine the strengths of the existing system, which lay in some of the tourist boards, such as AILLST, Perthshire Tourist Board and the tourist boards for Glasgow and Edinburgh.

Am I allowed to, Presiding Officer?

What is happening at the moment is that English headhunters are on the prowl in Scotland; they are looking for people to run their new area tourist boards. It would be a great shame if Scottish expertise were to be lost because a Scottish Executive process was dogged by uncertainty, indecision and consequential delay.  The Conservatives think that tourism is far too important to be dealt with by the Education Department and to be bundled together with culture and sport. When we come to power, we are committed to the creation of a new department of enterprise that will incorporate tourism. That will put tourism at the heart of Government enterprise policy, which is where it should be.

Does the minister agree with my point that too much priority is to be given to environmental bodies, given that plenty of environmental safeguards already exist? That will only take up more time and make the whole process longer.

Having listened to other members, I have nothing further to add. The Conservatives will support the motion.

I am happy to outline the Conservative position on this issue. Members of the Procedures Committee were circulated with an interesting late written submission from Councillor Lawrence Marshall—who, like me, is obviously a great railway enthusiast—who suggests that the procedure requiring rail schemes to be promoted via a private parliamentary bill is a relic of the Victorian era that discriminates against rail and tram projects. Among the main criteria for deciding which MSPs will sit on a private bill committee are that the MSPs are not local members and have no axe to grind about the project. Interestingly, Councillor Marshall challenges that. His guiding principle would be that decisions on private bills ought to be taken by MSPs who represent those who live in the immediate vicinity of the project. In that way, the members of the committee would be accountable to the local population for their decisions if things went wrong. He suggests that projects would be best determined by local councils. Indeed, he asks what the difference is between a councillor sitting on a planning committee that considers a proposal to build a new school and an MSP who sits on a private bill committee that considers an application for a rail or tram project. I found Councillor Marshall's ideas thought provoking, but was reminded of the well-known comment that Ross Finnie makes whenever he talks about fish, which is that fish do not recognise boundaries but constantly swim from one territory to another. In the same way, trains go steaming through council boundaries, and that is perhaps where Councillor Marshall's theory might not work in practice. At any rate, so long as private bills are to be looked at by members of this Parliament, we agree in principle with the changes suggested by the Procedures Committee. The changes are intended to bring flexibility and, in the main, are common sense. However, we are concerned that the environmental aspect is perhaps being highlighted more than is necessary, bearing in mind that the Parliament is fulfilling its objectives pertaining to European Community directive 85/337/EEC, on the assessment of the effects on the environment of certain public and private projects, by ensuring that environmental information on a project is collected, publicised and taken into account in determining whether or not to pass a bill. That is done in the form of an environmental statement, which is one of the essential documents required for any works bill. Therefore, the safeguard should be in place. As statutory environmental bodies currently have the same rights as any others, we do not really see  why they should be entitled to a priority right above all other agencies. We believe that the long-term statutory proposal is a sensible way forward. Although the initial concern might be that the system is moving away from the Parliament and from MSPs, we consider that the TWA-plus option is probably the right one. Having looked at the systems used by other Parliaments, it appears that most of them eventually turn to such a system when it comes to scrutinising intricate and technical bills. It makes sense to have experts examine the proposals first, rather than expect MSPs to become experts overnight. We also sincerely hope that the new proposals will lessen the sheer weight of private bills that are before the Parliament at the moment, so that no one suggests bringing in congestion charges to ease the private bill traffic jam.

As I have said before in the Parliament, the Conservative party has always shown its support for Gaelic-speaking people, the Gaelic language and Gaelic culture. We have done so ever since we tried to stop the Liberal Whig peers and their supporters perpetrating the Highlands clearances. That was one of their first so-called social experiments. The Tories have always supported rural communities and we are as intent at keeping people in the Highland glens today as we were in the past. In fact, we are the only party with a Gaelic name and the only party that was present in the old Scottish Parliament before the act of union of 1707. We are the true national party of Scotland. It makes us happy that, at least on Gaelic, the other parties in the chamber are obviously thinking what we are thinking. It would be a sad day for devolution if Scotland did not bring renewed hope for Gaelic. Let us hope that the bill will provide a framework within which Gaelic is reinvigorated in the same way that the Conservative party reinvigorated it with incentives and injections of cash in the early 1980s.

Will the minister join me in congratulating the work of the Scottish Schools Football Association, which has established a range of interschool competitions for girls, including the Bank of Scotland-sponsored senior shield competition? What action will she take to support schools that have had to cancel football matches due to fears over insurance and liability in the wake of the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003?

Once again, the SNP has chosen not to use its time to debate health, housing, council tax, pensions, the deprivation in parts of Scotland's cities or the difficulties that are faced by those in remote rural areas. Instead, it has decided to debate nuclear weapons, an issue on which this Parliament cannot make a decision. I am disappointed that my amendment concerning navy and civilian workers at Faslane was not accepted. With the greatest respect to Roseanna Cunningham, I am baffled that the SNP wants to debate the future of Trident when, by doing so, it only draws attention to its muddled and irrational defence policy. Fortunately, the SNP's wish to scrap Trident could not be implemented unless it won a majority at Westminster, which is unlikely. Trident has been the cornerstone of Britain's worldwide defence policy, and it has played an enormous part in keeping the peace and providing security for this country. Trident has been a very successful deterrent against invaders or would-be conquerors. We cannot talk about this subject in a Scotland-only context. I cannot see the UK scrapping Trident, but if Scotland were to become independent and the SNP did scrap it, there would be serious consequences for Scotland and many other nations.

Last week we debated education, which is slightly more relevant to Scotland. The SNP has admitted that Scotland would have to withdraw from NATO. Imagine the vulnerability of Scotland's position—and, for that matter, the vulnerability of the rest of the UK—were that to happen. I do not accept that the SNP's Scottish army would be able to guard Scotland's vast coastlines.

No. If the SNP got its way, there would be no British Army, no Royal Navy and no Royal Air Force. The withdrawal of Trident is part of a greater SNP policy that would leave Scotland defenceless. Its idea for creating Scottish defence forces is to take over all serving Scottish military personnel and to move them to such forces. For the Army, that would mean that there would be six infantry regiments, with minimal logistical back-up and support. Our Scottish regiments have done more than punch their weight. Scottish soldiers are feared as fighters and respected as peacekeepers. However, the SNP's policy would condemn those highly trained men from the best army in the world to a career providing a guard outside Alex Salmond's presidential palace, like some low-grade Ruritanian flunkeys. The Scottish defence forces would be unlikely to take part in peacekeeping or to join other forces in missions across the world, because the SNP's policy is to leave NATO. The economic effects of scrapping Trident would be devastating. Between Faslane and Babcock, some 7,000 jobs would be lost. Thousands of people in Helensburgh and Garelochhead would lose their jobs at Faslane, and many other communities would suffer. What would the SNP do about those job losses and the resulting devastation of local economies? A reasonably prosperous area of Scotland would become a wasteland. On the one hand, we hear that the SNP wants to encourage a vibrant economy. On the other, it is willing to throw away 7,000 jobs at the drop of a hat to increase its appeal to SSP voters. The SNP would like to get rid of our nuclear deterrent, but I believe that it is fundamentally wrong. It is good for our democracy to have the deterrent to counter the threat of dictatorships with nuclear weapons. Unilateral disarmament by the UK will never bring about disarmament by aggressive dictatorships or rogue states. The best way in which to keep the peace is to promote the spread of democracy from a position of strength. That is what Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan did so successfully when they ended the cold war.

The member says that she wants to keep the Scottish regiments and yet at the same time she wants to disband the British Army. How can she square that?

Does the minister accept that the operators of small hotels, bed and breakfasts and other small businesses are the backbone of tourism in Scotland? Does she also accept that the local knowledge that used to be supplied by the area tourist boards may be lost as a result of the new set-up? What does she intend to do to prevent that from happening?

Will the minister explain why carrying petrol in jerrycans is suddenly not allowed? After all, jerrycans are designed for the safe carriage of such fuel. How are the islanders of Lismore meant to cope without petrol?

My colleague James Douglas-Hamilton eloquently described the deficiencies in our education system, and I agree with him. I wish to draw attention to the state of some school buildings, especially those in the Argyll and Bute Council area. If we want to encourage teachers and pupils to attain higher goals, it is imperative that school buildings are properly maintained and continually updated and, at the very least, that they do not fall below civilised standards. Last Friday, I visited Hermitage Primary School in Helensburgh, which is Argyll's largest primary school. Although I was impressed by the atmosphere that prevailed among teachers and pupils, I was appalled by the state of the building. There were damp patches on the walls and leaky ceilings in some of the classrooms. Children had been moved out of those rooms, creating overcrowding elsewhere. In the corner of one classroom that was being used, foliage was growing through the floor—I do not think that it was an environmental sciences project. The state of the toilet facilities left a great deal to be desired, and the dining room was in the gymnasium. I have yet to visit Arrochar Primary School but I am told that its building is in an even worse condition. Dunoon Primary School's building is also in a bad way. Those three schools were all in the original non-profit distributing organisation scheme for rebuilding, which initially included 28 schools in Argyll and Bute. I welcomed that scheme, but in July 2004 the council reduced the figure to 17 schools and in January 2005 it further downgraded the list, which now includes only 11 schools. In addition to the three schools that I have mentioned, many other schools are in a bad structural state and require urgent maintenance. The catch-up figure for repairs alone runs into eight figures, and Argyll and Bute Council, which has a school estate that comprises 95 schools, is in the unenviable position of having to find that money. I hope that there will not be talk of tests of proportionate advantage and a threat of schools closing. Good local schools are pillars of local communities and wherever possible they should be maintained, but they must be maintained in good condition. Argyll and Bute is only part of the story in the Highlands and Islands and many other councils face similar problems. There is obviously a crisis that urgently requires a solution. In rural areas, people often have little choice about where they send their children to school. Some parents are therefore forced to send their  children to schools that have substandard buildings. The situation is intolerable and must be remedied as soon as possible. A society in which some children are educated in comfortable surroundings while others are forced to experience deprivation of the kind that I mentioned is hardly an inclusive society.

An enormous number of schools—all with flat roofs—were built in the 1960s under the Macmillan Government and the Wilson Government. They are all falling to pieces now; they have not been properly maintained by Labour. The Conservatives are committed to introducing choice into education for all Scotland's children. The current situation allows choice only if parents can afford to pay for it either by moving to an area in which their preferred choice of school is situated or by sending their children to a private school. We think that things should change. No matter how much Mr Peacock denigrates the Swedish education system, it is still interesting to observe the results of educational policy in Sweden, which has a socialist Government. New organisations can apply for funding to the national agency for education, and if they meet the required conditions, they can set up new schools that are independently run but Government-funded. That policy has been successful, especially in rural areas.

No—I am sorry. Initially, the largest number of applications was for schools in urban areas, but three of Sweden's northernmost municipalities—which are at or above the Arctic circle, in the rural and sparsely populated county of Norrbotten—are now among the municipalities with the largest share of students in Government-funded independent schools. The Conservative policy of allowing the setting up of new Government-funded independent schools has often been criticised as a policy that would benefit only urban children. However the Swedish experience clearly shows that a policy of allowing new schools to be created, with Government funding, where they are desired allows exactly that—the creation of good schools where they are wanted and needed. In answer to Elaine Murray's explosive outburst, I inform her that new schools have been so popular  in socialist Sweden that, since 1993, their number has increased by 480 per cent. Such a policy would be good for schools in both urban and rural areas and would safeguard schools that are threatened with closure. In turn, our rural communities would be helped to remain vibrant and active and young people and families would want to live in them. As I said, the local school is a strong pillar of the community and schools with good reputations draw people to the surrounding area. Therefore, they are a focal point that can encourage the repopulation of much of Scotland. Our policy will mean that such things happen.

The Scottish Conservatives congratulate Franz Ferdinand on winning the best British band and best rock act awards. The band is an excellent example of the flourishing Scottish music industry and a reminder of Scotland's long tradition of cultural accomplishment.  Franz Ferdinand were the first band since Oasis to be nominated for five Brit awards in a year and their appearance at the world-renowned international music festival south by southwest in Texas is another indication of how music from Scotland has gained popularity around the globe. Almost 50 per cent of the Scottish acts that applied to take part in that festival were accepted, which is a higher percentage than from any other European country except Ireland. That is an indication of the strength and quality of Scottish pop music. Franz Ferdinand is just one example of how the contemporary Scottish music industry is prospering. The list of Scottish pop heavyweights is endless and includes Alex Harvey, Lulu, the Bay City Rollers, Texas, Primal Scream, Wet Wet Wet, Travis, Belle and Sebastian and Snow Patrol, to name but a few. The success of Franz Ferdinand is a real Cinderella story, considering that most of the big labels refused the band's original demo tape. They were eventually picked up by a small private recording company called Domino and have since taken America by storm, which is normally regarded as the pinnacle of success by the industry. They also won a celebrated Mercury award and an NME award, which illustrates how good their music is, because nominations for those awards are made by musicians. Franz Ferdinand and Belle and Sebastian are living proof that Glasgow is one of the world's most stimulating centres of music. Time magazine lauded Glasgow as the "secret capital" of pop music and described the city as having an "embarrassment of (musical) riches". Many people believe that, for years, the music scene in Glasgow has been brilliant, although it is only now getting mainstream publicity. The Scottish music industry contributes about £110 million a year to the Scottish economy and has huge potential for growth. The luminaries of Scottish popular music also demonstrated their generosity and sense of civic duty when Franz Ferdinand and Travis headlined a Scottish tsunami relief concert that raised more than £300,000 for the victims of the Asian tragedy. Scottish contemporary and popular music still has room for growth, and many quality Scottish bands and acts are only now being discovered. The Scottish music industry is a burgeoning example of the creative and innovative nature of the Scottish people. However, the Government of Scotland must do what it can to allow the Scottish pop industry to flourish. As we speak, it faces the threat of illegal downloads, which will cause the industry serious financial setbacks if they are allowed to continue unchecked. The Scottish Executive must support incentives such as iTunes, which allow for legal  downloads and create a new revenue stream back to the label, the artist and the publisher. MP3 players such as iPods are stylish systems that produce good business, but it is important that the new systems contribute to the success of the music industry, rather than undermine the livelihoods of artists and recording companies. The Executive should encourage the industry with a lower-tax economy, which would keep our musicians and artists here in Scotland.

The Conservatives are quite happy with the changes to standing orders, which will help the commissioner for public appointments in Scotland,  Karen Carlton, to do her job properly. She has to come up with a code of practice for the making or recommending of appointments to public office by Scottish ministers, and she must ensure that her strategy encourages equal opportunities. I also agree with much of what Alex Neil said about removing patronage from the system. The commissioner must report to Parliament any case of non-compliance with the code of practice, and she may direct Scottish ministers to delay making an appointment or recommendation until Parliament has considered possible breaches of the code. Each year, she must lay before Parliament a report on what she has done. At the moment, there are no standing orders to allow for such procedures. After taking evidence from the commissioner in December, the Procedures Committee agreed on a course of action. Measures were necessary because it was unclear how a breach of the code of practice would be dealt with procedurally. It was also unclear how the requirement to consult Parliament on the code and the equalities strategy would operate in practice. I shall not bore Parliament by repeating the recommendations that Karen Gillon has ably put forward. We are happy to support them; the substance of that support will be seen in due course.

The minister will be aware from previous questions that Scottish Water's new waterworks have produced particularly offensive odours in the Argyll towns of Inverary and Campbeltown. Does he realise the effect that that can have on tourism, on which those towns rely? What will he do to  prevent such a situation from happening again? What will he do about the places that are in that situation?

John Gold of the Scottish Schools Football Association has said that "The greatest frustration for those who are trying to provide football and develop the game at grass-roots level is the lack of suitable playing fields." How can the minister justify the sale of sports pitches and other sports facilities when, in 2002, the New Opportunities Fund for physical education and sport allocated £52 million to local authorities to develop sports facilities for school and community use?

Will the member take an intervention?

As an MSP for the Highlands and Islands, I am fortunate not to encounter many examples of racism, although taunts are sometimes heard about white settlers in the Highlands. Those taunts are often directed at people who have sold up in the south of England and moved into an area where their ideas may not initially fit in with those of the native population. That sometimes causes friction and jealousies, but Highland people are normally extraordinarily welcoming. They extend generous hospitality and accept new cultures into their midst with open arms. The attitude that there are no strangers here, only friends whom we have not yet met, is good. Harris and Lewis have a large Pakistani community that has been there since the first world war and has adapted wonderfully well into local life. Italian communities all over Scotland make an enormous contribution to our society. Our ethnic minority population represents 2 per cent of Scotland's population. In the 10 years from 1991 to 2001, the total population increased by just 1.3 per cent, but the ethnic population increased by 62 per cent. That shows that people want to make their homes in Scotland. However, the situation could be much better. If we had a better infrastructure for living and a lower-tax infrastructure, which would really encourage people to start new businesses, Scotland would be a far more popular destination for incomers and a place where more of our young people stayed. The figures that I quoted, which show that the increase in immigrants dwarfed the increase in the native population, demonstrate that many Scots are leaving Scotland because it is too difficult to make ends meet and bring up a family with hope for a future.

I will certainly not apologise for remarks that the First Minister made about my colleague in Westminster.

The First Minister should apologise to my colleague. The Scottish Conservatives want to attract more people to Scotland and we want our own talent to stay. The only way to do that is to create a climate of economic opportunity and growth, rather than waste resources on gimmicks such as the fresh talent initiative. That means reforming our public services, freeing up our economy and liberating entrepreneurs to become smart and successful again. Those are fundamental points that the Government will not address. Scotland could be the best small country in the world if it had a decent Government that allowed that to come about. The Scottish Conservatives oppose racism in all forms. We will always try hard to eradicate any racist problem in Scotland. A well-organised and controlled immigration system is vital, rather than the chaos that we have witnessed lately south of the border.

No. Labour's policies have led people to think that as long as they can reach British soil by whatever means, they will be looked after. The lack of a properly organised policy may have inadvertently led to such terrible tragedies as the deaths of the Chinese people who were suffocated in a container and the deaths of the Chinese cockle pickers who drowned in Morecambe bay.

Not at the moment. It is a bit much for the Executive to bring its fresh talent initiative into an anti-racism debate. All that it is doing is trying to make political points. Home Office minister Des Browne has made it clear that the fresh talent initiative was not designed to remedy Scotland's population problem and is in fact a Home Office pilot scheme, which, if it succeeds in Scotland, will be extended throughout the UK. In other words, Scotland is being used as a guinea pig by Tony Blair.

I do not have time to take an intervention. Conservatives believe that defence of the nation's borders is a prime responsibility of government, but the Government has failed in its duty to police our borders. We believe in immigration and that modern Britain has benefited greatly from the social diversity, economic vibrancy and cultural richness that immigration has  brought. The energy and zeal of the young people from the European countries that were recently liberated from the communist yoke are a wonder to behold. Equally, they think that our democracy and freedom are a prize worth chasing. However, if the benefits of immigration are to continue, we need to ensure that immigration is managed effectively, in the interests of all Britons, old and new. If we are to maintain good community relations, the number of new citizens whom we can welcome must be well planned in advance and well controlled. That will help to make certain that those who arrive on our shores get the starter support that they need. Conservatives certainly believe that Britain should take her fair share of genuine refugees who are fleeing persecution, because we all have a moral obligation to help people in those circumstances.

I would have thought that the Scottish Executive would have learned a lesson after its mathematical incompetence caused the Highlands and Islands to lose objective 1 status and millions of pounds of grants. Allan Wilson has denied that £21 million might have to be repaid to the European Union. Will the First Minister give the Parliament an assurance on the issue, given that all the 14 projects that were inspected failed the auditors' initial inspection test and that a second inspection by the European  Commission is due shortly? Is this yet another appalling equation produced by the Executive's financial mismanagement?

Does the minister agree that the policy that the Forestry Commission used to pursue of bringing in clients for stalking within its areas and getting income from red deer was a good one, as opposed to the present policy, which appears to be that the only good deer is a dead deer?

Does Rob Gibson think that it is right that the Deer Commission for Scotland should not have appointed anyone from the Scottish Gamekeepers Association to its board?

I declare an interest: I am a member of the Inverary and Tyndrum deer management group. I am glad that we are debating deer management in the chamber and congratulate Nora Radcliffe on bringing that about. There is no doubt that the herds of red deer that inhabit Scotland's Highland regions are an important part of our national heritage and a tourist attraction. They must be managed in a way that makes the most of this valuable asset, rather than reducing the monarch of the glen to the status of vermin. I take the reference in the motion to "collaborative work on responsible deer management" with a large pinch of salt, because, frankly, that is not happening. The recent indiscriminate massacres of deer in Glen Feshie, on Ben Lomond, on the Cobbler and at Braemar are acts not of responsible management, but of barbarity—truly offensive acts that have disgraced the name of stalking and offended most people who are involved in deer management. There are too many deer in some parts of Scotland, but that is not the case throughout Scotland. Recently, deer numbers have dropped considerably in many areas. Management of deer should be controlled by the workforce on the ground, advised by the local deer management groups that are already in place. Deer should be culled carefully, by taking out the old and infirm animals. That should be done as it always has been done—by professional stalkers who either shoot the deer or instruct their stalking clients on which deer to shoot. Wherever possible, culling should take place in the existing stalking season. The main reason for culling should be the improvement of the red deer herd. Not only were the recent deer massacres that I have mentioned indiscriminate, but the methods that were used—the evidence of which can be seen on Scottish Gamekeepers Association videos—are abhorrent to anyone who has the welfare of Scotland's red deer at heart. It is important that the public should be told the facts about the tragedy that is unfolding amid Scotland's wild and beautiful places. The motion refers to "the contribution that sustainable deer management can make"  to rural employment and public benefit. I recognise that contribution and have nothing against habitat regeneration. However, I believe that the open hill environment that has been sustained for centuries through sensible stocking ratios of deer and sheep is far preferable to the impenetrable, tick-infested tundra that soon grows up where grazing animals have been removed. I speak from personal experience, as someone who has walked many of the high Highland mountain ranges, and know that I echo the thoughts of most experienced hillwalkers. I have nothing against habitat regeneration that promotes the growth of pine forests and deciduous trees in some of our glens, but from practical experience I know that that is impossible without deer fencing. I do not understand the present attitude of the Forestry Commission. Unfenced young trees act as a honeypot for deer from miles around and will be munched in the same way as an unfenced field of carrots will be munched by rabbits. Those who say that traditional deer fences kill bird life should remember that fences can be marked and that there is now the option of low-lying electric fencing, powered by solar panels, which is extremely effective. Failure to fence young trees is sheer madness that can lead to the savage slaughter that has upset many right-minded people of late.

Does the member agree that road accidents are caused not so much by deer as by people driving at too high a speed?

Countries with good economies generally have low tax regimes and good infrastructure: that is a fact. In the Highlands and Islands, one area stands out as a beacon of prosperity—Inverness. It was because of that, coupled with what I can describe only as the absent mindedness of the Scottish Executive, that the Highlands and Islands lost objective 1 status. The area had become too rich, on a per capita basis; yet, it is an area in which workers still have to be bought in from outside to fill job vacancies in the city. In looking at the economy, we have to ask what made Inverness do so well. The answer is blindingly obvious: it is accessible by road, air and rail. From the moment that the A9 was made into a decent highway, Inverness and the surrounding area prospered. Accessibility is the key, and therein lies the big lesson for the Scottish Executive, which says that it wants to increase prosperity: it must improve access. In the west, the A82 should be the main route to the Highlands; however, despite eternal questions and rhetoric in the Parliament, there is still a traffic light on the 9-mile stretch between Tarbet and Inverarnan. That piece of road is a disgrace. It should be the main gateway to Oban and Fort William, but it languishes in the state of a third-world bullock-cart track. It is a dreadful advertisement for Scotland.

I cannot give the exact number. I will have to get back to the member on that. Equally, the A83, which heads westwards from Tarbet, through Inverary and down towards Kintyre, is in a bad state and is full of potholes. A good infrastructure will bring investment and prosperity: that is true for ferry links as well as roads. I ask the minister what is happening regarding the new linkspan for ferries in Oban. Why is it not yet in place? Eighty per cent of ferry journeys in Scotland commence in Argyll and 700,000 people passed  through Oban last year, on their way to different holiday destinations. Why is there no help for that valuable part of the Scottish tourism economy? Access is the key, and a good infrastructure grants that access. Mr Wallace must often use NorthLink Orkney and Shetland Ferries. Why is NorthLink having to re-tender four years early?

No. The current tax infrastructure also disadvantages businesses in Scotland. How can small businesses cope with a business rate that is 10 per cent higher than the rate in other areas of the UK? That level of business rate is unnecessary and it is especially unfair on those who have small, independent businesses, which are the cornerstone of the Scottish economy. They do not need instruction from the Scottish Executive on how to run their businesses; they need less red tape, less tax and a better infrastructure. Even bureaucracy-bound Brussels has just announced its intention to reduce red tape. The Executive must do it here. Our salmon farming industry, for example, faces nine regulatory bodies, whereas the industry in Norway has a one-stop shop. The present set-up discourages business, and the fact that there are more businesses in Birmingham than there are in Scotland is not surprising. We have a bloated public sector that accounts for 50 per cent of GDP, which is a very unhealthy situation that must be unsustainable in the long term. We are lucky that the previous Conservative Government gave Scotland such a good deal through the Barnett formula, because that is what is keeping Scotland afloat. Our figures for growth and for tourism consistently lag behind those of the rest of the UK. Our young people leave because they do not see a sustainable future in Scotland, yet Jack McConnell calls for more people to settle in Scotland. That is okay, but why does his Executive not do more to keep our own young people here by enticing more Scots to return home to start up businesses here? The countries with economies that are doing well are invariably countries that have low tax and low levels of Government interference. Why will the Scottish Executive not understand that ever so basic reality? The Executive can produce glossy brochures, but it is useless at delivering action to help businesses and the Scottish economy. Another infrastructure-related factor that is holding Scotland back is the vast increases in costs that Scottish Water has passed on to business. That is holding back house building and projects in vital areas. Council plans cannot go  ahead because of Scottish Water's limitations, which act as a break on development. Scottish Water achieved only 38 per cent of the score of the worst-performing water company in England. If the Executive fails to get to grips with a proper energy policy for the future and fails to make its mind up soon about where our power will come from, we run the risk of the lights going out as well. It will be a case of "O power of Scotland, when will we see your lights again?"

Jim Mather extolled Conservative values but, unfortunately, he will not be able to carry his party with him. Murdo Fraser pointed out what Scotland could do—

I am afraid that I am in my last minute, but I will give way, if I am allowed to do so.

Richard Lochhead went on about oil, but oil is finite. This morning, Shell reported record profits because an oil shortage has led to huge price increases. However, Shell has replaced only 50 per cent of the oil that it used. Murdo Fraser pointed out what Scotland could do economically if we had the right policies. The sooner we have those policies, the better we will perform.

Tapadh leibh, Oifigeir-riaghlaidh. Tha am Pàrtaidh Tòraidheach a' cur fàilte air Bile na Gàidhlig (Alba) agus tha sinn a' cur ar taic ris an-diugh. Leanaidh mi orm anns a' Bheurla a-nis.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  Thank you, Presiding Officer. The Conservative party welcomes the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill and gives it our support today.  The member continued in English.  It was Michael Forsyth, during a Conservative Administration in the early 1980s, who poured £16 million into Gaelic and kick-started the engine into life, creating interest and jobs in an area that had stagnated and had been ignored for far too long. It is high time that a further injection of enthusiasm was directed towards Gaelic by the first Scottish Government for 300 years. One has only to look at the map of Scotland to understand the importance of Gaelic. In the place names lie the roots of Highland culture and, of course, of Dalriada, the first kingdom of the Scots. Scotland should encompass its own language, which has been well used in promoting songs and poetry that are unique in their excellence and individuality. Poets of the stature of Duncan Ban McIntyre, who wrote the classic poem "In Praise of Ben Doran", and Sorley Maclean, who wrote the classic "Hallaig" about the Isle of Raasay, where he grew up, are giants in their field. The Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill is a golden opportunity to develop Scotland's linguistic and cultural diversity and to advertise the richness of Scotland's cultural history. Gaelic music is alive and well, as can be seen at the Mòd and other festivals, such as Celtic Connections. However, not enough people are speaking Gaelic. The sad thing is that Gaelic  lasted as a main spoken language for 12 centuries, from the fifth to the 17 th centuries. It was the main language, certainly in Highland rural areas, until the early 17 th century, when it was outlawed by the Crown—a Scottish Crown—in 1616. Ironically, it was not the English who banned the speaking of Gaelic; it was the Scottish Parliament's education acts of 1616, 1646 and 1696 that stipulated that English was to be the medium of instruction for Highlanders. "Forgive them, for they know not what they did" must be the epitaph for that ill-thought-out dogma, which did untold damage to a proud language and culture. Less than 100 years ago, children were beaten for speaking Gaelic in the playgrounds and had their mouths washed out with soap. Therefore, it is up to this new Parliament and our Scottish schools to redress the wrongs of the past and give a beautiful language and a rich culture a chance of survival. It is important that the peripheral rural communities in which Gaelic is still spoken have the infrastructure that will allow them sustainability, because culture grows from a population that lasts for several generations. For example, many Gaelic songs stem from the Harris tweed industry. For Gaelic to survive, young people must become interested and a new generation of Gaelic speakers must be born who take pleasure in using the language. Much depends now on Bòrd na Gàidhlig. It will be up to the bòrd to come up with initiatives that rejuvenate interest in Gaelic. Gaelic language and culture are important, rather than the bòrd itself. I believe that, in a year or two, there should be a review of what the bòrd has achieved to ensure that the £360,000 per annum that it will cost is achieving benefits for Gaelic. We Conservatives would like to ensure that Bòrd na Gàidhlig maintains its aim "to facilitate, not to coerce." The bòrd should be an independent language development body rather than a tentacle of Scottish Government. If Gaelic is to survive, the bòrd must identify ways in which people would be willing to use Gaelic in their daily lives in different parts of Scotland. There is a great general wish among Scots to preserve Gaelic, but there has been very little instruction so far on how we as individuals can help to achieve that aim. If the Gaelic language is to flourish, Gaelic-medium teachers must be available and there is a distinct shortage of them. The advantages of Gaelic-medium teaching should be promoted positively to graduates who have the postgraduate certificate of education and to existing teachers. Gaelic should be linked to history teaching. Archaeological and historical tourism are growth  areas that could be linked to Gaelic. Gaelic could be very important indeed for Scottish tourism. The bòrd will ensure that councils meet the demand for Gaelic where the need exists, but the difference between the demands of people and the needs of the language is a key point if Gaelic is to have the chance of survival. Only a small percentage of people now speak Gaelic, so it would be easy for councils to say that demand is very small. That might suit the council's budget, but it would not suit the needs of a language and culture still fighting to exist into the future. Only when the number of Gaelic speakers has once again multiplied can Gaelic be looked upon as any other language. As long as the language is in the high-dependency ward, extra care and attention and extra resources will have to be used to make it healthy and vigorous once again. A dedicated television channel showing Gaelic programmes at peak viewing times would make a difference. Broadcasts of good Gaelic music and poetry are important, and the West Highland Free Press , the Stornoway Gazette and West Coast Advertiser and "Gairm" have done a good job. I see the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill as an important project that must be carefully watched, because failure this time will mean that Gaelic speakers will gradually drift away and the language will become like Latin or ancient Greek. That is the situation that we are trying to avoid. I exhort the members of the bòrd to remember that the reason for their existence now is to ensure that the Gaelic language and culture exist and flourish in the future. They have a tremendous task. Wendy Alexander was correct to highlight how important the bòrd members' ideas and decisions will be. They have a huge responsibility and I am sure that they will not let us down.

Does the minister agree that one of the main causes of aggravation in football stadia is the sale of sectarian flags, t-shirts and other mementos, and that more tactful control could and should be exercised over the sale of such products?

Does the minister recall that the Edinburgh International Festival was initially based on opera? Indeed, does she acknowledge that Scottish Opera has been an icon of excellence for Scotland for a long time? Furthermore, is she aware that it languishes at the bottom of western league tables as far as funding for opera is concerned? Will she free up some of the money that has been ring fenced for arts in Scotland to ensure that it receives more funding in the way that the Jonas report identified?

I congratulate Mr Ingram on securing this  important debate on the future of the Robert Burns national heritage park. Robert Burns is probably Scotland's most important cultural figure and his lasting impact can be clearly seen in the celebration of his life that takes place annually on 25 January. Alex Neil was quite correct to say that the celebrations are not restricted to Scotland; I know of Scots from Moscow to Timbuktu who have recited Burns and worn kilts—probably incorrectly, but they are flying the flag for Scotland. Burns's verses have been sung down the centuries and they speak directly to each generation. His grasp of human nature never fades or dates. Burns is contemporary to each generation and probably always will be. Shakespeare also had that gift, but Burns was by far the better songwriter. We would all agree that the situation that Mr Ingram outlined is not only undesirable, but a disgrace. However, we also know that the situation is all too common in Scotland: cash-strapped local authorities are snowed under with underfunded Executive initiatives and the resulting ring fencing of much of local authorities' budgets leaves them with little to spend at their own discretion. With insufficient money being allocated from the centre to cover the Executive's policies, local projects end up being cut. Local authorities have a responsibility for the preservation of their local heritage. In the case of the Robert Burns national heritage park, South Ayrshire Council appears to have experienced problems in fulfilling that part of its remit, but I am not sure that any of the current participants should shoulder the blame. We are seeing important parts of our heritage crumble away for want of funds. The matter urgently needs to be addressed, but the Executive has yet again placed more costs on local authorities in the past year without providing extra funding. That can lead only to further above-inflation council tax rises. I am encouraged that the minister met representatives of the National Trust for Scotland today to discuss the possible involvement of the National Trust in a plan to secure the long-term future of the Burns national heritage park. The National Trust has some interesting ideas for the creation of a national Burns centre and a Burns trail, which could attract increased numbers of visitors to Alloway and south-west Scotland. I sincerely hope that all those who are involved in the project can work together to make that vision a reality in time for 2009, which will be the 250 th anniversary of Robert Burns's birth. The current situation whereby our national poet's home and an important collection of his works are funded piecemeal by hand-to-mouth donations should not be allowed to continue. It is a disgrace that we are seeing the slow decline of  such an important part of our cultural heritage. What, I wonder, does VisitScotland think about the situation? As Chris Ballance rightly pointed out, Burns should be a tourist treasure. We must remember that Burns was part of the Scottish enlightenment—that wonderfully exciting time when an explosion of new thought and culture shaped not only Scotland but much of the rest of the world. Burns played his part in the transformation of Scotland from one of Europe's poorest nations to one whose thoughts shaped the future of our modern world. Today, we stand at a similar crossroads. We should look to the genius of Burns and that of his contemporaries, such as David Hume and Adam Smith, to inspire us as they inspired so many people in the past. The preservation of Burns's heritage is our responsibility and duty. We must not fail the memory of this cultural giant.

I will raise an issue that is particularly relevant in my region of the Highlands and Islands: flooding and the impact of climate change on the sea. As an Argyll man I am used to heavy rain, so let me start by saying that we have to be careful that we do not jump to conclusions on climate change. It would be easy to say that the terrible storms of last week, the flooding across large areas and the many landslips in the spring and early summer that are caused by heavy rain are the results of climate change. However, where I live on Loch Awe the water has never reached the level that it did in 1957. In the same region, we had a decrease of 30 per cent in rainfall in 2003. Nevertheless, one only has to have seen pictures from last week's storms, or from areas where flooding is a regular problem, to be concerned about the impact that our climate can have on our lives. In some parts of the Highlands and Islands the start of heavy rain nowadays raises fears of rivers and burns rising and the possibility of homes and businesses being ruined. The 2004 report by the Association of British Insurers on the future impact of climate change on flood defences and requirements notes that claims arising from storm and flood damages in the United Kingdom doubled, to £6 billion, in the  period from 1998 to 2003 compared to the previous five years. The association believes that damage claims from river and coastal damage could increase from £1 billion a year now to £20 billion a year by 2080. Last Friday, David McLetchie was in Moray to visit the Lhanbryde flood alleviation scheme, which is one of six schemes in Moray that are desperately needed to deal with flooding. The Lhanbryde scheme is close to completion and should be operational in April. However, it is the only scheme that has been started and Forres and Elgin are likely to have to endure the fear of flooding for some time to come. Although the other schemes are likely to happen, the issue of how Moray Council funds the schemes is on-going. The Scottish Executive has said that it will pay 80 per cent of the cost of the schemes, but that leaves Moray Council responsible for 20 per cent of £140 million, which is £28 million. Flood alleviation will be a problem for councils.

The conclusion is that some of these things have happened before. Only yesterday, I visited Lochgair in Argyll to see the site of the new sewerage system proposed by Scottish Water. Despite vocal opposition from local campaigners, Scottish Water ignored residents' concerns that the loch floods above the level of the planned new septic tank about every 10 years. Lochgair residents knew that the scheme was not suitable and told Scottish Water so, but they were ignored. Thankfully, yesterday Argyll and Bute Council rejected Scottish Water's application. Scottish Water's blasé attitude to the consequences of its actions could have led to local homes being flooded with sewage. That has happened in Campbeltown, Inverary and other areas in the west and is the kind of local disaster that could be avoided if action such as that which John Swinney suggested were taken. During a recent Campbeltown flood, businesses had to shut and pump out water. Flats and a nursing home were cut off and people's livelihoods and homes were put at risk because a suitable scheme to deal with excess water was not in place.

No. Many local people have worked hard to supplement the natural beauty of their areas and improve tourism, but they cannot do that if they  are not supported by Scottish Water. The hard work that has been done is being put at risk because the Executive and Scottish Water are letting problems drag on while the debate continues about who pays for what, and when. The Executive said that the problem was Scottish Water's. It passed the buck, which I think is a shocking indictment of the Lib-Lab Executive's attitude to rural communities; it simply washes its hands of the issue and hopes it will go away, but it will not. On our coastal defences, the tragic deaths in the Western Isles last week highlight why we should be concerned about the effects that climate change might be having on our seas. The inter-governmental panel on climate change predicts that the global mean sea level might increase by 79cm between 1990 and 2100, which could have devastating consequences for low-lying coastal areas, and that all coastal areas might experience severe weather conditions such as those of last week. What we need from the Executive is adequate flood and storm damage prevention. We need more research into why flooding is becoming an increasing problem. We need to know whether it is the result of climate change or simply the poor planning of new housing developments—building on flood plains—and deforestation. We need to consider the root causes of flooding to determine the best way of dealing with it in future. We need the Executive to do more to allow Scotland to adapt to the new climate that we are experiencing. The Executive needs to ensure that sufficient warning procedures are in place for any future storms and that sufficient funding is available for flood prevention as well as for encouraging innovative solutions. We need action from the Executive, because, like the sewage in Campbeltown, the issue is not going to go away. It is interesting that many of the landslips that took place in Scotland in the spring and early summer of last year were in areas from where the sheep stock had been removed. Perhaps stock removal should not be undertaken without considering landslips. The landslips might not have happened had the stock been left where it was.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Does the member accept that Denmark, which relies very heavily on wind energy, has the most expensive electricity prices in Europe? Certainly, its electricity is more expensive than ours.

rose—

The First Minister has just affirmed his total support for the exciting British bid for the 2012 Olympics. In order to silence the alarm bells that have been sounded by those in this Parliament who hold parochial views, will he outline further the considerable benefits that will accrue to Scotland and Scottish athletics from a British-based Olympic games?

The minister will be aware that Fort William has secured the mountain bike world championships in 2007, against strong bids from Australia and Canada. As mountain biking has brought an Olympic sport to the Highlands, will the Scottish Executive be reviewing the highly successful bidding techniques used by that sport, in order to inform the bid for the Commonwealth games?

To stop the present flagrant abuse, in some areas, of this country's angling laws, which can be damaging to our salmon, sea trout and brown trout stocks, will the minister move to introduce a close season for non-indigenous rainbow trout, in line with that for our native brown trout? Further, will the minister give a commitment that forthcoming legislation on freshwater angling will not weaken the current legislation, which helps fishery managers to protect their fish stocks, the environment and their freshwater fisheries?

Will the minister give way on that point?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I agree with much of what Jamie Stone says. However, the point that I was making is that surely information on the differences between the various areas can be supplied only by local professional tourism operators who live and work in those areas and not by an Executive view that is thrust upon them.

We agree that promoting the long-term growth of Scotland's tourism industry will provide economic benefits for Scotland. After all, tourism is Scotland's largest industry. However, the Executive's plans mean that ATBs will be replaced by 14 local tourism hubs that will be responsible for delivering the national strategy—in other words, the Executive's strategy—in their areas. Businesses will not pay membership fees, but will buy those commercial packages that they wish to buy. The current system of local authority grants to ATBs will be replaced by partnership agreements between local authorities and VisitScotland. Before committing itself to the restructuring, why did the Executive not solve some of the problems that the ATB members were already facing? The whole process has been dogged by uncertainty and indecision and there are still unanswered questions. In particular, how can funding for the new hubs be guaranteed without membership status and what will happen to local tourist information centres? Along with many people in the industry, we are concerned about the loss of local knowledge and expertise. The ATB network has branded VisitScotland's management style as "centralist and hierarchical with no ability to meet local needs". The network is also most unhappy about the "completely inadequate consultation with ATBs about the proposals."  The tourism industry has had to endure endless Executive tinkering, along with a big drop in visitor numbers. We believe that the proposed structure is flawed, but I suppose that it must somehow be made to work in the best interests of the industry. That will be difficult, because the fundamental problem with tourism in Scotland is that the Executive, as in so many other areas, behaves as if it were the role of Government to lead the industry. Consequently, the Executive pursues an interventionist approach; it is obsessed with restructuring and strategy launches. Each minister—of whom there have been plenty—has been determined to make their individual mark rather than to create a climate in which Scottish tourism can thrive. We have ended up with a flawed new structure, which the Executive and VisitScotland claim will provide a raft of benefits, including that of stopping different ATBs exercising petty jealousies against one another. Many people in the ATBs have raised concerns, especially about how the restructuring has been handled. Robin Shedden, who is the chairperson of the Scottish area tourist board network, said: "One of the major justifications for the whole re-organisation was the need to introduce funding stability at local level. We do not see how the proposals for the new structure will provide this. Indeed we fear there is a real risk of things getting worse as membership income ceases with no guarantee that the shortfall will be covered by additional commercial income ... furthermore there are no guarantees that local authority funding will be sustained at its current level." It is not surprising that area tourist boards are upset, because they have not been properly involved in the building of the project. A growing number of trade associations and private businesses are expressing their concerns about the lack of representation, influence and participation that they will have in the new system. They are also unhappy about their lack of involvement in the project up until now. Carolyn Baird of Perthshire tourist board said: "We seem to be designing something for big businesses, which will welcome and be able to handle the system. However ... the majority of businesses that are involved in tourism are not big businesses. That is a major problem."—[ Official Report , Enterprise and Culture Committee , 23 November 2004; c 1316.] The remarks that I have cited were made by tourism professionals who know their industry inside out. We believe that it is an outrage that Scotland's biggest industry has had to suffer several years of delay and uncertainty because of the Executive's incompetence. The Executive's approach to restructuring the tourism industry is far too centralised and dictatorial and it will hamper rather than help tourism professionals. Why can the Executive not understand that local tourism operators know best how to promote local tourism attractions?

All right.

I beg your pardon—my last minute?

The Conservative party thinks that tourism is one of the chief drivers of the Scottish economy and that it must therefore be central to Government strategies that aim to boost enterprise. Why is tourism currently dealt with by the Executive's Education Department? We would create a department of enterprise that incorporated tourism, which would put tourism where it should be: firmly at the heart of Government enterprise policy. In order to raise the status of tourism as a career choice for young people, we would better promote vocational training in the tourism sector. We need professional Scottish tourism staff who take pride in the importance of their job. We would also invest an extra £100 million a year on roads and public transport in order to improve our tourism infrastructure. There is huge potential to develop historical and archaeological tourism and we would also seek to really promote Scotland as a destination for golf and other sporting events. We would encourage more marine tourism off Scotland's fascinating coastline and develop the freshwater and seawater angling that is first class in this country. Ultimately, the best way in which to encourage Scottish tourism is to give the maximum support to the development of our strengths and tourism assets instead of wasting resources on yet more centre-led strategies and restructurings. On 28 November, I went to Aviemore for Scotland's national tourism conference. I heard Bob Cotton speak for the industry and call for no more regulation, a better transport infrastructure and more vocational skills training. The minister heard him too. That is what people in the tourism industry want, minister—please give it to them. I move amendment S2M-2166.3, to leave out from "approves" to end and insert: "urges the Scottish Executive to pursue a more ambitious target for growth in light of the aggressive policies being pursued by competitor countries; appreciates that long-term  growth can only be achieved by ensuring that the marketing of Scotland in UK and overseas tourism markets is further strengthened and that the businesses that comprise the tourism and hospitality sectors are freed from the Executive's policies which are hampering business growth and enterprise throughout Scotland; regrets the uncertainty and consequent damage caused to the industry by the Executive's handling of the tourism network restructuring process; further regrets the potential loss of local knowledge and expertise that may result from the centralisation of the tourism network, and calls on the Executive to ensure that both the local tourist information centres and funding for the new tourism hubs are adequately protected once the new network commences in April."

I declare an interest in that I still run a sheep and cattle farm in Argyll. I congratulate Eleanor Scott on securing this debate, which is important to farmers and crofters throughout the Highlands and Islands. I remember hearing the Minister for Environment and Rural Development, Ross Finnie, urging the agricultural sector in the Highlands and Islands to add more value to their products. I heartily agree with that aim, and here is an opportunity for Lewis Macdonald to do something about it by encouraging more modern abattoir facilities in rural Scotland. It has been difficult to maintain abattoirs because of huge rises in water rates and in the cost of offal disposal, specified risk material disposal and veterinary attendance. State-aid rules and worries about competition displacement make councils cagey about investing in new facilities or improvements to existing ones, but if Austria can work within the rules why cannot we? The abattoir in Stornoway in Lewis, which Eleanor Scott mentioned, is open only from August to December, which means that after December the supermarkets and shops have no local meat to sell. They need an all-year-round abattoir service. In Skye, animals have to be taken 120 miles to Dingwall and the cost of killing a sheep works out at £24. An enterprising group of farmers and crofters is trying to set up an abattoir in Broadford, which would cover Skye and much of the adjacent mainland. In Argyll, animals have to be sent across the Clyde to Paisley for slaughter, which is a huge disadvantage. Highland meat is healthy, nutritious and free range. Its use should be encouraged in schools and hospitals to support healthy eating guidelines. Lamb burgers can be delicious and are popular with children. The local enterprise companies have financed reviews and they should now be supportive by helping to finance abattoirs, which will undoubtedly benefit the rural economy. Many farmers and crofters will take advantage of the opportunities that are afforded by the single farm payment by keeping less stock, but aiming for better finished quality. It is probable that many sheep farmers will keep wedders to a later age, as they used to in pre-subsidy days, rather than selling all the lambs at a young age. Niche marketing of local meat is important and I call on Quality Meat Scotland to highlight the meat from different regions as well as advertising the overall Scottish product. Areas such as Shetland  would benefit enormously from that because they have the product. The tiny Shetland chops disappear like gold dust from butchers' slabs and we need an increased supply. There is an example of good practice in Mull, where there is a community-run abattoir that includes a butcher's shop. Tiree has an abattoir linked to a butcher, which sells fabulous meat and the best potatoes that I have ever eaten. Such models point the way to more prosperity for livestock farmers. To sum up, accessible local abattoirs give farmers and crofters the freedom to farm and the freedom to finish their product, thereby gaining the added value that is often lost if lambs and calves have to be sold in the store markets. Local enterprise companies can facilitate local abattoirs and provide a real boost to the agriculture and food retailing sectors in local areas throughout the Highlands and Islands.

Will the minister give way?

During yesterday's Environment and Rural Development Committee meeting, I asked Mr Finnie why Iceland and the Faroes have such healthy fishing industries while our fishing industry is in such an unhappy state. He told me that my synopsis was untrue, as the Scottish pelagic industry was doing well. If I may say so, that answer was a red herring. We all know that the pelagic fleet fishes shoals of herring and mackerel all over the oceans—they have a vast scope of fishing territory. Moreover, the CFP management system of TACs and quotas works okay for pelagic fish, which swim in shoals, but it is a disastrous way of managing a mixed white-fish fishery in which different species swim together. I was referring to our white-fish, bottom-trawled industry, which is vital to the people in the north-east and the people of Scotland as a whole. We and Scottish fishermen do not believe that overfishing has been the main reason for the decline in cod stocks. A list of predators of fish stocks shows that other fish are the most prolific predators, and whales, cetaceans and seals come second. Seabirds such as gannets and cormorants take by far the greatest quantity of biomass. Fishermen take a small percentage in comparison. Why were those figures not included in the astonishing report by the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution, which painted Scottish fishermen in a poor light? Why did not that  commission concentrate its efforts on the genuine problems from pollution from the Rhine and the Ruhr, which is pouring into the south of the North sea? That pollution may well be a factor in driving cod further north. Why did it not make more of the high quota for industrial fishing? For days, the media have concentrated on that damning report, which is not so much about conservation, but seems to follow a political agenda to ban fishing altogether. At this particular time, the report will severely reduce Ross Finnie's case if he is to support our fishing industry in Brussels. The report actually suggests that people should stop eating fish. The UK consumes upwards of 150,000 tonnes of cod every year, but less than 5 per cent of that is taken in British waters—the rest comes from Iceland, Norway and the Faroes. I point out to anybody who is worried about a world shortage of cod that Faroes cod catches are up nearly 40 per cent. Of course, the Faroes have never been affected by a common fisheries policy. Are not they lucky?

Not just yet. Mr Finnie attempts to ridicule the idea that a Conservative Government could withdraw from the CFP and Richard Baker says that we would have to leave the European Union if we did so. That is another red herring. European countries with specific core interests that are being damaged sometimes have to flex their muscles. For example, France and Germany have consistently breached the growth and stability pact, which is a core European treaty requirement. They have not been expelled from the EU and neither would we be if we stood up for our fishing industry and pointed out to the rest of Europe that our fishing industry is a core industry that is being devastated by the wrong system of management.

No, not now. How does Mr Finnie think that Iceland managed to achieve its territorial waters? It stood up for itself against mighty opponents, just as David stood against Goliath. I do not need to remind members who won those contests. The fact is that Labour and the Liberals want to take us out of the CFP.

I am sorry. The fact is that Labour and the Liberals won't take us out of the CFP. The SNP cannot take us out of the CFP, but the Conservatives can and will take us out of it. We should not be timid and scared about standing up for our fishing industry. We should tell the truth  about the real reasons for the industry's problems and set about tackling the root cause without further delay. Mr Finnie's motion mentions "management controls that are ... fair". Will he please do something about the unfair situation that is faced by fishermen who fish the west of four area, whose quotas—especially for monkfish—have been unfairly slashed although the stocks appear to be perfectly healthy? Does he know that the Apollo Creed, which is Scotland's newest fishing vessel, was recently forced to fish 240 miles to the west of Ireland because she had used up her pathetic quota and had nowhere else to fish? In those far-offshore and highly dangerous waters, she was hit by a gigantic wave and sustained more than £500,000 worth of damage. Members of the crew were lucky not to lose their lives. That they had nowhere else to fish and that they should be forced into danger is not fair, especially when one considers that the monkfish quota in area 7—which, incidentally, the Spanish fish—had been greatly increased. When Mr Finnie is in Brussels, will he or Mr Bradshaw kindly point out that the 11.5 per cent increase—or 12,700 tonnes—in the prawn quota that is suggested by the fisheries research service is the minimum increase and that there is ample science to show that we could allow for an increase of at least 15,000 tonnes? Will Mr Finnie demand that increase? While he is about it, will he point out that the derogation that applies to the west coast and North sea prawn vessels that caught less than 5 per cent of cod, sole and plaice has astonishingly disappeared from the regulation? It was there in 2004 and now it has gone without any explanation. That is a scandal. It will be interesting to see whether Mr Joe Borg takes any notice of the opposition of the North sea regional advisory council to the Commission's proposals for a number of closed areas. That will be a test of the effectiveness of regional advisory councils. At least Mr Borg comes from Malta, an island community, and it is to be hoped that he will understand the fishing industry better than did his predecessor Mr Fischler, whose fanatical obsession with the cod recovery plan damaged our fishermen so much. I wish Mr Finnie the greatest possible good fortune in his pilgrimage to Brussels. I remind him that Mr Borg will probably know more about lampuki than he will about haddock, but anything will be better than more red herrings.

I gather that the minister has commissioned an appraisal under the Scottish transport appraisal guidance for the Lochboisdale to Mallaig route, which infers that it would replace the Lochboisdale to Oban route. Is that the case?

I have been reminded of a saying that was attributed to John Stuart Blackie, who lived in Oban at the turn of the 19 th century:  "The earth belongs unto the Lord And all that it contains; Except the piers of the Western Isles; For they are Davey MacBrayne's." That may be an amusing anecdote, but it sends shivers up the spines of would-be competitors that will have to pay the pier dues and levies that CalMac—or should I say the vessel-owning company?—will charge. We must ask what the point is of a tender process for the main bundle of routes. All that it has produced is confusion and worry among people who depend on ferry services and among CalMac staff. The most important achievement would be to have a ferry service that offers best value to customers and to people who live on remote islands and who rely on their lifeline services. Therefore, a deal must be struck between what is necessary and what is efficient and cost-effective. That key issue, rather than bending over backwards to satisfy European rules, should be foremost in the Scottish Executive's mind.

No. We welcome competition between ferry operators when demand exists, as on the route between Gourock and Dunoon, but compliance with the European tender process for the main bundle of routes will not benefit ferry customers, the people who live on the islands or the people who live in the coastal communities. Once the tender is set in stone, it may well become a factor that drives up costs and leads to less reliable ferry services. One of the most important considerations is flexibility of services, which means the ability to change routes, their timing and their destinations according to islanders' varying needs. There is always room for improvement. To give CalMac its due, it reacts to demands from the public, albeit sometimes slowly. CalMac cannot please everybody everywhere all the time, but it attempts to do so, which above all requires flexibility without constraints. The tender, once written, will cut flexibility and increase constraints. Every day since 1973, Western Ferries has run an excellent service on the Clyde between Gourock and Dunoon. The ferries run until late at night and work out of hours in cases of medical emergency. Western Ferries carries nearly 80 per cent of vehicular traffic across the Clyde and would obviously like to provide the residents of Dunoon with improved quality of service. Whereas in the past new vessels for CalMac were subsidised to the tune of 75 per cent, that has become impossible under European rules. It is impossible to discover how much of CalMac's  subsidy is spent on the route, because that information is commercially sensitive and therefore confidential, but it is obvious that the route can make money, as has been shown by Western Ferries, which operates with no subsidy.

No. The residents of Dunoon are fortunate in having two options for vehicle ferries and no monopoly and it is understandable that they do not want their services to be downgraded. Dunoon is a gateway to the new Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park and every effort should be made to make Dunoon one of the main gateways to the Highlands. The most important point is that the people who live on the Clyde and the west coast should have reliable and constantly improving ferry services that are run by a company that has intimate local knowledge and experience of the waters, which must be classed as among the most dangerous in the world. The Executive can learn lessons from the sorry saga of NorthLink, whose contract to provide lifeline services to Orkney and Shetland should have lasted until 2007, but which has had to be retendered more than three years early because the funding did not fit the job. Passengers and businesses have suffered because of the Executive's incompetence in safeguarding a suitable service for the northern isles. The latest debacle over the minister's yes-no approach to approving NorthLink's new timetable has added to the confusion. If we are to be forced into a tendering process for the main bundle of routes, can we have one that allows innovation? The ferries are vital to our islands from Bute to Lewis. Let us put Scottish people before European Union rules.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister say whether CalMac will be able to tender for the unrestricted route?

Will the minister give way?

The member says that there is over-regulation. However, the Scottish Executive, of which Liberal Democrats are a part, has done nothing to lessen that regulation in six years. Why not?

I apologise for missing the opening speeches and I am grateful for the opportunity to speak. I declare an interest in that, in the early 1970s, I was one of the pioneers of cage farming technology, albeit in fresh water for rainbow trout. In those days, fish farming was an exciting new industry that promised to bring employment and prosperity to remote regions of the Highlands and Islands. Indeed, salmon farming blossomed, but it became a high-tech industry that was financed by big business. It has had its ups and downs, its supporters and opponents, but it is still an important employer and it produces one of Scotland's largest and most recognised quality food exports. Therefore, the Scottish Executive must do more to help the climate in which the industry can flourish. It can do that by listening to the industry's pleas and to those that have been made in the Parliament. We want an aquaculture framework that allows the industry to be competitive. The industry needs less bureaucratic regulation and one active, useful body, rather than the eight bodies that currently oversee it. It needs a quicker processing system for applications for medicines to control diseases and parasites, such as sea lice. I hear what Robin Harper says about wild salmon and sea trout, which are enormously important to Scotland, as is the wild-fish angling industry, but I take issue with him if he is saying that the Scottish fish farm industry is being irresponsible. Things have changed. Scottish Quality Salmon has done a great deal to develop a code of practice and better husbandry. Its policy of fallowing, coupled with the use of medicines such as Slice, has had remarkable results. Has Robin Harper spoken to the scientists of the fishery trusts, who have been working with salmon farmers under area management agreements? If not, he should do so, because he would learn that there have recently been notable improvements in the runs of salmon and sea trout in many areas on the west coast thanks to the scientists' work and co-operation from fish farmers, who, with the scientists, are finding a way of breaking the sea lice cycle that has been damaging wild fish and, of course, farmed fish. Sea lice are a major pestilence to the fish farming industry and eradication of the problem is just as important to the industry as it is to wild-fish interests. It is vital that the industry, which injects more than £100 million a year into local pay packets in rural Scotland, should be encouraged in a way that allows it to prosper in sustainable co-existence with angling and shellfish interests. There are not many job opportunities in the  Highlands and Islands, so if we wish to promote integrated rural development in our remoter areas, we must recognise that fin-fish farming and shellfish farming are remarkably important industries.

I have been to several meetings of the fishery trusts that have been set up in Argyll, Lochaber and the Western Isles. They are all working together with fish farmers to provide a product so that people in rural Scotland can continue to have the jobs that Robin Harper's party seems to want to do away with. I cannot understand his position when he talks about knocking back an industry that is vital for remote rural areas and that enables people to continue to live in rural areas and work at something that will provide a culture for the future. We Conservatives will support aquaculture, both fin fish and shellfish. We hope that the Scottish Government will put more research and development into ways of improving the industry for all concerned.

Does the minister agree that it seems to be the Ballycastle end that continually holds the project up? If the proposal falls through, will the  minister consider a link from Campbeltown to another port in Northern Ireland, such as Larne?

The member referred to the crofters in his constituency. Does he agree that a different form of marketing should be employed? Rather than marketing produce as organic, some of the animals should be marketed as free-range, because it is so difficult to become organic. A great deal of the land in the member's constituency is virtually organic already, as are the animals on it.

George Lyon talks about getting back the margin from the processors, but he said that the main margin was with the supermarkets. How does he intend to get the margin back from them?

When the minister is speaking to her Westminster colleagues, will she bring up the point that the water has been further clouded by the Competition Commission, which is totally against the type of fixed-price scheme that the bookmakers have been using up to now?

In no way do I or the Conservative party wish to enter into a legal dispute between two parties. However, I cannot help feeling sorry for the victims of the argument between bookies and pools companies: the ordinary clubs throughout the United Kingdom. Those clubs are loved by their fans and are the grass roots of football, but they are trapped in a fight between pools companies and bookmakers, without any direction, support or encouragement from the Labour Government. I do not particularly want to politicise a members' business debate. However, Tony Blair and company—and the Scottish Executive—have been issuing statements about getting rid of obesity by making youngsters more active and saying that they are encouraging initiatives to involve people in active sport, but what is a better active sport than football and who will fund those initiatives if the clubs do not exist? Ours is not like some European countries, where the game is subsidised—in Italy, the Prime Minister, Signor Berlusconi, owns A C Milan—although Prime Minister Blair is a dedicated Magpies supporter, which I know because I have read of his fantastical anecdotes of Newcastle United Football Club matches that he attended when he was a boy.  I am not privy to the past negotiations between the pools companies and the Government, but sensible arrangements have been agreed, such as the extra funding from the pools companies for all-seater stadia in return for less betting duty after the Hillsborough disaster. However, in 2003, the Labour Government allowed the three pools companies to cease funding the Football Foundation charity, which used to get 3 per cent of the income of gross stakes. What a shame. That body has done much for the grass roots of football, including the domesday book project that set out to assess the conditions of all the grounds, buildings and facilities in order to make a database for the United Kingdom. The Football Foundation has had its funding stopped, but the Government's sports and arts councils still get their 3 per cent of the gross stakes; those bodies—regrettably—seem more concerned with the glamour of the top clubs than with the potential seedcorn from which it all comes. I am not surprised that the 114 football clubs that are not part of the Premier League are bitter when they receive so little help or direction from a Government that does not practise what it preaches and does not seem interested in the muddy origins or the blood and guts of most of the football that is played in this country. The Government must realise that, since 1881, football has been part of British culture—especially Scottish culture—and that success or failure in football can affect the morale of our nations and every city and town that has its own football club. Football Dataco, which, since 2001, has collected the licence fees that the pools companies and the bookies pay, has explained to me that, although the pools companies would like to switch to a fixed-rate levy like that enjoyed by the bookmakers, it wants the bookies to be on the same system as the pools companies. The pools companies have a valid point: not only has their income dropped, but they pay more than £3 million annually, whereas the large bookmakers have been paying only £22,000. The pools companies cannot want to prevent the clubs from flourishing, but we now have a situation in which Football Dataco is in conflict with the bookies and the pools companies, so no one is paying any money into the internal mechanism that distributes money down the family tree of football and provides the less-well-off clubs with revenue that is vital to their existence. If they are already strapped for cash, the SFL clubs will find it hard to fund a court case, which would only be likely to line the pockets of lawyers. I agree with Roseanna Cunningham that a compromise is needed. It surely would be more sensible for all concerned—the pools companies and the bookies, which would both benefit from the nation's love of football—to sit down with  Football Dataco and sort out a fair way of putting enough back into the goose that lays the golden egg to keep the goose laying and the smaller clubs playing.

Karen Gillon said that members' bills should never be held up by narrow political interest. I agree with her. There is no doubt that time invested early will produce a richer harvest. I also agree with her that there needs to be more dialogue between committees and perhaps more sharing of evidence taking. The committee rooms in this building are large enough to allow that to happen. It is all well and good for members of a committee to reach a consensus about who should represent the committee at another committee's meeting at which shared evidence is to be taken, but I defend at all costs the right of any committee member to attend and speak at such a meeting. That should be set in concrete. I listened to Bruce McFee's contribution and I am sure that his description of himself as a "tail-ender" is far too modest. He made a good point about lead committees holding dialogue with subsidiary committees at an early stage before timetables are set. Donald Gorrie talked about the need for a more robust system and said that we must be strong enough to withstand pressures and take enough time to scrutinise bills. I agree with him. It is worth taking the time to get something right. The Procedures Committee recommends a change to standing orders to make the Executive memorandum on delegated powers in a bill a mandatory document. That is a good idea, as is the recommendation that revised explanatory notes be provided four days before a stage 3 debate, which would greatly help the understanding of amendments to bills at stage 2. A revised financial memorandum would also be extremely helpful in circumstances in which the financial implications of a bill are changed by amendments at stage 2. Pauline McNeill made those points well. It is vital that the Presiding Officer should have flexibility at stage 3. He can help to redress difficult situations that arise at stage 3, which can be unpredictable, as members know. He should have the discretion to allow more time for a debate if it is perfectly obvious that that is needed. [ Applause. ]

In order to improve the opportunities for members and others to participate in the making of sound legislation, it is necessary to allow enough time for the purpose of bills and the consequences of amendments to them to be fully understood by all concerned. It would help a great deal if lead committees consulted other relevant committees before a timetable is agreed with the Parliamentary Bureau. At least two months should be allowed for the submission of written evidence and the consideration of oral evidence, and committees should be able to share that evidence. I agree with the Procedures Committee's recommendation that there should be a minimum of a week between the publication of a stage 1 report and the holding of a stage 1 debate. The Conservatives also agree that the minimum interval between stage 1 and stage 2 should be increased from seven to 11 sitting days, as that will give members an extra week to digest the points that have been raised at stage 1 before they tackle the complications of stage 2. At stage 2, we face a problem that many people highlighted, especially in relation to the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill and the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Bill, which is that there is not enough time to digest and understand some amendments well enough to comment on them. An interesting example of that occurred during consideration of the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Bill. The Environment and Rural Development Committee received a written submission from the Scottish Gamekeepers Association that referred to amendments that had been lodged on Monday 26 January, which were not published until Tuesday 27 January and which were to be debated at the committee's meeting at 10 am on Wednesday 28 January.  In his letter, Alex Hogg, the chairman of the SGA, explained that the SGA committee was made up of full-time professional wildlife managers whose remit was to advise parliamentarians of any adverse or other effects that proposals might have on rural employment, wildlife and the countryside and to recommend considered amendments to support the rural spectrum. I point out that the SGA can afford to employ only one full-time member of staff to assist it. Given that the nature of the work of SGA committee members means that they are usually outdoors from the crack of dawn to late in the evening, it proved impossible for them to respond to amendments and to prepare briefing notes for relevant committee members in time for the meeting. As the SGA has been extremely useful in explaining the practical effects of amendments to bills that relate to the countryside, I consider that its evidence is particularly relevant and that its complaint should be taken seriously by the Parliament. If we are to be open and accessible, it is important that practical people from all backgrounds are able to understand what an amendment means and what consequences it will have, especially if they have been asked to submit evidence and are involved in the bill process. Cloudy water takes time to settle, just as complicated amendments take time to become clear. The point is that it is clear that the current procedure discriminates against the busy working person and so is against the ethos of the Scottish Parliament. I hope that that example will encourage members to support the Procedures Committee's recommendation to increase the notice period for amendments that are lodged at stage 2 from two days to three days and to bring forward the deadline on the final lodging day from 2 pm to 12 noon. We Conservatives agree with the recommendation that when a committee holds two or more stage 2 meetings in the same week, only the lodging deadline for the first meeting should apply. We also agree that a minimum interval of nine sitting days between stage 2 and stage 3 should apply to all bills, not just those that have been amended. I am glad that the First Minister highlighted the fact that bad law has resulted from a process that was too rushed. He said that he sometimes felt uncomfortable about taking the whole of stage 3 of a bill in a single day. There have been occasions on which major amendments have been passed, but there has been no time for them to be considered before the bill was voted through that same afternoon. We agree with the recommendation that the notice period for lodging amendments at stage 3 should be increased from three days to four days and that there should be a  single lodging deadline when stage 3 is to be taken over two days. More time should be allowed for stage 3 proceedings and more flexibility should be built into timetabling motions to allow the best use of the time that is available. We agree that the Presiding Officer should be given discretion to take account of which members should be allowed to speak as proceedings unfold. It is also a good idea to have a new rule that will allow a member to move a motion to extend a timetabling deadline. We believe that the changes, which are based on the experience of our new Parliament, will help to avoid bad law and will secure sounder law for Scotland in future.

I appreciate the point that the member is making, but how will she get members to read the entire consultation?

I thank the Deputy Presiding Officer for having the radiators turned down. The changes in procedures will enable NEBU—a very helpful body—to be even more helpful. Iain Smith pointed out that the bureau would not be the appropriate body to prioritise members' bills. As he said, parliamentary resources and time are finite. I have always felt that we should have evening debates, because that would greatly extend debating time. However, that is an argument for another day. We Conservatives felt that the status quo of a threshold of 11 supporting members was all right. However, given that other members suggested a threshold of as many as 30 supporting members, we were inclined to accept a compromise of 18. We hope that bills will go through NEBU. However, if they do not, the draftsmanship will have to be of a sufficiently high standard to equal that of NEBU. Mediocre drafting can cause delays and misunderstanding in valuable committee and parliamentary time. I will take Cathie Craigie's advice and look at the consultation process for Karen Whitefield's proposed Christmas and new year's day trading in Scotland bill, because it is only through experience that a new Parliament can learn. The First Minister told us to raise our game. One way of doing that would be to change procedures that do not work properly and to produce procedures that are as fair as possible to anyone who takes part and that other Parliaments envy.  We do not want a situation in which an individual does an enormous amount of work only to be trumped by the introduction of a similar bill by the Executive. It would be good to know more details about the Executive's legislative programme further in advance. The Executive should tell a member if it has similar plans. I understand that the Executive has picked up Margaret Mitchell's proposed sexual grooming of children (Scotland) bill, which deals with a serious matter of great importance. I congratulate it on doing that. Donald Gorrie gave the examples of how he had been headed off on licensing and sectarianism and said that the Executive working party was useless. That is surely a waste of public time and money and an example of bad practice. I find it difficult to understand Donald Gorrie's proposal for special debates. Who would introduce such debates and what time would be allowed for debating them? Is there a process in Westminster or another Parliament that allows for that kind of debate and, if so, will he give a fuller explanation of his suggestion?

Before the non-Executive bills unit was created, members and committees had access only to limited support from the legislation team and the Scottish Parliament information centre, or to any outside assistance that interested organisations were prepared to offer. That was considered to be inadequate, and NEBU was created early in session 1. The unit is made up of dedicated and experienced clerking staff and Parliament lawyers, and its role is to assist members and committees through the development process and to train members in the right way to hit the ball through the hoops without being croqueted too often by technical or legal snags. As we know, the process is complicated. A small amendment can easily turn into a long- winded bill as a result of the follow-on of the effects and impacts that it produces. It is important that opportunities exist for legislation to be created by bodies other than the Scottish Executive. There are already good examples of useful legislation that has been instigated by individuals and passed by the Parliament. That said, it is necessary to manage the process properly, so that the number of bills that come forward does not lead to a traffic jam in the system, or to bills not receiving enough attention and support because the process is too rushed. There must some sort of sifting and prioritisation, but the Conservatives do not think that the Parliamentary Bureau is the appropriate body to carry that out. However, there is no reason why it should not influence the process by considering the outstanding bills annually and making recommendations to the Parliament as to whether they should be accepted or rejected. Members who submit bills can receive assistance from experts on the parliamentary staff, and it would greatly help the process if members undertook responsibility for the consultation process. That process will give the member a good indication of support for or opposition to their bill at an early stage and it may allow them to drop their proposals if too great a degree of opposition has been exposed during the consultation process. There are currently 40 proposals for members' bills, which is already more than there were in the entire first session. Obviously, that will put an enormous strain on NEBU and stretch the limits of its capacity to cope. The head of that unit, David Cullum, has said that NEBU's current capacity is having four bills running and four bills in preparation, although it somehow managed to cope during the final year of the previous session, when it handled seven bills simultaneously. As a result of the consultation process, many proposals do not result in the drafting or introduction of a member's bill and it would be wrong if a decision of the Parliament made it more difficult for members to introduce a bill. Although it is perfectly acceptable for members to draw support from outside the Parliament's resources, thereby relieving the burden on those resources, such support must be of an expert nature if it is to benefit the process. Of course, it is not only NEBU that is stretched by too many bills; the parliamentary timescales into which bills have to be fitted are also stretched. It has been suggested that we should establish special committees that would be like the committees that are established to consider private bills. However, such a measure would place extra burdens on members' work schedules.  Members should not be restricted to introducing only one member's bill per session. Very few members will have the time or energy to manage to introduce more than one bill, but the proposal might prevent an excellent idea from coming forward in the shape of a bill. It is important that weak and pointless proposals should be sifted out at an early stage, before they take up the valuable time of NEBU and the committees of the Parliament. Matters such as the legislative competence or adequacy of drafting of a bill should be sorted out early, so that lead committees need not conduct a stage 1 inquiry for a bill that contains a basic flaw. A bill should contain no such flaws by the time it reaches the lead committee. The rule changes will ensure that that is the case. The purpose of a member's bill should be to facilitate an improvement in the lives of Scottish people, rather than to act as a public relations stunt to get a member's name into the newspapers.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I do not know whether other members agree with me, but it seems that the chamber is unreasonably hot.

The minister might be aware that in a recent survey by the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, three quarters of the respondents said that national marketing campaigns either had no visible effect on visitor numbers or led to a decrease. In the light of that devastating statistic, will she assure the Parliament that both she and VisitScotland will greatly increase its co-operation with the industry in deciding how best to use the new funds?

In the light of the revelation that Scottish Water is not accepting any new connections in Campbeltown, what is the Executive doing to encourage the Scottish Environment Protection Agency to allow developers to install alternative disposals for sewage, such as septic tanks and reed-bed systems, when no mains drainage is available from Scottish Water? Many housing developments are being held up or abandoned because of refusals by Scottish Water and SEPA.

On Vestas at Campbeltown, can the minister tell me whether there has been any progress in improving the pier facilities to allow more of the equipment to be carried by sea? Is anything happening regarding the Ballycastle to Campbeltown ferry, which could also be used by the industry?

I was slightly surprised by the Green member's remarks about the decline of the oil industry because, with oil at more than $50 a barrel, the industry is doing pretty well at the moment. Maybe that was just wishful thinking on behalf of the Green party. As an Argyll resident, I am fully aware of the importance to Campbeltown of the Vestas factory at Machrihanish. I am glad that the company's aim seems to be to make more turbines for the offshore wind farm industry. It is up to the Scottish Executive to find opportunities to facilitate more sites for offshore wind farms, which may take the pressure off some of the great beauty spots in Scotland. Such beauty spots might not be helped by having a wind farm on their doorstep because that would hurt tourism. A sensible compromise is needed and it is up to the Scottish Executive to work that out. After all, it is in a position to do so. I agree with what John Farquhar Munro had to say about the importance of burying cables if possible. I know that underground cabling has been used a great deal in France. I am told that it can be as much as 30 times more expensive, but surely there is an opportunity for our industries to look into methods of burying the cables. That would be a clever thing to do. One has to remember that all those wind farms have to be backed up by conventional methods of generation—one must never forget that fact. I would like to ask the minister whether, following the forestry debate that we had the other day, he will say a little bit more about the possibility of actually doing something about using biomass, rather than just talking about it.  I end by agreeing with Fergus Ewing's remark about the RSPB. I often cannot quite understand why the RSPB complains so much about the death of the occasional raptor when it seems to have no compassion whatsoever for the hundreds of small birds that the raptors kill.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

As a native of Argyll, I am acutely aware of the contribution that Scotland's forestry has made, and continues to make, to the economy. However, many changes have been made in the forestry sector in the past 40 years, some of which have been good and some of which have been not so good. I well remember when the villages of Eredine and Dalavich, which were built specifically for forestry on Loch Awe in Argyll, were populated almost entirely by local people working for the Forestry Commission. There was pride, spirit and a strong sense of community. Those villages, along with many others, were built when modern forestry in Scotland was in its infancy and they certainly contributed to the employment of local people in remote areas. The situation now is completely different. Hardly any forestry workers live in those villages; a primary source of local employment has gone. However, the news is not all bad, because over the past 10 years Forestry Commission Scotland has become more receptive to community engagement and to sourcing jobs within the forestry industry and locally. That employment factor is vital now, given that the value of the product is hardly economic. West Argyll forest district produces 400,000m 3 of timber, which supports some 300 jobs between Southend and Kilmelford. The timber transport group network has made progress on linking up forestry roads to carry heavy lorries that would otherwise damage public roads. In future, such roads may well be used as forest drives, which will stimulate the tourism sector by attracting motorists and the increasing number of cyclists and mountain bikers. They are a very good way of opening up more of Scotland's splendid scenery to the general public. However, I have heard concerns from forestry groups that the funding for the strategic timber transport fund that Fergus Ewing mentioned, which will receive £13 million over three years, is simply not enough. Although that funding is welcome, it may not be enough to prevent trees from being landlocked in the future.  There is also concern that the Executive's cutback in funding for public roads has meant that forestry producers are not being allowed to use many of the roads that they would have expected to use, which has added enormous cost to the industry.

I am referring to the cutback from the original Conservative programme, which I think is a cutback of 100 per cent. The carriage of timber by sea has been another plus point as regards getting heavy lorries off the road network. Both the piers at Campbeltown and Ardrishaig are being used; indeed, Ardrishaig is bursting at the seams and cannot cope with extra tonnage. On that note, I ask the Executive to consider redeveloping more piers on the west coast, such as the pier at Furnace and the piers on islands such as Mull, Skye and Jura, which hold an enormous amount of timber. Rail transport should be further used for timber, but I am told that forestry groups are finding it hard to motivate English Welsh & Scottish Railway to facilitate timber transport by rail. The Executive must help with getting more timber carried by rail. The biggest problem that forestry faces is undoubtedly the price of timber, which is about half of what it was seven years ago; even then the price was thought to be bad. I understand some of the reasons for that, which are to do with imports and exchange rates, but it would seem sensible to extract as much added value as possible and to source more markets in local areas that are close to the site of timber production. A glaringly obvious way of extracting benefit would be the use of biomass to obtain light and heat, a subject on which I have questioned the Executive on several occasions over the past five years. Much of Europe has made use of biomass on a large scale, but all that the Executive seems to do is talk about it. There have been significant biomass projects in Argyll, at Whitegates housing complex and the Lochgilphead swimming pool and through the efforts of Torren Energy, but it is essential that any major biomass project is thought through carefully and that there is supply to fulfil the demand. Biomass is certainly cost effective in comparison with most fuel systems, except possibly mains gas, but people will not invest in wood boilers if there is no ready supply of the fuel close at hand. Therefore, it would be advantageous if Forestry Commission Scotland encouraged more outlets such as the Auchencorvie sawmills at Campbeltown to make biomass fuel. That would be a good way of making the most of our forests.

I thank the member, but I think I mentioned that just before he got up.

I have already spoken about the tourism aspect and I congratulate the Forestry Commission on the work that it does to promote walking tracks. It is worth mentioning the Dalriada project, in which the Forestry Commission has linked with British Waterways Scotland on the Crinan canal and worked with Kilmartin House Museum and SNH to encourage exploitation of the culture and natural biodiversity of that area of west Argyll. Good forest management can help freshwater fisheries by making sure that burns are not canopied by trees, blocked by log dams or filled with silt. The Forestry Commission has been helpful to fishery bodies. I wish that I could say the same about its policy on red deer, which of late has involved all-year-round indiscriminate slaughter rather than discriminate seasonal culling. In the past, the Forestry Commission earned valuable income from deer hunters from both the UK and abroad. The forests produce notable heavy stags that provided a good source of lean, healthy meat, which was supplied by local game dealers. It is important for red deer to be seen as an asset of Scotland's forests rather than as vermin. If young trees are planted in an area—

—they will act as a honeypot, so it is necessary for areas of young trees to be properly deer fenced. Any practical forester will confirm that.

Bearing in mind that 8.5 per cent of Scotland's land area is owned by Forestry Commission Scotland, will the minister encourage community buyouts of forestry land?

I do not want to talk Scotland down; I prefer to talk it up and to show it as a fantastic place to visit for a holiday, an ideal place to bring up a family and a competitive place in which to do business. It is my firm belief that Scotland can be all those things, but it is not being helped by the Scottish Executive's policies or the action of its agencies and quangos. When we talk about Scotland's international image, we are talking about a beautiful land mass and a fine people. One of my favourite pictures came from a stained-glass panel on one of the early Caledonian MacBrayne ferries. It depicted a Highlander steadfast and strong with the motto, "You may break but never bend me"—an image of a brave, honest people who were incorruptible, an image crafted in the face of adversity and harsh weather conditions and an image based on pride in a culture and a history. Last week we debated the Scottish regiments. How much of that pride stems from their heroic efforts? One of the most recognisable images of Scotland worldwide is that of Scottish regiments with their pipe bands and tartan uniforms, yet we have a Labour Government that appears to want to do away with them. On the subject of uniforms, it puzzles me why the First Minister would want to portray Scotland's image on, of all days, tartan day by wearing a rustic blouse and a pinstriped skirt. It did not do much for the tartan industry, but to each their own international image. The international image of Scotland's land mass is portrayed by the magnificent open scenery in which dwells our rich diversity of plants and wildlife, including, of course, our monarch of the glen—the native red deer. What would people think if they knew that that icon of our Scottish international image was under threat of  indiscriminate culling by Scottish Executive agencies, whose aim seems to be to transform the Scottish landscape back into the jungle that our ancestors painstakingly cleared to form the foundation of our internationally famous agricultural industry? For that matter, members should look at what has happened to our internationally famous fishing industry. After five years under this Executive it has been decimated. Visitors have a mental image of Scotland before they arrive and experience it for themselves. They will leave with the impression of what they have seen, what they have heard and—dare I say it—what they have smelt. In many areas of my region, especially in the towns of Argyll and Bute, such as Campbeltown, Inverary, Rothesay, Dunoon and Tobermory, the efforts of Scottish Water to incorporate new sewage systems has had the effect of creating flooding and an offensive smell. I am led to believe that Scottish Water has said that it will accept no further connections in Campbeltown, which puts an unbelievable burden on the local council and anyone planning to expand. What does that do for Scotland's international image? A country is judged by elements of its infrastructure, and water and sewage are pretty basic elements.

Mr Raffan ought to admit that a smell of sewage certainly has something to do with image. In Scotland a visitor who is unlucky enough to be in the wrong place at the wrong time and smells sewage is going to think that Scotland is moving backwards. Visitors will also think that Scotland is moving backwards when they drive on many of the so-called A roads. Ever since Roman times roads have been one of the criteria used in recognising degrees of civilisation, and those who govern Scotland must realise the importance of a first-class transport infrastructure. It is unfair to those who try to promote tourism in Scotland that the basic infrastructure is not up to scratch. People do not necessarily mind driving on single-track roads, but they do mind their cars being damaged by potholes. What about Scotland's international cultural image? This year the Scottish Executive has emasculated Scottish Opera. What message does that send out from the country whose major festival—the Edinburgh festival—was originally based on opera? What message is the Executive  sending out to the international community by refusing to lift the ban on alcohol at Murrayfield stadium? The ban continues to lose Murrayfield major sporting events. We need more international events in Scotland. We need a visual arts festival to bring the international art world back to the country that once launched the enlightenment, and we need more sporting activity to ensure that we have a healthier population. If Scotland is to be a business leader again, we should listen to the business leaders who tell us that one of their chief concerns is the lack of appropriate skills among young people. The Scottish Conservatives will promote business-led vocational training at further education colleges. That training will give young Scots the skills to create businesses. Business rates must come down and people must be allowed to keep more of the money that they earn. That is how we will get young people to stay in Scotland. I am all for fresh talent, but what about the talent that is already here? Surely that should be encouraged. There should be less control and more incentives for entrepreneurs. Vocational training is needed in the tourism industry to ensure that people achieve a standard of excellence that makes them proud of what they do. The French or the Italians will hold a waiter's job with pride and, for them, to be a chef is something to be sought after. Yet somehow people in this country think that those jobs are undignified. What utter nonsense. Our food—our meat, fish, shellfish, potatoes, raspberries and so on—is the best in the world. We should make more of that image and of our brand. However, what has the Executive done with Scotland the Brand and the taste of Scotland award scheme? Scotland has punched well above its weight in terms of its international reputation. However, lately it has done so despite the policies of the Executive rather than because of them. Further, dare I say that one of the main reasons why Scotland has done well is that it is a member of the most successful partnership ever, the United Kingdom? On that point, I must say that I hope that the European Union has managed to rediscover Wales, which, although it will never be anything like Scotland, is also quite an important part of the UK.

On 18 December, I asked Frank McAveety, who was then the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport, whether he would support Richard Demarco's exciting concept for an equivalent to the Venice biennale in the visual arts. That idea has received support from the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art and the Scottish Arts Council. Is the minister aware that Liverpool plans to spend £50 million on promoting itself as a culture centre? Does she agree that that will be a threat to Scotland if Scotland is not prepared to make further investment in the arts?

Given that the real asset value of Hunterston and Scapa flow lies in their deepwater facilities, will the Executive ensure that any development maximises the return on those valuable assets?

Does the First Minister agree that the best way to promote Gaelic language and culture is through education and by giving them a higher profile in the media? What will the Executive do to fast track Gaelic teacher training? Will it promote a dedicated Gaelic television channel in Scotland?

I congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing a debate of such importance. At a time when Iraq's new ambassador to the United Nations has asked Britain to increase its forces in Iraq, when British troops are still required in Northern Ireland, Bosnia, Afghanistan, the Falklands and Cyprus—to name but a few—and when terrorism threatens peace and the democratic infrastructure all over the world, it is extraordinary that the British Government plans to cut four infantry battalions, including one Scottish regiment. It is outrageous, it defies logic and it is dangerous for the safety of our active service troops and civilians where danger exists. It is the wrong signal to give. The chancellor, Gordon Brown, a Scotsman, is refusing more cash for defence spending because equipment projects—including the Eurofighter—have gone over budget. One thing that we in this country know is that, although superfighters and stealth bombers can partially win wars, they have  to be supported by infantry, who are always needed to cope with the situations on the ground. It is the poor, bloody infantry who have saved our country so many times in the past and who often take the brunt of the casualties, without always getting their fair share of the glory. Those Scottish foot-soldiers, who have always been ferocious in attack and who have formed famous and formidable defences—such as the Argyll's thin red line in the Crimean war—now face the prospect of being wiped out by a thin red line from Chancellor Gordon Brown's pen. That is disgraceful. We have more to fear from Whitehall than from any other potential enemy. Senior Army officers have been muzzled and prevented from commenting on the proposed cuts in the regiments; nonetheless, Britain's most senior soldier in Iraq has openly criticised the plan. General John McColl, who is deputy commanding general of the multinational force in Iraq, has bluntly and bravely spoken out, saying that the size of the Army should be increased to allow it to cope with its growing number of commitments. That is a practical, front-line soldier speaking. If we are going to keep troops in Iraq until at least 2006—by which time there might, possibly, be Iraqi troops who can cope with the situation—it is vital to our Army's safety that it is at full strength, rather than being overstretched; otherwise, even more lives will be lost. Geoff Hoon must realise that before it is too late. I will not dwell on the undisputed honours and glories of the past history of our valiant Scottish regiments; Murdo Fraser and others have already done so eloquently. However, the territorial link of the different regiments is an invaluable recruiting tool and we underestimate it at our peril. All the rumbling uncertainty has had an adverse effect on the morale of Scottish servicemen and women. I end by saying that it is the primary duty of the Government at Westminster to ensure the security of our country and the safety of our civilians and armed forces. A policy of reducing our forces at this time is pretty well a dereliction of that duty and is certainly a disservice to the nation.

Earlier, I pointed out that funding for the active schools programme comes entirely from the health budget. Should not it come from the education budget? The member says that the health budget should be used, but surely the education budget should be used.

I have difficulty with the first point in the Executive's motion because we have seen no evidence that children are having "at least two hours of high quality physical education". The target is laudable and is included in sportscotland's sport 21 aims, but where is the evidence that the sport 21 targets are being met? The Executive has until now agreed only that that is one way forward. Earlier this year, Peter Peacock announced at Lasswade High School Centre that the number of teachers would be increased to 53,000 and that 400 extra PE teachers would be in place by 2007. That may be an Executive commitment to Scottish pupils, but when will it be implemented? We should have a date. When will we have a minimum of two hours of high-quality physical education in our schools? The sport 21 targets were set years ago. Why did the Executive not do anything then? Despite its commitment to activity, the Executive has hardly been active—mind you, it banned hunting with dogs, which provided active sport for many people in southern Scotland and the Borders. I am delighted that our Scottish athletes won medals at the Olympics, but it must be noted that they all trained south of the border and that the sports in which they succeeded are not the core sports that sportscotland promotes, except perhaps cycling. I understand that gold medallist Chris Hoy has said that he would train in Scotland if the new velodrome ever came into being, but as long as it remains one of the Executive's so-called commitments, he will have to train elsewhere. The national governing bodies of sport are screaming out for more help and encouragement. They involve the people who provide the wherewithal for most would-be athletes who want to take up sport. The national governing bodies must be properly funded to supply a steady stream of good Scottish sport talent from the grass roots right through the system, to provide candidates for the Scottish Institute of Sport to back.  The Executive's aim should be to produce a new generation of Scots who are fit and healthy and who consider sporting activity to be the norm. We want more people to play football rather than to think that they are participating by sitting on the sofa and watching it on television. We want to encourage people to walk and climb the hills of Scotland, to canoe and row the lochs of Scotland and to sail the seas around Scotland. This country has the most beautiful outdoors in the world. It is blighted only by the midge, but even running away from midges is an active sport.

That question is extraordinary. Scotland has never had a law of trespass of any kind. People walk all over the hills in Scotland and are never prevented from doing so. One matter that puzzles me is that since the report of the physical activity task force under John Beattie was produced, the Executive has committed to an active schools programme, but no funding for that comes from the education budget—it all comes from the health budget, which is somewhat stretched, as every member knows. Surely the education budget should be used to promote more sport in schools. After all, PE stands for physical education. The Executive has also committed to active workplace programmes, active community programmes and active home programmes. I hope that that does not mean that it will poke its nose into people's private lives any more than it has done already. However, no action has been taken on any of those three commitments; they are all empty words and hollow rhetoric and the Executive has failed to translate its rhetoric into action. Instead, it has preferred to pour money into unnecessary and overlapping layers of bureaucracy, endless consultation papers and quangos. A sporting Scotland would certainly be a more successful Scotland for three main reasons. It would produce improved health, make for stronger and more effective communities and inspire pride and economic growth. Unfortunately, Scotland's participation in physical activity is poor. Treatment of obesity and illnesses that are caused by physical inactivity is estimated to cost the health service £171 million a year. The Executive plans a ban on smoking, but before it does that it should surely consider the effects of junk food which, combined with a lack of exercise, is in many cases more harmful than tobacco.  The value of sport and competitive games in promoting responsibility, enterprise and engagement among young people cannot be overestimated. I was impressed by an article in a Scotland on Sunday magazine about what a teacher called John Herbert has achieved at Haghill Primary School in one of the more challenging areas of Glasgow. He has started a mountain biking club called the Haghill Dirt Dawgs. There is no doubt that he has inspired many pupils to feel proud about appearing in bike races all over Scotland. Mr Herbert realised that selling mountain biking as a healthy option would probably not work with the pupils of Haghill or any other school, but they found out that it was fun, which is why they do it. Mr Herbert had an idea that has grown from a little acorn into a mighty oak. At first, he took four or five pupils who enjoyed mountain biking and who persuaded their mates to go, too. Now, 35 pupils bike regularly. They have private sponsorship for equipment and—I am glad to say—that the local council is now helping with a trailer for the bikes. The moral of that story is that we will create a sporting and successful Scotland not by setting targets, distributing glossy bits of paper or having consultation meetings. It will be brought about by people such as Mr Herbert in Haghill. Money should be spent directly at the grass roots and private inspiration should be encouraged and rewarded. If Mr Herbert can do it, surely the new active schools co-ordinators should be able to do it. If they do not produce results, the Executive should consider whether they are value for money. What about our national game of shinty? It is a popular Scottish game, especially in the Highlands, which virtually relies on private sponsorship. Events such as the Ryder cup and the six nations rugby tournament act as catalysts for economic growth. Sporting events attract enormous numbers of visitors every year for the tourism industry, so if we are to be a successful Scotland, we must capitalise on our Olympic athletes' success and host more sporting events. The mountain bike world cup, which was staged in Fort William, attracted 8,000 spectators. A world-cup village was erected on the Nevis car park, which included a range of expo stands that offered for sale all the equipment that was being used. One local businessman said that his income for that weekend was £3,500, whereas his normal income is £300. That event was a huge success, in stark contrast to the Scottish Executive's golf strategy, which promised everything but delivered nothing. To finish—

I reiterate that we need physical activity and action from the Executive and not just mental commitments. I move amendment S2M-1733.3, to leave out from first "recognises" to end and insert: "laments the lack of significant progress made since devolution in increasing participation in sport; congratulates Scotland's sportsmen and women, particularly the medallists at the recent Olympics and those competing for medals at the Paralympics currently under way in Athens, Andrew Murray at the US Open and most recently Colin Montgomerie as part of the successful European team in the Ryder Cup; endorses the Scottish Executive's ambitions to attract major sporting events in Scotland, building on the successful rugby U21 World Cup; believes that the Executive's fixation with arbitrary targets and control of sport is counter-productive, and believes that, rather than over-spending on consultations, initiatives and glossy brochures, funding should be channelled directly to schools and national governing bodies to be spent on facilities and training."

I am surprised that the First Minister did not say more in his statement about the health service, because people in the west of Scotland north of the Erskine bridge are worried mainly that their health service is disintegrating. The downgrading of health services and the possible closures of medical units such as the Jeanie Deans unit in Helensburgh and of famous hospitals such as the Vale of Leven hospital are retrograde steps that will surely lower standards of living. The centralisation of acute and emergency services at the Royal Alexandria hospital in Paisley is not an acceptable option for people in Lomond, Helensburgh, Dunoon and south Argyll,  because those places are simply too far away. The disappearance of out-of-hours general practitioner services in many rural areas is causing great anxiety. For example, in the Eastdale practice in Argyll, which includes the island of Luing—which I visited the other night—one doctor was available locally out of hours to cover fewer than 1,000 people. Now they, and the whole out-of-hours service for north Argyll, will be covered by one doctor in Oban hospital, which means that there will be one doctor for 20,000 people. We must think about the extra stress that that will put on ambulances and ambulance service staff. Malcolm Chisholm says that the new GP contract offers doctors a choice. However, it is clear from the contract that that choice is stacked in favour of opting out and against opting in. Such an approach might work in urban areas, but it will be a disaster for rural communities. I want now to turn to Scotland's biggest industry, tourism, which accounts for 9 per cent of the Scottish work force. Despite the Executive document, "A New Strategy for Scottish Tourism", which was launched in February 2000; despite Lord Watson's tourism framework directive, which was issued in 2002; and despite the ad hoc ministerial tourism group finally reporting in March 2004 with its structure for tourism, the figures for tourism in Scotland are worse than those for the rest of the UK. For example, between 2001 and 2003, the number of European Union visitors in England rose by 1,806,000, whereas in Scotland the figure fell by 63,000. In 2003-04, that figure had increased by 276,000 in England but had fallen by 14,000 in Scotland. The numbers in London rose, despite the fact that the city would have been the most likely target for a terrorist attack. Under this Executive, tourist numbers in Scotland continue to fall. Scotland needs more direct affordable flights from outside destinations and a better road infrastructure to speed people north of the border. We must improve Scottish train services and ensure that the ferry services to our many islands are fully integrated and user friendly. The chairman of Oban and Lorn Tourism Association wrote to me recently to say that he believed that the loss of area tourist board membership will cause particular problems for Highland tourism because of the loss of local identity. He emphasised the importance of a major VisitScotland presence, namely an area headquarters to create a strong link between the organisation and the west Highland tourist industry.

No, I am sorry, but I cannot. I do not have the time.  The fundamental problem with the Executive's tourism policy is that it believes that it is Government's role to lead the industry. It pursues an interventionist approach and is obsessed with organisational restructuring and strategy launches, rather than allowing the industry to grow by creating a climate in which it can flourish. The Scottish Conservatives would invest more in Scotland's roads. We would try to bring common sense back into the procedure for keeping roads open after traffic accidents. Recently in the Highlands—especially in Argyll—there has been a spate of road accidents, many of them fatal, which is obviously very sad. However, it seems that often when there is a fatality nowadays major trunk roads are closed for hours and, sometimes, even days. Recently, an unfortunate motorcyclist was killed on the A85, which resulted in the road being closed for 11 hours at the high point of the tourist season. The Government must ensure that common sense is applied to keep things moving and that the blame-and-claim culture is not allowed to bring Scotland to a standstill. On sport, I am glad that the First Minister will meet the Scottish Olympic medal heroes tonight. I hope that the Executive will respond to their efforts by encouraging more sport in schools. I am sorry to say that our cultural image is in terrible trouble. It has been strong since the age of enlightenment, but the wrecking of Scottish Opera is quite disgraceful and makes Scotland's other national companies scared for their futures. If artists, musicians, actors and film makers are to flourish in Scotland, there must be more encouragement for the teaching of those subjects in schools.

I welcome the news about the new community hospital in Lochgilphead, but where will the psychiatric patients from the Argyll and Bute hospital in Lochgilphead go?

The review is disastrous. It is a draconian solution that is based on concern about financial budgets rather than on concerns for the health care of the people of Argyll and Clyde. It is obvious that the desire to retrieve the £35 million overspend has resulted in a totally blinkered approach that shows no awareness of the real geographical and logistical problems that patients and their families face. Why should people face continual downgrading of acute services? Nothing else is being talked about. Given that millions of pounds have been spent on the NHS, we should be talking about upgrades. The truth is that the review is all about mismanagement of money rather than about good management of proper health services for the people of Argyll and Clyde. If the review is carried out, it will have the effect of closing all acute services except those in Oban. Although closure there has been put on hold for the time being, people are extremely worried about the future of services. All emergency and out-of-hours services will be transferred to Paisley, but how will Paisley cope if that happens? In a supplementary to a question that I asked about Argyll and Bute health services, Duncan McNeil pointed out that the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley was already overstretched without its having to cope with a greater influx of patients. Surely it cannot be acceptable to the people of the west of Scotland, from Tiree to the outskirts of Glasgow, that all their health services are being downgraded. Even if the population diminishes, the situation will obviously not be enhanced by removal or relocation of adequate health facilities. People in Helensburgh, Dunoon, Campbeltown, Lochgilphead and Oban should be able to look forward to improvements in the facilities that they already have. Health should be more, not less, accessible and the standard of the services that are provided should be higher, not poorer. In spite of the overspend in Argyll and Clyde, there has been no significant upgrading of the existing facilities, which must be a cause of concern. Perhaps there was always a secret plan to centralise services: if so, people should be told. The health board has said that it needs to make tough decisions and the decisions that it has made are indeed tough for the patients and the  professionals in the hospitals. The review also says that decisions should be flexible enough to adapt to changing needs and new opportunities. Why cannot the NHS in Argyll and Clyde understand that, by removing local facilities, it is reducing the possibility of new opportunities, because the thrust of development is already limited? Mr Neil Campbell has told Oban hospital that it will not lose its acute services as long as it stays within its devolved budget, but why is the NHS Argyll and Bute hospital in Lochgilphead being threatened with closure? That hospital has provided vital psychiatric services for many years and has always worked within budget. What will happen to the people who require such services? Will they be sent to Dykebar hospital, which has a history of problems? That would be no solution. What will happen to the people of Helensburgh if the Vale of Leven hospital closes? They do not even have proper public transport to get to Paisley. The people of Dunoon are worried about what will happen if Inverclyde royal hospital is downgraded; their excellent maternity services at Dunoon hospital have already been downgraded. The unfortunate truth of the matter appears to be that, under the present Government, the only concerns of this aggressive health board are budgetary. The Government wants central control. There are 100,000 people in Inverclyde, 60,000 in the Vale of Leven and another 60,000 in Argyll. That adds up to 220,000 people, all of whom may have their services downgraded. For once, I agree with John McFall MP and Jackie Baillie MSP, who have been vocal in campaigning to defeat the health board's plans. People are losing trust in NHS Argyll and Clyde. Only last January, the medical acute assessment unit was opened at the Vale of Leven hospital. NHS Argyll and Clyde promised that it would be a model of care for the future and that it would be sustainable in the long term. Only six months later, the people in charge have changed their minds. How are people expected to trust the health board after that? In spite of the best efforts of the staff of the Royal Alexandra hospital, it is bursting at the seams. Devolution was meant to deliver a better standard of living for Scottish people, but the prospect of an acute-services-free zone between Inverness and Paisley after five years of Labour-Liberal Government will hardly achieve that end.

Is the First Minister happy that £300,000 has been spent to tell the people of Scotland that their national flag is an important symbol of their country? Will he be kind enough to tell us why he has scrapped Scotland the Brand, which was another important symbol in promoting Scotland?

I welcome the teachers and pupils of Lochyside RC Primary School, who are sitting in the public gallery, having travelled all the way from Fort William to be with us today. The school recently ran a voluntary project that involved a back-to-school day for MSPs, during which some members, including the First Minister, visited the school. The school raised £640 for global education. The good thing about the Executive's volunteering strategy is that it highlights the great work of volunteers in Scotland and the fact that the rate of volunteering in Scotland is higher than the rates in the rest of the United Kingdom and other European countries. Unfortunately, as usual, the Executive's control-freak mentality will work against all the good that Scottish volunteers have done. One of the key themes of the strategy is to make volunteering more socially inclusive, which demonstrates the Executive's mentality and its desire to control the voluntary sector from the centre rather than allow it the freedom to function as it wants. The Executive's idea that volunteers come only from better-off groups in Scottish society is frankly not true. Ted Brocklebank may well be right about the vital statistics of middle-aged ladies, but voluntary sector managers in Argyll tell me that they get willing volunteers from all walks of life. Tricia Marwick made that point earlier and I agree with her. The desire to volunteer comes from the individual and stems from a feeling of responsibility, which is the most important element of democracy. People in free countries will retain rights only as long as they accept the responsibilities that go with them. While it is important that more people volunteer, it is preferable that they do so for the right reasons. It is also preferable that volunteers are people who can achieve results. Since nearly everybody has the potential to help in some way, the key is to identify the right people for the right tasks. The Argyll council for voluntary service, which is based in Lochgilphead, has informed me that an audit carried out two years ago identified that volunteering had a value of £28.2 million to the Argyll and Bute economy, which is an enormous amount of money for a sparsely populated area—it is the second highest figure in Scotland. The audit also showed that funding has an important but time-consuming role in volunteer organisations. On average, volunteers spend 34 per cent of their time fundraising. That work is essential and volunteers do it efficiently so that most of the money that is collected goes to the purpose for which it is intended.  I spoke with Alison Logan, the manager of the Helensburgh and Lomond carers project, which is part of the Princess Royal Trust for Carers. The organisation runs a 24/7 service on the £23,000 a year that it gets from Argyll and Bute Council. The half-yearly funding was meant to come in on 1 April, but it was received yesterday afternoon. It would be helpful if the small amount of money that is provided was produced on time. Alison Logan did not complain, but I realised what a wonderful job the carers were doing on their allowance of £44 a week, especially those who work with people with Alzheimer's disease and mental disability. She emphasised the point that some people are put off volunteering by the background checks. More assurances should be given that such checks are carried out in the strictest confidence. My father worked for the lifeboat service for 35 years and was convener of the lifeboat service in Scotland for 16 years. At a dinner during the 1970s, he sat next to the Labour Prime Minister Jim Callaghan, who asked my father how much money had to be raised to run the lifeboat service. When my father told him that it was £17 million, Jim Callaghan exclaimed, "My goodness, that's cheap. We did a survey that showed that it would cost our Government £170 million." That is 10 times the cost of the volunteer lifeboat service. I cannot speak in a debate that celebrates volunteering without referring to the lifeboat coxswains and crews, who volunteer to risk their lives in order to save the lives of others. There is a local service in each coastal area, but the parts are united in a UK-wide club, which is respected and revered. They are their own bosses and they hate interference. In my local town of Oban and throughout Scotland, it is considered an honour to be asked to be a member of the lifeboat crew. When one thinks of the terrible disasters in places such as Longhope on the island of Hoy in Orkney and Fraserburgh in the north-east, where entire crews lost their lives only to be replaced by new crews of volunteers within 24 hours, one realises the sacrifice that is made. We should celebrate that extraordinary bravery, selflessness and dedication. The same applies to the members of the mountain rescue squads at Glencoe, Ben Nevis and Cairngorm, who, like the lifeboat crews, volunteer to risk their lives in order to save others but receive hardly any Government support. We are incredibly lucky to have voluntary organisations of such calibre—they save lives as well as vast amounts of money for the Chancellor of the Exchequer. It seems extraordinary and ironic that the Royal National Lifeboat Institution should have to pay VAT on new lifeboats. How long does it take for volunteers to collect the millions that the Chancellor of the Exchequer  receives in VAT? Surely the Government could help by removing the tax in that instance. That would certainly be a cause for celebration. There are many other voluntary bodies that help the Government. In Scotland, all fishery board members—except for the clerks, who are normally paid—do their work for no money at all. That must save the Scottish Executive a small fortune, and it should think carefully before it makes changes to that arrangement. Volunteering raises people's morale and produces self-respect. We can celebrate the fact that 45 to 50 per cent of Scots volunteer, because it shows that, underneath everything, at least half of us are responsible, caring, wonderful people who love one another and take responsibility for the communities in which we live. We Conservatives believe that it is the Government's job to encourage the voluntary sector in two principal ways. First, politicians should set an example, which many do, by donating some of their time and energy—or even their money—to voluntary organisations. Secondly, the Government should give voluntary organisations freedom from bureaucracy and overtaxation. We are disappointed with the Executive's strategy, which seems to be more about centralisation, control of volunteering and imposing its own agenda rather than reducing interference and giving the sector the freedom to develop itself.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to support the publishing industry. (S2O-2790) Shall I repeat my question, Presiding Officer, as the minister has arrived?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to support the publishing industry.

In the light of the fact that the Scottish Executive has presided over the destruction of the Scottish book retailing industry to the extent that there is not one substantial Scottish-owned book retailer left, and bearing in mind the importance of books to the intellectual life of a nation, what will the Executive do to redress the situation other than to produce yet more expensive reports, which have been condemned as meaningless by publishers such as Canongate in Holyrood magazine? When will the Executive enter into dialogue with the book industry and listen to its concerns?

The minister will be aware that the people of towns such as Inveraray and Campbeltown have been living with an appalling stink of sewage since Scottish Water fiddled about with their water works. Doe he understand that people in those towns rely on tourism as their main income? What does he think that tourists will make of the stink? Will they come back next year?

The Scottish Conservatives congratulate the clerks of the parliamentary business team and of the Finance Committee on recognising the need for the proposed changes. The change to rule 2.7.1 simply substitutes the Holyrood debating chamber for the Assembly Hall, which we use just now. The change to rule 5.8.1 will ensure more time for the three-stage budget scrutiny process. As the current timeframes are too narrow to cover what happens in the practice that has developed in the Parliament, the proposed changes will broaden the timeframes.

Bearing in mind the fact that there is no dedicated Gaelic-language television channel, what is the minister doing to support his colleague Brian Wilson, who is making efforts at Westminster to achieve one?

I do not think it fair that this Executive  should congratulate itself on progress in the past seven years, despite Dr Hunter's interesting videos. Perhaps the Executive has not been in touch with areas north of Balloch. It cannot have been reading the local newspapers, which have focused on health care—or rather, the lack of it. Malcolm Chisholm, the Minister for Health and Community Care, must know what I am talking about. He will have received many letters complaining about the downgrading of maternity services from Wick in Caithness, to Dunoon and Helensburgh. The threat to downgrade from acute status the Belford hospital in Fort William and the Lorn and Islands district general hospital in Oban has been a huge blow to local confidence. Quite apart from the situation with hospitals, why are so many rural communities such as Helmsdale, Applecross, Dalmally and Lochgoilhead worried about not having a resident general practitioner, and also worried about whether out-of-hours health cover and adequate ambulance services will be provided in future? People will not relocate to areas that do not have adequate health services and they will not relocate to places such as Campbeltown and Inveraray, where the smell of sewage is the only tangible result of the Executive's so-called progress.

No. How can this Executive seriously think that it will encourage people to live and work in the Highlands and Islands when it is in the process of downgrading health and public services? Why have we heard this morning, through the medium of The Scotsman , an excellent newspaper, that this Executive is now allowing Scotland the Brand to die? That body was set up in 1994, with £300,000 from Scottish Enterprise, to manage the "Made in Scotland" brand. It was successful. Recently, the high-quality board of directors were all giving their time free of charge. Nick Kuenssberg, the chairman, said yesterday, "I believe the Executive will come to regret this. The whole idea of a national brand will be undermined. Most companies I've spoken to are saying 'why should we spend our money on another branding company when the last one was doing OK ... ?'." But let us not worry about that, because the Executive is undertaking a review and will be reporting in a few months. Nick Kuenssberg also said: "I have talked to Jack McConnell and left convinced that we were part of his 'big vision' for Scotland—yet just weeks after we went private it was made abundantly clear that we were surplus to requirements". I wonder who else has heard that. Scottish Opera perhaps.  My friend Murdo Fraser has talked about the onus of tax burdens on Highlands and Islands businesses. I endorse what he said. Those burdens are holding back the economy. Why are Scottish businesses paying extra rates? Why do excellent small high-tech businesses, such as Dunbeath Engineering Ltd in Caithness, still not have broadband? Such things make companies uncompetitive. The Highlands and Islands depend to a far greater extent on primary industries such as agriculture, fishing, fish farming and forestry than do other areas in Scotland. So, why is the Executive removing the livestock improvement scheme? Why do we have a national modulation tax? We are the only country in Europe that does. Why are our white-fish fishermen so restricted in what they are allowed to catch? Why are our prawn fishermen refused their deserved increase in prawn quotas? Why are our fish farmers still struggling with excessive red tape and threats from the Norwegian-owned sector of the industry that it may pull out altogether? That would be disastrous for jobs. When will we see more help for Scottish fish farmers—for example, with the provision of a one-stop shop, such as the Norwegians have, for applications for the use of medicines? We have to make our businesses competitive, which means having the minimum of red tape and the minimum of Government interference so that businesses in the Highlands and Islands can get on with creating and selling their products. That must be underpinned by good transport infrastructure and an integrated transport policy. The Conservatives have been responsible for practically every major infrastructure improvement in the Highlands—from the Scalpay bridge to the Skye bridge to the Berneray causeway. Such projects link communities and make things easier for businesses. The Eriskay causeway, which the minister mentioned, was of course planned by the Conservatives and funded by objective 1 European Union money. Objective 1 status has been lost by the Government and I hardly call that progress. The recent oil price hikes have put rural fuel prices through the roof once again. The Conservatives are asking Gordon Brown to forgo his intended hike in fuel duty because of the rises in oil prices. Further dualling of the A9 can only save lives, as well as giving the Highlands a transport backbone that it sorely needs.

No. The A82 is also a huge priority.  Tourism will always benefit from improved infrastructure. I have said before that it is VisitScotland's job to advertise Scotland as a destination for people in the rest of the United Kingdom and abroad. It is not up to VisitScotland to tell tourism operators what to do. The operators know the local attractions and the pride and passion of the tourism industry should be left in their capable hands. Unfortunately, tourism businesses find it increasingly difficult to carry out basic maintenance and improvements because of a lack of skilled tradesmen. There must be more vocational training in further education so that more people have practical skills. There is an increasing demand for those skills in the Highlands and Islands. Yesterday, I received the Scottish Islands Network newsletter, which told me of the awful prediction that there will be a 50 per cent reduction in population by 2015. The Executive should take that prediction as a warning and do something about it.

The member mentioned the numerous events and festivals that take place in Scotland. Why is a body such as EventScotland needed to overmanage events and festivals when they have been managed perfectly well in the past?

In 2001, the Scottish Arts Council commissioned the Jonas report, which showed that Scottish Opera was losing about £1 million a year. Surely it does not take a rocket scientist to work out that, after three years, the company will be £3 million or £4 million down.

This morning, a learned Edinburgh gentleman commented to me that the motion is all verbiage and that it is the sort of thing that makes people ask what the Scottish Parliament is for. However, it would be wrong of me to be churlish. We should celebrate this case of Daniel coming to judgment. It seems that, at last, we have a Labour Government that says that culture is a good thing—the First Minister said so in his St Andrew's day speech. He said that culture should be at the centre of everything. It may be that the considerable section of the Scottish public that loves opera is now questioning whether he was sincere in that statement. We wait with bated breath to see how the future unfolds for our beleaguered national opera company—that award-winning company that now faces downsizing and a loss of jobs. It is high time for the First Minister and the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport to take responsibility for the mess that Scottish Opera is in. What is obvious is that, despite all the words of support, the Executive's approach to improving culture—and the tourism that goes with it—is fundamentally flawed. The Executive's strategy and review-led approach means constant interference and restructuring, which impedes progress. Last week's letter in Scotland on Sunday that was signed by 55 of Scotland's leading cultural figures said: "There is a void where the Executive's arts policy should be." That puts the matter well. I hope that the Executive takes note of that statement, because many people in the arts world are beginning to despair. The Executive's approach to culture and tourism always consists of glossy brochures, state-led  strategies and new organising bodies, which are all paid for with public money that could be better spent on events on the ground. Government involvement should be confined to enabling, encouraging and, possibly, to advising on methods; Government should not be involved in content or artwork. The Conservative party is proud of Scotland's great record of holding successful major events and festivals, but the fact is that most of the main events, such as the Edinburgh festival, the Edinburgh tattoo, the royal highland show and the open golf championship, came into being and flourished long before the creation of EventScotland. I suppose that it was inevitable that the launch of the Executive's strategy would entail the establishment of a new body of that type, because the Executive is so fond of them. Rather than create bodies such as EventScotland, why does not the Executive take advice from the individuals who have been successful in promoting events in the past? For example, there is Ricky Demarco, who is giving a half-hour broadcast this afternoon on American television to sell the Edinburgh festival. Members should note that the American television people did not ask EventScotland; they asked Ricky Demarco. It is not surprising that they went to him, because he has experience of putting on thousands of theatre plays, concerts, performances and exhibitions and of organising funding internationally from 40 different countries. He has been doing all that for 40 years and his contribution to the Edinburgh festival is legendary. Are people of his calibre and experience advising EventScotland and, indeed, are they advising the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport? It does not appear that they are—more is the pity. Festivals and events are extremely important all over Scotland and are becoming more so all the time, as world tourism grows by more than 4 per cent a year. Among the special things about festivals and events are the benefits that they bring to the communities in which they are set. That applies to big international festivals and events such as the Edinburgh international festival and the Edinburgh fringe, and the royal highland show, which promote Edinburgh and Scotland around the globe. It also applies to the smaller festivals, such as the new year ball game in Kirkwall, which is a hilarious football game between two ends of the town; Up-Helly-Aa in Lerwick, which is a celebration of Shetland's nordic heritage; the riding of the marches, which takes place in several Borders towns; and, of course, the numerous highland games, which take place throughout the summer all over Scotland. There is also the annual Gaelic mòd and, this year, the Lochaber festival of Scots and Irish  gaeldom, which are vital to encouraging and supporting Gaelic culture. Two other important events this year will be the Scottish food fortnight, from 18 September to 3 October, and Scotland's countryside festival on 4 and 5 September. Those events are aimed at promoting Scottish food and drink and encouraging understanding of countryside issues. I congratulate the Scottish Countryside Alliance for organising them. I want to highlight the fact that festivals often occur in provincial towns or rural areas outside the normal tourism season. The mid-Argyll music festival is a good example. I know it well and it is a remarkably well-organised event that is held in Lochgilphead in March. The festival highlights many sorts of music, poetry, dance, choirs and ensembles, and has a big competition for school brass bands. The festival brings many visitors to Lochgilphead and Ardrishaig and it has become a famous event. That kind of festival, which celebrates traditional music, brings to participants self-esteem and confidence, an increase in personal skills, the benefits of participating and interacting in groups, the pride of belonging to a group or choir, opportunities for an increased social life and the glory of achievement. There are far too many other festivals for me to name, but they should be supported because they are expensive to run; for example, there are travel and accommodation costs, facilities hire, obtaining finance and recruiting organisational and administrative skills. All that takes a great deal of time. How do we quantify voluntary time in terms of cost? The events are genuine examples of people-led culture; they have nothing whatever to do with Executive strategies and require no Government intervention. The Executive should use its money for funding festivals at the grass roots, instead of setting up more quangos like EventScotland.

Is the minister aware of the situation in Campbeltown, where people are having to live with sewage not only lying in the streets but floating in the harbour? What is Scottish Water going to do about it?

I am glad to hear that the minister is committed to producing something that is better, but he has not really explained what was wrong with the bull hire scheme. Why did it need to be changed? The scheme seems to have been very popular with the people who know about livestock.

Is the minister suggesting that the scheme contravenes state-aid rules? I have it on good authority from Brussels that it does not.

I welcome those representatives of crofting communities who are sitting in the public gallery. The whole matter was first brought to my attention by the Scottish Crofting Foundation at a meeting of the cross-party group on crofting and by the fury expressed to me by crofters all over Scotland that they are being asked to pay in advance for the hire of bulls under the livestock improvement scheme. I took that on board and wrote to the Executive, but events moved quickly and the unthinkable suggestion of the abolishment of the scheme has now emerged. Yesterday, I talked to the Blackface Sheep Breeders Association, which informed me that neither it nor the North Country Cheviot Sheep Society, which represent the majority of the breeds of sheep used in the tup scheme, had been consulted on the effects of the withdrawal of the scheme. They are incredulous and wonder what the Executive is up to. The tup scheme is particularly valuable in aiding the national scrapie eradication scheme. The department tups are well researched and well sourced from safe sources. If the abolishment goes ahead, it will have serious implications for crofting communities. The Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development, Allan Wilson, announced that the Executive intends to replace the bull hire scheme with a new grant scheme, close the ram purchase scheme and close the Shetland ram scheme. However, to soften the blow, he has said that he will explore the possibility of providing training in  ram selection and purchase. It appears that the Executive's answer to the problems facing Scotland's crofters is to send them back to school. I find that extraordinarily patronising. Does the Executive really think that the practical crofters cannot recognise the finer points of a blackface ram or a shorthorn bull? They deal with them on a daily basis. The benefits of the livestock scheme are many: high-quality bulls that sire the quality calves that the market requires are available to those who would not otherwise be able to afford them; crofters are not left with the costs and difficulties of having to winter bulls; bulls enter the breeding season in peak condition; replacement animals are always available; the crofter can choose between breeds every two years; and the scheme ensures that crofters do not run the risk of a bull siring from his own progeny. The scheme unites crofting townships and encourages community working and co-operation, which have always been important to the socioeconomic well-being of towns such as Stornoway and Lerwick. The scheme does not benefit crofters alone. Many of the female calves of well-bred bulls in crofting communities go on to supplement the breeding herds of farmers in other parts of Scotland, thus ensuring quality from a clean, disease-free source, which is important nowadays. Cattle enhance the rural habitat and environment, both of which are strategic aims of the Executive's agriculture policy. Cattle are necessary for crofters to enter certain environmental schemes to maximise income under the less favoured areas scheme, which favours mixed-livestock units. The concern is that, if the livestock scheme is withdrawn, the quality of the bulls will deteriorate, which will lead to deterioration in the herd in general. Again, that would be contradictory to the Executive's stated aims. The bull is half the herd. What are the alternatives to the scheme? Given that artificial insemination is impractical for beef herds and that there is a lack of bulls for hire privately, will crofters be expected to purchase their own bulls? That is an expensive business—good bulls can cost thousands of pounds—and although it may be all right for a farmer with a large herd of at least 40 beef cows, it makes no economic sense for a crofter with four or five cows. Add to that the expense of wintering and the cost of transport, which may be from Perth to the Western Isles or Shetland, and one can see why the bull hire scheme is so important. The fear is that those and many other knock-on effects will lead to crofters abandoning cattle production, which would have a devastating impact on income to the area, the local economy, supporting services such as the auction marts, the quality of the environment and the sustainability of remaining cattle units.  The Scottish Agricultural College highlights the potential loss of cattle numbers if the scheme is withdrawn, which would be contradictory to the stated policy of the Crofters Commission. The Scottish Executive document "The Way Forward: Framework for Economic Development in Scotland" includes the objective of supporting the return of cattle to crofting areas and a subsequent increase in cattle numbers. I well remember listening to Minister Ross Finnie speaking at the Scottish Crofting Foundation conference on the Isle of Skye some years ago, when he gave a full commitment to crofting communities and stressed the need for improvement in quality and to gain added value from farm products. I am sorry that he is not here this evening, but I ask him why he is abolishing a scheme that achieves all those things for the relatively low cost of £0.25 million. Minister Wilson has said that the changes, including the replacement of the current bull hire scheme, the closure of the ram purchase scheme and the reworking of the crofting counties agricultural grant scheme are "interim measures to modernise the schemes and ensure they comply with EU state aid regulations." Ross Finnie also commented on the issue in Saturday's edition of The Press and Journal . What is most concerning is that—if you will excuse the expression, Presiding Officer—crofters appear to be being given a load of old bull. My colleague Struan Stevenson MEP has discovered that last December the Scottish Executive Environment and Rural Affairs Department contacted the agriculture directorate-general in Brussels to ask whether the bull hire scheme breached state-aid rules. What on earth was SEERAD doing? Surely it must have known that the scheme existed prior to 1973, before Britain joined the EU, and had never been notified to the Commission. That is in compliance with article 1(b) of regulation 659/1999 and is standard practice. When Brussels informed SEERAD that it had no record of the bull hire scheme, SEERAD realised that the scheme had never been notified and told DG agriculture not to bother with further investigations, as an internal review in Scotland was under way. Who was consulted during that internal review of the livestock improvement scheme? Why did SEERAD have to inquire about a scheme that had never been notified, when it should have known perfectly well that state-aid rules were not relevant in this case? I hope that the Executive was not looking for a reason to dump the livestock improvement scheme and blame it on Brussels. Given that further questions have been raised about the state-aid rules in Parliament, I hope that the minister will clarify the position.  The bull hire scheme has been a great success, with cattle numbers in Lewis and Harris alone more than doubling from 400 to 800 in the past decade, which meets the Scottish Executive's recommendations. I urge the Scottish Executive to rethink its decision to end the livestock improvement scheme and to listen to the National Farmers Union of Scotland, which has stated that such schemes are more relevant than ever today. I also urge the Executive to listen to the Scottish Crofting Foundation, which has said that the bull hire scheme is particularly highly valued, and to the environmental organisations. Unkind rumours abound in the north that the Executive wants to sell for profit and development the department farms near Inverness where the bulls in question are normally kept. I cannot think that an Executive that has said that it is so supportive of Highland agriculture could possibly be thinking of doing such a thing, but I would like the minister to confirm that. The Executive made a commitment to increase the number and quality of Scotland's beef herds, but removal of the livestock improvement scheme will have the opposite effect. It is not an expensive scheme; it is great value for money to the people who use it. I ask the minister not to get rid of the department bulls or the department tups.

Recently, we had a debate on Scotland's bathing beaches, in which I highlighted the splendour of some of the Hebridean and north isles beaches that, sadly, the majority of our population never sets eyes on. Now, I have another chance to talk about the rest of our truly amazing coastline and the marine environment. There is plenty of it. The coastline of Argyll alone, believe it or not, is longer than that of the whole of France. No wonder other European countries are jealous of what we possess, and they are equally jealous of the fishing grounds that lie off our shores. Our coastal seas, apart from supporting huge numbers of species of wildlife and exotic flora and fauna, have also been a mainstay of the existence and prosperity of generations of individuals and communities dating back thousands of years. I have often visited the shell middens that can be found in Hebridean sand dunes—huge piles of sea shells that are the remnants of man's fodder from earlier times—and I have visited fish markets from Stornoway to Peterhead, where evidence of our rich marine bounty lies in ice boxes at the start of the processing chain that gives so many people in Scotland their livelihoods and their nourishment. I would like to think that, despite the ravages of common fisheries policy management, Scottish people have managed our seas reasonably sensibly and sustainably. Fishermen know that if they trawl the same line of mud too often it may decimate the future prawn stocks, and that if they take too much out of one shoal of fish they are liable to decimate fish stocks in the area for some time.

I really do not see how that has anything to do with the speech that I am making. Sustainability is about leaving enough for future generations, and that is what has been wrong with European management. It has been a question of far too many people fighting for the biggest slices of a cake that is limited in size. That kind of management has shown scant regard for the future and that is why it must now be changed. Local people with practical knowledge and a stake in the management of our coastal waters are much more likely to manage the marine environment well if they know that there is a future not only for young fish, but for their young fishermen and fish farmers. As sustainability is, at present, the new black, I had better also use the other fashionable word: biodiversity. In layman's terms, of course, that means recognising what is around us and making the most of it while leaving something for the future. Environmentalists want that and fishermen want that, so why has a rift developed, with some conservationists distrusting some fishermen and vice versa? I am certain of one thing—that the fishing people who have lived and worked in our coastal regions for generations, and the harvests that they have taken from our coastal waters, have not destroyed the environment. In fact, scientists and environmentalists should take more note of the practical wisdom and experience of those already in situ. Generally speaking, the damage to environments, shore based and marine, comes from concentrated industries and monocultures. I refer specifically to the land-based monoculture of thousands of acres of Sitka spruce. When it grows up in canopies, it is destructive, because it blocks off the light and food from everything below. Far better is a mixture of different kinds of trees in smaller plantations. In the marine world, we have witnessed the growth of fin-fish farming, which threatened to turn farmed salmon into the monoculture of the marine environment. However, I am glad to say that such fishing now seems to be diversifying into different sorts of fin-fish and shellfish aquaculture, as well as salmon. The waters of Loch Fyne used to hold huge native oyster beds but, sadly, they no longer exist in any quantity. Nowadays, farmed oysters from Loch Fyne can be consumed in the famous Loch Fyne oyster bar, either in the restaurant or—as plotting Government ministers do—in the car park. It is always much healthier to have variety, but in the marine world variety is truly the spice of life. Different modes of exploitation defend their own interests and, in so doing, protect species that depend on them.  Another exotic word that I believe in is subsidiarity, which should apply to the management of coastal waters. Subsidiarity is the principle that a central authority should have a subsidiary function and should perform only those tasks that cannot be performed effectively at a more immediate or local level. When we have withdrawn from the CFP, we will be wise to consider the Faroese system, which Ted Brocklebank mentioned, and how we might return the practical management of our fisheries to local levels. People attack different methods of fishing. Some will claim that trawling for prawns takes too big a haul and that prawn creels are the answer, but the trawlerman will complain that creel boats fish 24 hours a day and are allowed to fish far too many creels. Fishermen will always use the best method that is available—the best legal method, I should say. The best form of control is effort limitation that includes horsepower limits for vessels and takes the size of the vessel into the equation. The secretary of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, Hamish Morrison, recently told me that, if oil hits $50 a barrel, many fishermen might stop bottom trawling and return to less energy-demanding methods of fishing that are less based on the power of the boat. Therefore, the future may change quicker than we think. I am all for conserving our rich marine environment. It existed before the common fisheries policy and it can exist again. However, let us never forget the part that people have always played within the marine mosaic. What is the point of a fishery if it is not sustainable enough to produce a harvest?

Will the Executive give help to fish farmers who have to relocate their fish farms?

We can all agree with the terms of Bill Butler's motion and I congratulate him on bringing the debate to the chamber. Racism has no place in any aspect of our society, but it is particularly offensive to all right-thinking people when racism rears its ugly head in the world of sport and recreation. We have, in fairness, certainly come a long way, though. One can recall well the offensive conduct of some Scottish fans, who threw bananas at the Rangers Football Club player Mark Walters, who was the first black player to play in Scotland. Such childish and offensive behaviour had no place in Scotland and it did not reflect the Scottish people's reputation for tolerance and moderation. It sent out an appalling message. It is encouraging that there has been a reduction in that type of behaviour over recent years. However, it is disturbing that Bobo Balde of Celtic Football Club continues to be verbally abused and barracked because of his race and that Neil Lennon has received death threats. Of course, those threats have been sectarian in nature, but we should not forget that the sectarianism in Scotland is just as divisive and destructive as racism. It is also encouraging that, despite the fact that many more black players operate in Scotland than did some years ago, people's attitudes have definitely improved. However, there is no room for complacency. It would be appropriate to congratulate the clubs and the players for their sincere and frequently determined efforts to combat racism, but we must always be aware that the problem has not entirely gone away and that it needs only a few irresponsible individuals to stir up the difficulty again. Show Racism the Red Card has definitely been successful and there is much to commend in the UEFA 10-point plan, which contains practical measures that clubs can adopt to send out the firm message that racism is not welcome in their clubs. However, a European organisation is again attempting to impose a one-cap-fits-all solution  and is failing to recognise that the problem is greater in some countries than it is in others. There is common sense in the provisions, however, and I urge clubs to sign up to the 10-point plan, but that must be a decision for individual clubs, because they can put the message across best. In recent times, the national team that most successfully amalgamated different races was France, as a result of which that team won the world cup. Recently, I was delighted to hear that South Africa will host a future world cup, which Nelson Mandela has said will be held on behalf of the whole African continent. I, for one, look forward very much to that.

It was lovely to listen to Jamie Stone—Scotland's answer to Molly Malone. I declare an interest, in that I have been swimming off Scotland's beautiful beaches, from North Berwick to Luskentyre in Harris, since I was a child. My favourite memories are of wonderful Hebridean beaches on islands such as Coll, Tiree and the Uists. Every year I return to those places with my children, who run riot and run free through the surf, as I did long ago, without fear of shark attack. It seems to me that the Scottish sea has got warmer, but I do not know whether that is the result of global warming or of my having more rubber rings around my middle. One of Scotland's best-kept secrets is the Hebridean weather. Tiree has more sun hours than any other place in Britain. To be classified as a bathing beach, a beach must be used by a high number of people at peak times—the suggested figure is 200. Surely we should make more of the availability of our first class less-visited and therefore less-spoiled beaches. Although the water temperature may restrict the amount of time that is spent swimming, the other facets of Scottish beach life, such as wind surfing, sand surfing, the famous surfing breakers of Tiree, the variety of seashells and the multiple flora and fauna of the rock pools enable people of all ages to have healthy fun in beautiful surroundings. The real beauty is in the remoter places. The discerning and careful watcher can see seals, otters, basking sharks, whales, dolphins and a huge variety of sea birds and shore birds. I hope that VisitScotland will approve of my advertisement on its behalf, which is delivered with all sincerity. I truly believe that Scotland is a paradise for the beachcomber and his or her family, especially in our Highlands and Islands. It is imperative that we protect our beaches and our reputation for clean water, which is also very important for our shellfish trade. The Executive is now claiming that large-scale investment by Scottish Water has caused an improvement, but I doubt that the people of Campbeltown in Argyll would agree. Those people, who live near the exquisite beaches of Southend and Machrihanish,  have to put up with raw sewage flooding their streets and pouring into their harbour basin every time there is a rainstorm. Banana beach in Dalintober, which was painstakingly created by Mrs Stewart and her volunteers to improve Campbeltown, is affected by this disgraceful discharge of sewage. Campbeltown has recently received big investment from Scottish Water, but Scottish Water has got things badly wrong. The Executive must ensure that something is done soon to get things right for the people of Campbeltown. I was deeply concerned by the figures that were published by the Marine Conservation Society that showed that in Scotland volunteers picked up an average of one item for every 25 inches of coastline surveyed and that those items included more than 10,000 cotton wool buds that ended up on one beach between Saltings and Bowling on the River Clyde. More bins must be provided for public rubbish. It is difficult to compare Scottish beaches with beaches abroad. Beaches in our country vary greatly. We Conservatives support the existing thresholds for good and excellent water status, but we believe that amendments that have been passed in Europe—supported by the Socialists, the Liberals and the Greens—that add a large number of new criteria relating to the chemical composition of water, do not have a direct bearing on public health, will add extra monitoring costs and will confuse the public, who seek only reassurance about the safety of water for bathing. Other new microbiological parameters may mean that up to 200 of the 800 monitored UK beaches could be deemed to be non-compliant with the new European bathing water directive. The Conservatives will support an amendment that has been tabled by Labour MEPs on an issue that is of particular importance to Scotland. The amendment would allow more flexibility when diffuse pollution is caused by heavy rainfall's being washed into the sea. Let us hope that that unusual coalition brings results. A further hindrance to cleaner water is Scotland's antiquated planning system, which has not been changed since 1947. It is regrettable that the Executive's review of strategic planning did nothing to tackle the real issues. A total review of planning legislation is required to simplify and speed up the process. Robin Harper made an important point about the danger of oil spills; I take up the point because it is especially relevant to the Minches. The double-hulled ships that are now required to carry oil cargos require bigger piers. Will the Executive do something about building such piers?

Will the member take an intervention?

I do not know whether Rob Gibson knows this, but on the island of Sardinia local traders are not allowed to sell items in plastic bags in case the bags end up in the sea. Those traders have to sell items in paper bags. Does he think that such a system would be a good one for Scotland?

Does the minister agree that red deer herds are an important and historic part of Scottish national heritage and that deerstalking and deer watching bring in money for tourism? Does he agree that this noble animal should not be reduced to the status of vermin because some people want to save money on fencing?

Lorne and Islands hospital has the highest number of births of any hospital in Argyll and the isles. In light of the fact that—[ Interruption. ]

I beg your pardon. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to downgrade maternity services at the Lorne and Islands district general hospital. (S2O-2167)

Thank you. In light of the fact that the Vale of Leven hospital has also had its maternity services downgraded and that expectant mothers in Argyll and the islands now have to drive 100 miles and more to Paisley for such services, will the minister acknowledge the importance of maintaining a 24-hour midwife-led service at the hospital in Oban to deliver babies and to provide prenatal and postnatal care and advice? Furthermore, is he aware that, because of the rumours about the downgrading of the service, mothers are feeling consternation and staff morale in the hospital is low?

These are dangerous times on the roads for political hedgehogs. First we had Tony Blair's U-turn on the referendum. Now the SNP has made an even more tyre-screeching change of direction by saying that it might not support the European constitution after all. This is the party that has always said, "Brits out, Brussels in." Unfortunately, the nationalists' fear of losing votes means that they are selling Scotland short on fishing and making it clear that they would sign up to everything else in a constitution that would make the Scottish people more subservient to Brussels not just on fishing, but on every issue. Nicola Sturgeon was right to say that the European constitution would set things in cement. Member states would have less control over their affairs and experience even more control from Brussels. For example, we would have to give up no fewer than 32 vetoes, while new rules, regulations and red tape would extend into areas that have so far been free from Euro-interference. All that would be set in cement. It is no wonder that most people in Scotland do not want the constitution. They have never called for such interference and have certainly never voted for it. It has always surprised me that the SNP, which above all else preaches independence, could ever want a constitution that would make Scotland a sort of vassal state forced to comply with directives that might suit Paris or Berlin but not necessarily Peterhead or Campbeltown. Surely such an attitude contradicts John Swinney's recent comments about subsidiarity being his party's key belief. John Major wanted true subsidiarity, which means being in charge of whatever is adjacent and vital to the needs of a particular community or area. The present Brussels regime already interferes with that. After all, most of the legislation passed in this chamber emanates from Brussels. An EU constitution will not change that; it will only make matters worse.

No.  In my region and elsewhere, I meet many practical people and businessmen who have to live with broad-brush EU directives, some of which are simply ludicrous. Although many of those people are finding that the directives are making their businesses uncompetitive, they ignore them at their peril. However, with fisheries, the directives are not just making businesses uncompetitive; they are making the activity downright dangerous. I spoke recently to a fishing skipper who had been fishing out of Kinlochbervie to the west of 4° west. He told me that, thanks to new CFP rules, he had been forced to fish in an area that he would not normally have visited at that time of year. Because of bad weather, one of his crew was badly injured and all of them feared for their lives. He would not have been fishing such treacherous waters at the wrong time of year if the quota for monkfish in his usual fishing area had not been cut by 70 per cent in order to increase the quota in the area further south where the Spanish fish. Because he caught his quota in the first two days of a 10-day trip, he was forced to move into a more dangerous area. Anyone who has seen the film "The Perfect Storm" will know of the catastrophic results that could arise. Another vessel catching haddock in the same area was recently penalised for—believe it or not—using nets whose mesh was too large. That ridiculous technical infringement emanated from the CFP. Although I could give further examples, I do not have the time. It is obvious not only that the Brussels-led CFP is threatening fishermen's livelihoods, but that bad management and ill-considered law are threatening their very lives. There is abundant evidence that Franz Fischler aims to have a European fishing fleet into which what remains of our historic Scottish white-fish fleet will be integrated. Initially, he requires spare white-fish quota in the North sea to allow Spain, Poland and Estonia to fish there. Most fishermen say that the CFP system of total allowable catches and quotas, which is used to manage Scotland's white-fish fishery, is fundamentally flawed, because it does not discriminate between different species of fish in a mixed fishery. Because the system has caused the huge discards of dead fish, our fisheries spokesman, Ted Brocklebank, and our UK Government spokesman, Owen Paterson, are in the Faroes today looking at other management systems that would work better—Mr Brocklebank is doing something to help Scottish fishermen. The main perceived benefit of Scotland staying in the CFP used to be that we had the lion's share of quota for cod and haddock stocks. However, ever since interference from Brussels has  forbidden Scottish fishermen to catch those fish, that rather dubious benefit has disappeared. Saving the Scottish fishing fleet and the people who depend on it means that we must radically alter fisheries management. However, we can achieve that only through having national control of our waters. That is Conservative policy and we will achieve it by getting the power at Westminster to change things. The SNP will not be in a position to do that. Its promise to repatriate fisheries to Scottish control, which has always had a hollow ring to it, has been wrong-footed by Tony Blair's U-turn on the referendum; the SNP is now rushing into a squalid deal and short-term compromise that fall well short of withdrawal from the CFP. The nationalists are desperate to sign up to an EU constitution because their policy of Brits out, Brussels in makes them the doormat at the entrance to the tunnel that leads to a united states of Europe. Only the Conservatives have a long-term solution that will bring prosperity back to our fishing communities and only the Conservatives favour a vision of a new enlarged European partnership that concentrates on the efficient administration of the essential freedoms of the single markets. We need free movement of people, capital and goods with a minimum of interference in the internal affairs of member states.

Will the minister join me in congratulating the Highlands on achieving seventh place among 115 world destinations for sustainable tourism? [ Applause. ] Will the minister explain how hubs that are populated by people in ivory towers, who often have no practical experience, will do a better job than area tourist board directors, who have local expertise? Where will funding for local tourism now come from? Will he consider keeping area tourist boards as autonomous membership organisations with expertise in their areas while giving VisitScotland the responsibility of marketing Scotland throughout the United Kingdom and abroad?

I thank the minister for the statement. I got it only five minutes before he delivered it, so I have done my best. I agree with the minister when he says: "Our future support for culture must harness all the available resources in ways that deliver best value ... best value means trimming unnecessary bureaucracy". However, I question whether setting up a new commission will trim that bureaucracy. Where will the minister trim bureaucracy? Will the members of the commission consider new methods of funding arts companies such as Scottish Opera, so that that icon of Scottish excellence can flourish and continue to delight, rather than lurch from crisis to crisis? Will the minister do more to encourage Scotland's visual arts sector, by attracting more of the international arts world to Scotland? Does he accept, as he has already mentioned, that traditional music is a thriving area of Scottish culture? Will he give more recognition to the excellent accordion and fiddle clubs that play a huge part in Scotland's culture? In particular in the Highlands and Islands, they are keeping traditional  Scottish culture alive. Will he do more to attract film makers to Scotland, so that more films and television programmes can be made here?

While Conservatives welcome the accession of the new member states, we urge caution over the result that the incoming wave will have on our economy. It was interesting to hear the Canadian Professor Robert Mundell—no relation to David—who is the father of the euro, saying recently that Europe now has serious problems to deal with, for two reasons. First, the accession of 10 countries that have one third of the per capita income of western Europe will cause an increasing influx of labour into the rest of Europe, which will create considerable adjustment problems. Secondly, the huge rise in the euro, following its original meteoric fall, will make overall growth in the euro area much lower. Robert Mundell said: "I would think it is going to be very serious ... there is going to be almost no job growth in Europe with rates at this level". This fanatically pro-European man, who invented the concept of the euro, is now advocating a global currency nicknamed the globo—far-fetched members might think, but do not forget that when Professor Mundell laid the  intellectual foundation for the euro, few people thought that European countries would ever give up their francs, pesetas or marks. Many are now regretting that they ever did. Let us be under no illusions—the rules for the new countries are quite different from those that cover us, as they will be legally bound to join the euro when their budget deficits are below 3 per cent of their gross domestic product. In other words, they will be forced to join the euro by Brussels. The new Europe will stretch to the Black sea, and possibly eventually via Russia to the Pacific. It is far too diverse a unit to survive as a centrally governed federation, because its interests differ so much. A glaring example of that is left-wing Sweden's refusal to join the euro. It is much more likely that a patchwork of intersecting alliances will emerge. I see nothing wrong with that. It is healthier than the present European model, which has caused so many problems to this country's structure, decimated our fishing industry, and now threatens to ruin our farmers with modulation tax. Our businesses cannot afford oppressive EU regulatory burdens, which make them uncompetitive. It is likely that some of the 25 member countries will fail to ratify the new constitution. Anyone who suggests that those countries will be expelled from the EU is talking rubbish, as there is no provision for expulsion of that sort in any EU treaty. It is becoming abundantly clear that many people in eastern Europe, Scandinavia and the Mediterranean share the view of the majority in this country who do not want to be herded over a precipice into a united states of Europe, headed by a president of Europe. The eastern European countries have only recently emerged from the iron grip of totalitarian communism, and they wish to regain their cultures and identities, rather than be immediately covered by the soggy blanket of Brussels bureaucracy. If the EU and its member states are going to prosper, we will need new partnerships acting within a flexible regime. It will have to offer a selection of policies from which member states can choose those that suit them best. What is needed are slimmed-down EU powers concentrating on the efficient administration of the essential freedoms of the single market, namely the free movement of people, the free movement of capital, and the free movement of goods, with the minimum of interference in the internal affairs of member states. Mr Blair's dream of putting Britain at the heart of a Europe—that outworn cliché—dominated by France, Germany and Belgium, like some modern-day holy Roman empire, with himself at the head of it, will do nothing to help the people of the UK or the new entrants to live freer, happier and more  prosperous lives. A far better approach would be for us—a nation that in general has prospered in close proximity to landlocked Europe and which has always been outward looking to areas beyond our European backyard—to make alliances within the larger framework of European countries that deliver the limited objectives on which we can collectively agree. We do not need a constitution to deliver that aim, nor do we need a president. How can a British Prime Minister describe the constitution as a tidying up exercise when, instead of making the present Europe work better, it is set to build more institutions? The Prime Minister recently said that it is not always possible to know the nature of the outcome of certain actions. We believe that the result of this action will be federalism by the back door.

I completely take the point that the member is making, because in the region that I represent, shinty is a big game that does not receive nearly enough funding, as I have said on many occasions, but it still manages to go on providing a means of physical exercise. We do not see shinty at the Olympics.

Like the SNP, the Scottish Conservatives fully support London's Olympic bid. As the SNP has outlined, the Government's estimate is that £55 million per year—about 4 per cent of annual income for good causes from the lottery—will go to the Olympic bid. The SNP is right to say that money will be diverted from good causes, but that is the case for the whole UK, not only Scotland.  The chairman of sportscotland, Alastair Dempster, welcomed the London 2012 Olympic bid, but said: "While we wait to hear further details regarding the funding arrangements for the implementation of a successful Olympic bid, we are concerned that the funding required will be diverted from existing Lottery streams." I appreciate those concerns, because it is estimated that between £40 million and £60 million will come off Scottish sports funding to help to make up the Olympic £3.6 billion. Some would say that that is a fraction of the cost, but it is a substantial amount for Scottish sport over the next seven years. Another big worry is the fact that lottery income appears to be dropping consistently from year to year. I fully understand the concerns that funding might be taken away from current Scottish sport funding, but I ask where else the money will come from. I know that the SNP wants London to fund the games, because it believes that London will get the benefits from them—it takes the view that if a place benefits, it has to pay for the thing. That is fair enough, but the fact is that Scotland will benefit from the games if the bid is successful. For example, it is guaranteed that Hampden will be used for the football tournament. On that point, it is sad that there are unlikely to be any British footballers involved. I think that my previous suggestion that we should reinstate the home internationals, and that whoever wins the home international championship should represent Britain in the Olympics, is a very good idea. I wonder whether the minister might say something about that. Athletes from all over the world will come to Scotland and the rest of the UK to train and prepare for the games. That is a great advertisement for our country. Surely that means that we should contribute financially as much as possible to the games.

No—I do not think that such clubs will not get any funding. There might be a shortfall somewhere, but that should be made up by the benefit from the Olympics to Scotland and to sport as a whole, especially when we think about young people's dreams about sport. If we really wanted to do something for sport, we would have at least two hours' physical education in schools. Then, I hope, we would have more Olympic athletes. That would be a start; it is not all about money.  I think that Scotland will benefit more from the London Olympics than the majority of English counties, and what about all the charities and sports activities that will benefit? The Olympic games are different—they are special, and they bring a terrific buzz. They inspire children to get out and get involved in sport. Children will get a passion for a whole range of sports if the games come to the United Kingdom. I believe that the Olympics are an occasion that brings the UK together—Alex Neil may or may not agree with that. I believe that we would be getting an extremely good deal if the games were brought to London. However, I also agree that funding would be diverted, and that concern has been echoed by sportscotland, with which I have been in contact today. I look forward to hearing from the minister about what has come out of discussions on the issue with Tessa Jowell, the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport. I re-emphasise that money is not everything where sport is concerned. We need enthusiasm and a little more physical exercise in schools. I make that plea to the minister.

It is extraordinary that the Labour Government should impose an extra burden—indeed, a stealth tax—on a Scottish industry that already pays 60 per cent of the value of its product in tax. On the SNP's amendment, the only Government that has dropped the tax in recent years was the Tory Government, whose  chancellor, Ken Clarke, twice slashed the duty on whisky. The duty has remained frozen for six years, which is probably why Chancellor Gordon Brown thinks he can get away with such a strip stamp ploy. There was certainly not much opposition from his colleagues down south, although the ploy is foolish and unnecessary. In Scotland, whisky is one of our icons. Other industries may come and go, but Scotch whisky goes from strength to strength and provides the Treasury with one of its most valuable sources of revenue. It is bonded geographically with Scotland, which in some ways makes it more exposed if the competitive environment in the UK becomes untenable. It is down to UK politicians such as Gordon Brown to provide the environment in which Scotch whisky can flourish. By threatening the use of strip stamps, he is threatening the Scotch whisky industry, which was originally unfairly treated in 1909, when a teetotal Prime Minister, Lloyd George, increased the tax by 35 per cent in one go to pursue his personal crusade for a drink-free Britain.

That is hardly typical of a Liberal leader nowadays. The Scottish Parliament should help the Scotch whisky industry by producing whisky more at Scottish Parliament receptions. Uisge-beatha—the water of life—is our national drink and we should be proud of it. When taken in moderation, it is a medicine. The last debate on whisky, on 7 March 2002, centred on the Scottish Executive's document, "A Toast to the Future", in which the Executive pledged to support the industry. I am glad that the Executive's amendment seems to support our motion—frankly, it would be shocking if it did not.

Moderation is below 80cc for someone who is driving. I think the member knows what I mean.

Spirits are already taxed one and a half times more heavily than other drinks, and the application of strip stamps would compound that disadvantage. Strip stamps do not work. They have been abolished by the USA for that reason. They are easy to forge and expensive to apply. Why is Gordon Brown—himself a Scot—so determined to push ahead with this foolish exercise, despite the National Audit Office's  warning that his fraud figures are flawed and do not add up?

Yes. I take the minister's point on that. If the Government's figures were correct, it would mean that 200,000 bottles were being sold illegally every day and that almost every bottle of spirits that was sold outwith the supermarkets was fraudulent. The figures on beer and wine from the same source showed that more duty was being collected than was possible according to the amount of drink that was being consumed. Therefore, the figures are quite possibly utter nonsense, or at least unreliable. In the face of that, why is Mr Brown attacking an industry that supports not only distillery jobs, but the production of bottles and labels, an enormous amount of transport and a big slice of agriculture? Most gin and vodka is bottled in Scotland as well, so there is even more of an employment risk. Whisky contributes significantly to the tourism industry, and whisky tourism is growing every year, especially in the Highlands and Islands where most of the distilleries are located. The move is not even Euro-friendly. In western Europe, only Spain, Portugal and Italy use strip stamps, and their consumption is tiny in comparison with the UK market. There will be huge compliance costs to industry and supply chains if the UK adopts strip stamps, not only from the purchase of the machines that are required, but due to much slower production. The productivity of a bottling plant that produces 600 bottles a minute would drop to 450 bottles a minute if strip stamps were introduced. Additionally, every stamp is worth £5.40, making them a huge security risk. It is estimated that their introduction would cost the industry in Scotland £24 million in capital costs, with further running costs of £60 million a year. Someone would have to carry those costs, and the price of whisky to consumers would probably rise by a minimum of 40p a bottle. A £3 million fund would mean a payment of perhaps £30,000 to individual companies, although the machines cost £250,000. The security risk also means that insurance costs would soar. Strip stamps damage competitiveness and productivity. They should not be introduced. I hope  that our First Minister persuades Gordon Brown to change his mind. The chancellor has promised to do his best to freeze duty and to minimise the cost to the whisky industry. I hope that the First Minister will hold Gordon Brown to that promise. He can do that and help the industry by doubling the duty deferment period. Currently, it is 45 days after bottling, but it is within the First Minister's remit to make it 90 days, which would be of huge advantage to the industry. He should also examine security funding and come up with a deal that shows his support for the Scotch whisky industry. I am glad that we have the support of the Scottish Labour party and the Liberal Democrats. I ask the SNP to withdraw its amendment so that the Parliament sends a stronger message to Gordon Brown. We should all be saying slàinte mhath together on this one.

Is the minister aware of the concerns of the community of Applecross in Wester Ross about the future provision of out-of-hours health cover? Is he aware that the high road to the area is often blocked by snow and that it is therefore vital that out-of-hours cover remain in the area?

In view of the increasing age of workers in the Harris tweed industry, will the Executive provide training initiatives to ensure that the skills of that indigenous industry are not lost?

In this country, we have priceless historical assets and the rest of the world simply cannot understand why we do so little with them. There seems to be a mindset against advertising our historic and colourful past and a presumption in favour of getting away from an image of castles,  tartan and thistles. I am certainly not against the modern image, even if it is depicted by Russian catwalk models; all that I am saying is that, in Scotland, we must make the most of both facets—the old and the new. Anyone in advertising would tell us that it is a mistake to try to change people's mindset; it is much cleverer to go with the flow and embellish it. Many members of the Scottish diaspora come here to seek their roots. They love their tartans and they seek their history. Scotland is the capital and the Mecca of tartan, so it is surely time that we had a proper national register of tartans in Scotland. I ask the minister to think about that. Young Scots should be taught about their history so that they can be proud of it. We have an extraordinary legacy of historic buildings and sites, which date back to pre-Neolithic times—5,000 years' worth of artefacts and sites, all of which can be explored. We must use our imagination to capitalise on that history, because there is a demand for it worldwide. Some parts of the country, such as Orkney, already do that well, but I want to highlight the excellence of the historical museum at Kilmartin in Argyll, which has done so much to interpret the lives and times of the inhabitants of early Scotland around Dunadd and the Kilmartin valley, where the kings of Dalriada, the original Scots, were crowned. Unfortunately, that award-winning museum faces closure through lack of funding. That would be a disaster for the community and it should not be allowed to happen in a country in which our First Minister pledged to put culture at the heart of all that we do. It is unfortunate that the situation of Kilmartin museum is not an isolated example and I beseech the Executive to accept the importance of such rural museums for education, tourism and employment. The RCAHMS, which has produced excellent volumes on the ancient history of sites, again appears to be underfunded. Kilchurn castle at the head of Loch Awe, which features, in all its grandeur, on the VisitScotland website, is now very difficult to get to on foot, because Network Rail has locked the access gates. I hope that the minister is aware of that. I also hope that VisitScotland is aware of what has happened to its icon. The review of Historic Scotland that Frank McAveety commissioned in 2003 concluded that there is little trust among applicants to Historic Scotland for consent on modernisation. It stated: "There is a perception that Historic Scotland acts as judge and jury in its own court." That is hardly surprising when one considers that only one out of 220 applications received  scheduled monument consent and only one out of 2,600 applications received listed building or conservation area consent in 2003. That brings me to the strange case of Mr Lex Brown and Castle Tioram. I am at a complete loss to understand Historic Scotland's thinking in the case of the rebuilding of Castle Tioram on the Moidart peninsula. Can the minister explain why it is wrong for an individual to spend £4.5 million of his own money on the restoration of a 13 th century castle to its 1715 condition? Is it wrong that he should want to live there? Is it wrong that he should wish to create a museum for the public? Is it wrong that he should create spin-off benefits and employment for the local community and for local hotels and bed and breakfasts? Historic Scotland seems to think that that is wrong, despite 70 per cent of the local population around Acharacle signing a petition in support of the renovation and Highland Council giving the go-ahead to the plan, which seems democratic enough to me. The renovator is not asking for money; he seeks permission to spend his own money on the restoration of a piece of Scotland's heritage that without renovation will crumble into the sea. Will the minister look at the case and at the prejudice that is blocking a good idea from becoming a reality for the people of Moidart? Many Scottish castles were destroyed during the Jacobite rebellion. Does Historic Scotland want to leave Scotland with so many monuments to a period of great suffering? Surely it would rather see at least some of them refurbished to their original glorious state. Do we have to wallow in perpetual nostalgia and sadness on the other side of sorrow? I hope not. I hope that VisitScotland will link with Historic Scotland to produce a strategy that promotes historic tourism and uses our historic assets for the benefit of Scotland. I move amendment S2M-1033.1, to insert at end: "and believes that Historic Scotland, in its policies, must be mindful of the immense benefits to employment, income and culture brought by tourism and, in particular, art and archaeological tourism."

I shall try to be positive. I am glad that the minister is putting another £17 million into tourism over the next three years, given that the industry generates £4.5 billion. I am glad that there appears to be no top slicing of the money for local authorities and I am glad that the new money will go mostly towards marketing Scotland in previously unexploited areas. I welcome the minister's emphasis on the importance of training quality staff. If he is upgrading VisitScotland's quality accreditation scheme, will he ensure that he considers what is available for tourists to do rather than just consider the colour of teacups or curtains? Will he bring in a body to replace Taste of Scotland, or will he resurrect Taste of Scotland? I cannot believe that it has taken three years to come up with this.

You have already heard two.

Okay, Presiding Officer. Why has the review taken so long? Will the minister apologise to tourism operators for the fact that it has taken so long? Will the Executive realise that its control-freak mentality of bringing ATBs—under another name—under VisitScotland's wing is exactly the top-down approach that the industry does not want? When will the Executive understand that VisitScotland's job should be to market Scotland throughout the United Kingdom and abroad, and that the ATBs' role is to act as membership organisations that understand what is important in their own areas?

Will VisitScotland produce a decent infrastructure that allows Scottish tourism operators to use their imagination—

—their pride and their passion—

—to get on with their jobs?

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive on what date it will publish the review of area tourist boards. (S2O-1347)

I thank the minister for his answer, but we were promised an announcement before the 2003 election. As tourism is Scotland's biggest industry and brings in billions of pounds, why is it still waiting for the results of a major review of its structure? The result of that review has been delayed time and again and the new tourism season is almost upon us. The perception in the industry is that the Executive does not care enough for Scotland's first industry, especially given the shambles of visitscotland.com. How can the Executive pretend to promote Scotland as a must-visit destination when our tourist boards are still paralysed?

Has any consideration been given to using an automatic identification system for vessels travelling through the Minch? Such an approach would lessen the need for mandatory pilotage and would provide a safe, worldwide approved system that would allow coastguards and other authorities to pinpoint the position of tankers and communicate with them when necessary.

On that point—

I appreciate what the minister says about "I'm A Celebrity ... Get Me Out Of Here!", but the point is surely that, although there is allegedly apathy about politicians, we had an average audience of 46,000, which we have managed to reduce to 18,000. The audience figure was, in fact, as high as more than 100,000 on occasions, so I cannot see what the argument is. Fewer people are now seeing our Parliament and there is less access to it, which must be against the founding principles.

I was describing the Alastair Campbell mindset. I said that Tony Blair had been persuaded to change the timing of Prime Minister's question time at Westminster because of the mindset across the border and that an Alastair Campbell mindset had been adopted here.

I want to talk about moving First Minister's question time and about how that move has  affected ministers' question time, because that is important for everybody in the chamber—and for the people who are not here now. I regret to say that the moving of First Minister's question time from the Thursday afternoon slot to Thursday at noon represents the triumph of spin over substance and the triumph of party-political interests over parliamentary and public interests. We can sum up the reason for the switch in two words: Alastair Campbell. Mr Campbell convinced Mr Blair to move Prime Minister's question time from a mid-afternoon to a noon slot at Westminster, so that it could be spun more effectively—in his way—on the news. Predictably, the same new Labour mindset finally made it north of the border and Mr McConnell's spinners up here decided that what was good for Tony must be good for Jack. Has the move been good for Jack, though? Maybe it has, but I do not think that we can possibly claim that it has been good for the Scottish Parliament or for the public. Since the move, there has been a distinct loss of atmosphere in the chamber, in particular at question time. I am glad that Bruce Crawford agrees that that is the case.

It is the Parliament's responsibility to make question time work as best as it can for the people of Scotland. Let us consider how the figures stack up. Since the switch, the viewing figures for the BBC's "Holyrood Live" have plummeted from an average of 46,000 to an average of 18,000. We have no excuse, because the BBC and the Parliament's broadcasting unit warned us that that would happen. Those figures represent a huge number of people in a small country such as Scotland.

Later on. The audience of "Holyrood Live" is not concentrated in one location, but can be found in every Highland village, every island community and every town and city in Scotland. Those who support the switch claim that it has been good for visitors to the Parliament, and especially for schools. Of course those visitors are important, but their number cannot exceed 400, because that is the capacity of the gallery—and the capacity at Holyrood will be 250. Television represents a far greater public gallery.

Not now, I want to make  progress. However, the report emphasises the numbers in the public gallery. We carried out a survey of visitors, but can a survey of self-selected visitors truly reflect opinion? The survey was distributed only to people who attended First Minister's question time at 12 noon. There was no remit to survey a wider group and the option of holding First Minister's question time at 2 pm on a Thursday, prior to ministers' question time, was never included. Yet the results of that flawed survey are being used to hail the move as a great success, even though they show that only 53 per cent of those questioned in the survey supported the move to noon, which is hardly a ringing endorsement.

I take the point that it is important to engage with schoolchildren and young people, but we can engage with far more young people—

Yes we can. I am afraid that the member is wrong—she is talking only about the central belt. There has actually been a 5 per cent drop in attendance at First Minister's question time, from an average of 309 to an average of 295.

Sorry, but I tell the member this because it is true: the number of visitors to the public gallery has gone down. It is not as though we are saying that more people have visited the public gallery since the move; there have been fewer visitors. I cannot understand why some members say that the move has been a success—actually I think I can understand why. In fact, the move has led to a reduction in the number of visitors to the gallery, including schoolchildren, and there has been a huge drop in television viewing figures. Why is the move being viewed as a success by its supporters? Let us consider those supporters.

No, I will not. All right, I will. Do I have plenty of time?

With the greatest respect to the member, that is the biggest load of rubbish that I have ever heard. The viewing figures speak for themselves. There has been a drop in gallery figures and a drop of thousands in the TV audience. Let us consider who is supporting the move. I am not surprised that Mr McConnell and the Labour Party support it and I have said why. However, it is odd that the Scottish National Party's front bench supports the move. Bruce Crawford, the SNP business manager, is apparently keen on the idea—perhaps he is doing John Swinney's bidding. Why should such an alliance have been forged? Perhaps the SNP believes that by holding First Minister's question time at noon it will get coverage on the lunch-time news for all of a 20-second soundbite. That is the trade-off: a 20-second soundbite against good TV coverage for the whole of First Minister's question time. Perhaps the SNP does not want to expose Mr Swinney at all. Perhaps Mr Swinney just likes to have a long, relaxing lunch break after finishing an onerous First Minister's question time—who knows? I do not know.

Given that the Parliament is committed to accessibility, the move is surely an outrage—I cannot understand it. First Minister's question time on "Holyrood Live" offered one of the few chances for the whole country to see its Parliament unfiltered and unedited.

No. The coverage on "Holyrood Live" also gave back benchers a chance to shine—not many of them are here today—and gave people a chance to see their constituency and regional members performing or not performing, as the case may be.

Did the member say 3 am? We should certainly not meet at 3 am, although I would support late meetings of the Parliament. I appreciate that the news coverage might attract more viewers for 20 seconds than "Holyrood Live", but live TV coverage offers the one chance that the public has to see its Parliament in action. The 20-second soundbite hardly ever features back benchers, even when they have asked a question, because the BBC leaves the action in the chamber to go to the analysis with Iain McWhirter at 12:20—and sometimes earlier—which is the very point at which back benchers get their chance to ask the First Minister a question. That is unfair. Back benchers of all parties should not let the Alastair Campbell mindset dictate how the Parliament runs its business. Given that our Parliament is committed to maximising access to proceedings, it is irresponsible to throw away half of the TV audience. Let us get back to making the Parliament as public and as transparent as possible and let us try to put substance before spin.

rose—

I thank the member for taking an intervention. Does he agree that, if there is important news at lunch time, First Minister's question time often does not get shown at all?

rose—

Perhaps I did not make my point very well.

The point that I am making is this: if there happens to be very important news on a particular day, there is often no coverage on the news of what goes on in the Parliament.

I agree that £25 a year is not an enormous amount of money to pay but, given that it is a new charge, one would expect people to be able to make slightly better use of visitscotland.com. However, the people to whom I have spoken appear already to be fed up with visitscotland.com.

Will the member give way?

Although the Scottish Executive currently spends £90 million per annum on tourism, there has been a decrease in Scottish tourism since 1977. Whatever the reason, the situation must be redressed. Regrettably, I have had many complaints from tourism professionals all over Scotland about the workings of visitscotland.com. As people use the internet more and more, it is vital that we have  decent Scottish agencies through which bookings can be made and information can be downloaded. However, visitscotland.com seems to achieve very little in undertaking those functions. It charges hotels and bed and breakfasts a 10 per cent commission for bookings and £3 per customer. As of 1 April this year, regardless of whether businesses choose to participate in the visitscotland.com booking arrangement, they will have to pay a £25 charge for a listing on the website. This afternoon, I spoke to the owner of the Langass Lodge Hotel in North Uist, which is famous for its comfortable accommodation and excellent Scottish cuisine at modest prices. They have had an excellent season but, believe it or not, no bookings at the hotel this year have been made through visitscotland.com. The owner did a little research. She contacted the visitscotland.com call centre only to be told that there were no hotels in North Uist. There is an enormous problem with the website search engine. It is not possible to enter the word "Uist"; one has to enter the words "the isle of North Uist". The database is useless. It showed only one bed and breakfast and one community centre and yet the Uists and Benbecula are full of hotels and bed and breakfasts. I decided to check out the situation this afternoon. First, my assistant, Jo, checked "Uists and Benbecula hotels" on the Google search engine. Immediately, she found both the Langass Lodge Hotel and the Lochmaddy Hotel, after which we did not bother to look any further. She tried the visitscotland.com website, selected the "Hotels" option and clicked on the Western Isles area of the map. The first hotel that she was offered was a hotel in Edinburgh, the second was a hotel in Callander and the third was a hotel in Thurso. There were many more besides that but no mention of any hotels on the islands, which is pathetic and inexcusable. A lady who runs a bed and breakfast in Tarbert on the Isle of Harris received a booking through visitscotland.com. The guest rang her in the evening to say that he could not find the address, which was not surprising as he was some 300 miles away in Tarbet, Argyll. The list is endless. It is no longer funny. It is devastating for our tourism industry. To put it mildly, visitscotland.com has taken a system that was simple, informed and easy to operate and made it into something that is complicated, uninformed and unhelpful. The Scottish Executive must accept some of the responsibility for that. Another professional tourism operator of good hotels in Nairn tells me that most of the call centre operators are not trained in tourism, have no  product knowledge and so do not contribute to raising business. He told me that, in the past, more than 70 per cent of the clients who contacted his hotel management stayed in his establishment, but visitscotland.com tends to put people off. For example, one operator asked a caller, "Where is Nairn?" Most people know that Nairn has been a famous holiday centre and spa since early Victorian times. I do not think that I have to say any more—the evidence is obvious.

I should point out to Mr MacAskill that my amendment "invites the Scottish Football Association to consider reinstating the home international". It does not tell anyone to do anything.

Yes. Although there is certainly a crisis in football, which is a game that is so important to so many Scots, I am very confused by certain points in Mr MacAskill's motion. In a press release that was issued on the SNP website on 6 February, he stated: "No one will thank politicians if we try to dictate to football how it should proceed". If that is the case, why, while welcoming current and proposed financial support from the Scottish Executive, does he call "for such support to be matched by structural change"? Surely that would be a case of politicians interfering with the business and management of football clubs and associations, both of which should be outwith any political interference. It is up to clubs and associations to take sensible financial decisions to cope with the present crisis. I would  agree with Mr MacAskill's statement that "public funding for the game is essential" only if such funding were used to promote the playing of football in schools and to build the infrastructure to encourage that instead of giving a handout to struggling clubs.

Not at the moment. Sections of Scottish football must realise that they do not generate enough of a turnover to support current levels of spending. There is no reason why a well run club cannot operate at a profit. Clubs must find a way of securing a sustainable future that is based on a core of good, young players in order to help to boost dwindling attendances. Above all, they must make sound financial decisions. In 2003, PricewaterhouseCoopers produced a report that concluded that, for a club to stand a chance of producing a reasonable financial performance, wage costs should represent no more than 60 per cent of its turnover. However, in 2001-02, only Celtic Football Club achieved that. In the same year, Dundee, Dunfermline and St Johnstone actually spent more on wages than they earned in income. Such a policy is bound to end in tears. Unfortunately, those tears are shed mostly by the loyal fans who have supported their teams relentlessly, through triumph and disaster in all weathers, and who have been let down badly by management. I accept Lex Gold's point that this year the Scottish Premier League's total revenue has dropped from £21 million to £14 million. I also accept that he is quite right to say: "There will be a lot of people who'll say why should we help you folks who have made an absolute shambles of it." I am sure that most Scottish fans would agree, especially when they realise that the exclusive £50 million Sky TV rights offer was rejected by the Premier League clubs on the recommendation of the SPL management, who preferred the SPL's own proposed TV channel, which—as we know—failed to materialise. It was therefore the SPL's advice that precipitated the dramatic fall in television revenues to the clubs and the "absolute shambles" to which Mr Gold refers. Other foolhardy practices have come to light. Bill Aitken, our chief whip and arguably the finest left winger since Bobby Lennox, tells me that after Motherwell went into administration last year it poached players from Partick Thistle by offering them higher wages. Partick Thistle took the honourable decision of not going into administration: it paid off its debts. That is surely a  commendable course of action and an example that other football clubs should follow. I have written to the chairmen of all the United Kingdom football associations to ask them for a return of the UK home internationals. England, Wales and Northern Ireland are in the same qualifying group for the world cup, so they will play each other twice anyway. What better time would there be to rekindle fixtures that were always popular and would be good for sport and for the economies of all the cities throughout the UK that were chosen to host the games? Revenue raised through television coverage could be reinvested in the Scottish game. We also believe that we should revoke the ban on the sale of alcohol at football grounds. Our leader, David McLetchie, will expound on that later. I come from the generation who remember great Scottish teams with players such as Jim Baxter, Jimmy Johnstone, wee Willie Henderson and Archie Gemmill—to name but a few. Those men encouraged young Scottish footballers. Now we have more great players such as Barry Ferguson, James McFadden and Darren Fletcher; they set the standard to which budding youngsters can aspire. We need more good Scottish players. In football terms, we need a Scottish coaching state rather than a Scottish nanny state. I urge members to support the amendment in my name. I move amendment S2M-889.1, to leave out from "significant" to end and insert: "importance in terms of its economic, social and health benefits and also its contribution to our culture and identity; believes, however, that football clubs must take responsibility for their own commercial decisions and that a well-run football club should be sustainable without the need for public funding; further believes that the Scottish Executive can help club finances by lifting the outdated alcohol ban in all-seater stadia, and invites the Scottish Football Association to consider reinstating the home international championship as a means of generating additional revenue for the development of the game."

Will the minister update me on what progress is being made with the new ferry linkspan in Oban, which is vital for the future of tourism in Oban and the Hebrides?

Is the minister aware that, in one day, Forest Enterprise slaughtered 97 deer on the Cobbler in Argyll forest park, which itself is within the new Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park? Does he consider that to be reasonable and sustainable deer management?

Since Mr Finnie's statement of 7 January, we have heard a lot about unintended consequences that have been damaging to Scottish fishermen, but what is the intended consequence—the consequence that Mr Franz Fischler and his pals intended? I think that the intended consequence is that the Scottish white-fish fleet will be reduced to a mere 50 vessels—a fraction of its proud, former self—in order to fit neatly into a European fishing fleet that is dominated numerically by Spain and other EU countries. The EU is saying that the UK and Scotland are too advanced, in socioeconomic terms, to be hunter-gatherers any more. A Labour MEP said recently that the fishermen should come ashore and work with computers instead. The evidence is quite clear that the fleet—which has bent over backwards to adopt more conservation measures than any other fleet in Europe—is still having to bear the brunt of the pain. I am talking about the Scottish fleet, which has been fatally let down by its political representatives once again. On 7 January, I asked Mr Finnie several questions concerning west-coast fish stocks and the particular problems that are faced by the fishermen on the north-west coast, west of 4° west. His only reply was that cod stocks had shown less recovery on the west coast than on the east coast, which was why there had been quota cuts rather than increases. However, he did not explain why, despite a surplus of monkfish, there has been a savage cut of 73 per cent over the past three years in the monkfish TAC in area VIa—an area that is vital to Scottish fishermen—whereas next door, in area VII, where the Spanish fish, the TAC is up by 32 per cent. He did not explain why, despite the fact that the fattest, bonniest haddocks ever are now being seen around Rockall, there has been a 17 per cent drop in the haddock quota for area VIa whereas, in area VII, where the Spanish fish, the TAC has risen by 156 per cent. The figures for bycatch for Scottish vessels that fish both in the North sea and off the west coast are misleading. For example, one boat, the  Adventurer 2, caught a total of 6.1 per cent cod bycatch in 2002, but the west-coast component of that was only 3.8 per cent. There are separate TACs for the east and west coasts; nevertheless, the vessel was judged to have taken a 6.1 per cent cod bycatch from its fishing activity off the west coast. That is utterly unfair. What makes it worse is the fact that, because the Adventurer 2 was classified as having a cod bycatch of more than 5 per cent in 2002, she will be limited to 15 days' fishing in the waters off the west coast and will have to go into the deep-sea waters beyond the French saithe line. I ask the minister to do something about the tamper-proof box issue that Ted Brocklebank spoke about. It is vital that the Scottish fleet should continue to fish the deep-sea waters outside the French saithe line according to the same rules as the French fleet—as an open area with no days' restriction—otherwise big, new boats will become bankrupt and communities such as Kinlochbervie will be wiped out. The present west-coast TACs are so small that they could be taken within five months. What are the fishermen to do for the rest of the year to maintain their boats and the people who depend on them? Despite my previous entreaty to Mr Finnie, I am told that the 100 square miles south of Sule skerry are to be closed for the whole year. That is a massive blow to the Scottish fishermen. Previously, the area was closed for only eight weeks, as it was seen as a cod spawning area, but this year there will be a long closure even though the scientists have said that those eight weeks were a waste of time. As I have said before, all these disadvantages to the Scottish fleet are aimed at making it small enough to squeeze into the European sardine tin. The only way for us to save our proud fleet is to regain control and management of our waters.

I congratulate George Lyon on securing a debate on the vital matter of health care in the west Highlands. The issue particularly concerns those who are dependent on Lorn and Islands district general hospital in Oban and the Belford in Fort William. It is crucial that solutions are found to  maintain consultant-led services and acute care in those rural population centres. Long, hazardous and sometimes painful journeys to Paisley or Inverness should be undertaken only in exceptional cases. Consultants often speak of the golden hour in which lives may be saved by patient stabilisation. That provides a fundamental reason for having hospitals that can deal with life-threatening incidents in rural areas. It also provides a good reason for upgrading the transport infrastructure to a higher standard. The people of Fort William and Oban must stand together on the issue and not be divided by self-interest, which might weaken the determined resolution that I saw recently when I attended a packed meeting in Oban. There, I heard Baroness Michie of Gallanach give a stirring speech in which she defended the right to acute health services of people in the Highlands and Islands who depend on the hospital in Oban. At the time, I said to her that I hoped that her Liberal colleague George Lyon would echo her sentiments in the Scottish Parliament, which he has done. I hope that he will follow through her words and the words of his motion rather than follow Scottish Executive health policy, which is—I regret—about centralisation and has lately been detrimental to health care in rural communities. In the same mode, I sincerely hope that when the minister sums up he will agree with the motion, reject any proposals for the downgrading of those hospitals and instead pledge to improve all health services in the Highlands and Islands. It is unfair that patients and their families should have to travel huge distances to receive the benefits that are taken for granted in urban areas. The west Highlands health services report, which has sparked off the furore, may have a value in highlighting the ever-increasing problem of recruitment and retention of members of all health care disciplines in remote and rural areas. Solutions must be found to the problems identified in the recent report by Professor John Temple. He stresses the need for the retraining of medical staff to make their skills more relevant to the needs of rural practices and hospitals. There are far too many specialist consultants and not enough general ones. Those problems are exacerbated by compliance with the new deal for junior doctors, the new general medical services contract for consultants and the agenda for change—all of which appear to be undeliverable within the current financial allocations. Professor Temple concluded: "The medical workforce in Scotland is under pressure ... the capacity to respond is already limited and will be further restricted as the Working Time Directive is applied across the workforce ... The service will only survive with change."  It is vital that the services not only survive but improve. The Oban hospital provides a service that used to be covered by five different hospitals in Oban and the Belford has a high incidence of trauma patients because of the climbing activities in Glen Coe and on Ben Nevis and the skiing in the surrounding areas. Both areas are black spots for car crashes. Although the resident populations may appear limited in size, they are hugely enlarged during the tourist seasons, which are vital to the Scottish economy. Recently, I spoke with Bill Crerar of North British Trust Hotels, whose generosity and effort made it possible for both Oban and Fort William hospitals to receive computed tomography—CT—scanners. A huge amount of effort and money was required to achieve that admirable result. The downgrading of those hospitals would be an insult to that achievement. I call on the Executive to realise the effects that such a move would have in the long term if those pillars of health care are in any way weakened. We want to see a Highlands that is confident and forward looking, a place where people want to live their lives and invest in their children's futures. To that end, good health care is a vital component.

On 9 December, I wrote to the BBC's Greg Dyke to ask when the digital TV masts would be fitted in the mid-Argyll area. To date, I have not received even a holding reply to that letter. Has the minister had any more success in getting answers out of the BBC on this subject? Moreover, does he know when digital TV masts will come to Argyll and other remote parts of the Highlands and Islands?

Although I agree that it is possible that there are too many deer in some parts of Scotland, does the member agree that in many parts of Scotland the numbers of deer have fallen to record low levels because of the Forestry Commission's decimation and slaughter policy?

Will Mr Crawford give way?

Why was there no increase in prawn quota on the west coast, given that the stocks there are healthy? Why cannot the cleanest prawn fishery in Europe as regards bycatch be decoupled and the  quota increased? Why is there no increase in the quota for monkfish in area VI off the west coast, where the monkfish TAC has been reduced by 73 per cent over the past three years? Why has there been a cut of 17 per cent in the haddock quota on the west coast while the haddock off Rockall are more plentiful than they have been for years? Why have there been all those cuts in area VI, which is so important to Scottish fishermen, while in area VII, where the Spanish and Irish boats fish, there has been a 32 per cent increase in monkfish quotas and a 27 per cent increase in megrim quotas? Is Mr Finnie aware that the proposed complete closure of an area of 100 miles between Scrabster and the Butt of Lewis will close one of the richest fishing grounds for the north coast and west coast fisheries and will devastate the fleets of Kinlochbervie, Lochinver and Scrabster, while non-European Union boats such as Norwegian long liners will still be able to fish that area? Will the minister fight against that closure and will he immediately renegotiate a better deal for the west coast?

Will the culture minister support Richard Demarco's exciting concept of a Scottish equivalent to the Venice biennale, an idea that has already received the support of the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art and the SAC? Together with the British Council and the SAC, the Executive invested approximately £400,000 in Scottish representation at this year's biennale. It was right that Scottish artists had the chance to play away from home in Venice, in the cultural equivalent of the world cup. However, a biennale in Scotland would not only give Scottish artists the opportunity to play in an international arena on home soil, but attract the international art world to Scotland, just as the Edinburgh festivals already attract international attention in theatre, music, film and literature.

It is envisaged that national control would involve national management and that such management might not be by TACs and quotas, but might be by a different tool that might have a different and far better result for our stocks.

Will the member give way?

All those involved in recent fisheries meetings will have noted the absence of Hughie Allan, the secretary of the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association, who has a serious illness. Members associated with fisheries will know of the enormous amount of work that he puts in for his members and for the fishing industry. I hope that everyone will join me in wishing him a speedy recovery. [ Applause. ] It has been difficult to be upbeat about fisheries in the past, but on this occasion the science supports what fishermen have been telling us for ages: stocks of haddock are at their highest point for a long time. The opportunity should be taken to increase the TAC. The fact that for each boat in our diminished Scottish fleet there is now more than 1,000 square miles of fishing space speaks for itself. The graph on page 3 of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation's briefing note shows that cod stocks have risen by 30 per cent since the low point in 2001. The graph was drawn up painstakingly from a 900-page scientific report. Despite all the good news, the scientific press release had nothing to say about the improvement in cod stocks. However, we can be upbeat about that news and about the scientific advice on prawns, which shows that the TAC could be increased by up to 40 per cent. I ask that a push be made for an increase of at least 25 per cent for prawns in the North sea and an increase of 20 per cent for prawns on the west coast, where the 10 per cent that was withdrawn from the fishery some years ago has never been returned. Prawns are the most valuable stock landed in Scotland and have particular significance on the west coast. Since the original baseline for the prawn TAC was set, the areas fished have increased greatly. Evidence suggests that a far higher TAC would be sustainable. The Commission reduced the TAC to reflect the level of reported catches, but new evidence shows a pressing necessity for a scientific reassessment of the prawn stocks. Given that the United Kingdom possesses 96 per cent of the TAC for prawns on the west coast and 70 per cent of it in the North sea, it is not as though an increase in the TAC would open the floodgates to foreign fishermen—indeed, I very much hope that there is no intention for that to happen. Given that the prawn stock is virtually a national stock, it should be possible, through consultation with the catching and processing  sectors, to work out how an increase in catches would not necessarily lead to a drop in prices. It is little wonder that there is so much cynicism towards the Commission among Scottish fishermen. The Commission's broad-brush approach takes little notice of, for example, the Clyde fishermen's efforts to restrict cod catches. The arrogant attitude of a distant Commission is doing little to promote conservation. The Clyde fishermen should at the very least have received a pat on the back for their efforts, instead of a kick in the teeth. The west coast fishermen have a genuine gripe that, although they were affected by the tribulations of the white-fish industry, they have been unable to qualify for decommissioning. A number of prawn vessels could have qualified for decommissioning, but the Executive took a private decision not to spend money on that. What is the excuse for that? Still on west coast matters, I would like to know whether it is true that the Food Standards Agency has run out of money for testing boxes for amnesic shellfish poisoning. If so, that would leave the boxes permanently closed to scallop fishing. What is wrong with fisheries management from Brussels is that, despite lauding the principle of subsidiarity and regional advisory councils—European buzzwords—the Commission ignores the concepts and forces its micromanagement policies on to our fishermen, who would be far more capable of producing policies that would keep stocks healthy and sustain livelihoods. That is why most fishermen want us to come out of the common fisheries policy. They do not believe that Brussels cares a jot for Scotland's fishing fleet; rather, they believe that it wants to create a European fishing fleet that is dominated by other nations. The draft of the new European constitution makes that even plainer. The Labour Government seems happy to give exclusive competence for fisheries to Europe. It is bad enough having shared competence over oil and gas resources, but exclusive competence for fisheries spells the assassination of our fishing industry by our own Government. People in the United Kingdom must be allowed a referendum on issues of such importance. Our fishing fleet has created a culture of pride and passion over the centuries, which we lose at our peril. Last Sunday in Pittenweem, I heard Carol MacDonald of the Cod Crusaders deliver a clear message to the new Conservative leader, Michael Howard. She said: "Mr Howard, the fishermen want out of the CFP. Please get us out." That message comes from the heart of the industry. The main complaints about the CFP are  that it seeks to micromanage and that officials do not listen. That leaves it wide open to claims of conspiracy by the fishing industry, whose representatives are locked out of negotiations. The question is: is it conspiracy or is it simply incompetent management? I have a vision of Scottish fishermen packing their suitcases this weekend for a trip to Brussels—a trip that they would not need to make if they had confidence in their political representatives. Who can blame those men for wanting out of a CFP that has ruined their livelihood? Let us face it—national control will not happen today. Until it does, it is up to Mr Finnie and Mr Bradshaw to use the upbeat science to extract a more upbeat future for our fishing fleet. I genuinely hope that they will do that.

rose—

I appreciate what the member says about new treatment works, but is she aware that, in places such as Campbeltown and Inverary in Argyll, where new treatment centres have recently been put in, the people are far from happy with the results, because the situation is worse than it was before?

I made the point in my speech that schools in England have two hours a week set  aside for physical education, but in Scotland only one hour is set aside. Does the Executive intend to try to raise the threshold?

On that point, is Elaine Murray interested in trying to reach the targets?

Although I welcome the initiative, I must ask how we have come to be in the dismal position where, although sport dominates our television screens and the talk in the pubs is more likely to be about football and, lately, rugby, than anything else, formal and informal participation in sports is very low. Unfortunately, for many young people, participation in sport consists of sitting in front of a television, watching their heroes, swallowing sweet drinks and eating potato crisps. That does not produce fit sportsmen; it grows couch potatoes. Is it not ironic that the national obsession with sport, although it seems to be growing, is producing so many unfit youngsters? That boils down to a lack of physical activity and inappropriate diet. On that point, I am glad that the Daily Mail has informed us that the English rugby victory was in fact inspired by the team's Scottish cook. A key factor must be more sport and more physical exercise in schools. However, playing fields are still disappearing at an alarming rate throughout the United Kingdom. In Scottish secondary schools, there is only one hour a week for sport, games and physical activity. That is clearly a big problem, given that in England there are two hours. As a very minimum, we must climb to that level as soon as possible. I have seen sportscotland's targets that the Executive has set for the future fitness of the Scottish population. Will the minister tell me what progress is being made to achieve the targets and how he is going about doing that? Will he give me an assurance that he will raise the amount of time for physical exercise in Scottish schools? In March, after an exhaustive and broad consultation, a document was launched on a strategy for Scottish sport. The strategy attempts to position sport and physical exercise as a key to delivering a healthier Scotland. The strategy is called sport 21 and is managed by sportscotland. Sport 21 has 11 targets and an overarching target that, by 2020, 60 per cent of adult Scots will participate in sport at least once a week.

The strategy is being carried out after a very wide consultation in Scotland. Target 1 is that 80 per cent of primary school children should have at least half an hour of daily exercise or play. Target 2 is that secondary schools should have at least two hours of high-quality PE classes per week. Target 3 is that 85 per cent of 13 to 17-year-olds take part in sport in addition to the school curriculum more than once a week. Target 4 is that 49 per cent of teenagers over 14 in social inclusion partnership areas take part in a sport at least once a week. That emphasises the extra need for sporting opportunities within deprived areas. Target 5 is that 55 per cent of 17 to 24-year-olds take part in sport more than twice a week. Target 6 is that 43 per cent of those aged 45 to 64 play sport once a week. That target is particularly important given our aging population. Target 7 is that at least 250 Scots will have been made medallists somewhere on the world stage by 2007. Target 8 is that, by 2007, Scotland will have more than 500 sports halls with public access, so that 70 per cent of Scots can access a hall within 20 minutes. Target 9 is that over 1 million Scots play sport in membership clubs, which are very important in promoting sport culture. Target 10 is that Scotland should contain at least 150,000 volunteers who contribute to organising participation in sport through, for example, coaching, secretarial duties or refereeing. Target 11 is that, by 2020, every local authority will have contributed to the sport 21 agenda. That is the strategy. Will the minister tell the Parliament what progress is being made on those targets, which are being managed by sportscotland? Finally, I agree with Tom McCabe's support for walking. Walking in Scotland's countryside, particularly in the Highlands, is a very beautiful and good experience. More Scots must be encouraged to be more active by accessing more of Scotland's great outdoors.

The west Highland health project seems to be bent on downgrading the hospital services in  Oban and Fort William. Does not the minister think that the people who live in those areas deserve an upgrade in hospital services rather than a downgrade?

Does Mike Rumbles agree that, if all members are aware of equal opportunities and try to apply them, recommendation 32, which is to have "a 'champion' for equal opportunities" on each committee, is pretty pointless?

I start by congratulating the Deputy Presiding Officer on his personal contribution to the previous Procedures Committee and to the report. As a member of the current Procedures Committee I do not intend to use all of my allocated time; I would prefer to hear the views of other MSPs. However, I will comment on a few general points. Iain Smith's motion endorses the founding principles of the Scottish Parliament. Although the Scottish Conservatives welcome a review of those principles and of the committee structure, we are certainly not in favour of any recommendations that would lead to unnecessary interference in the committee system. We believe that the committee system should retain flexibility and, above all, independence in order for it to act as guardian of the founding principles. As the Scottish Parliament does not have a second chamber, it was understood from the start that the committee system would be robust enough to fulfil the scrutiny that is undertaken by second chambers in other Parliaments. It is imperative that nothing impede that. Any recommendations from the Procedures Committee should not detract from committees'  ability to scrutinise the Executive and to provide an efficient and effective check on the Executive. We think that committees should not work in conjunction with the Executive in developing policies. I have already said that the job of committees is scrutiny; it would be very difficult for a committee to scrutinise its own work. How can a committee scrutinise the policies of the Executive if that committee has helped to develop those policies? As we are discussing the founding principles of accountability, openness and transparency, I feel compelled to mention the progress of the recent experiment with the timing of First Minister's questions. People may well remember my own and the Scottish Conservatives' vehement opposition to the detaching of oral questions to ministers from First Minister's questions. We were also against First Minister's questions' being moved to the midday slot. During that debate, we argued that the actions would result in oral questions losing their appeal to the public and MSPs, and that viewing figures for First Minister's questions would fall as well. Unfortunately, our entreaties fell on deaf ears. However, the latest viewing figures—which I have obtained from the BBC parliamentary unit—show that the average audience for the afternoon slot of First Minister's questions between March and September this year was 63,000. Since the changes were made, the viewing figures have slumped to an average of 18,000 between 6 September and 6 November. In fact, viewing figures have been as low as 7,000. That rather vindicates our approach and I hope that the figures will be taken into account when the experiment ends. My point is that by denying access and, therefore, transparency and participation, we are failing the founding principles that are mentioned in Iain Smith's motion. The figures show that members who believed that viewers would follow First Minister's questions to the new slot were completely wrong. In effect, the changes have lost two political audiences: one that watched First Minister's questions in the afternoon and another that was interested in Westminster politics—the timing switch also lost thousands of viewers who watched First Minister's questions on "The Politics Show". We are told constantly that the country is apathetic towards politics and politicians, but those who mistakenly voted for the change have effectively discouraged the people who were interested in politics. In today's edition of The Daily Telegraph , the First Minister tells MSPs to do better and to ask ministers more spontaneous questions. However, it is mainly because of him that far fewer people now hear the answers.

I always believe that if something is not broken there is no point in trying to fix it. If the Parliament intends to be family friendly by shutting up shop every evening at 6 pm, we should spare a thought for the families of civil servants, many of whom sit up all night preparing briefs for ministers on stage 2 amendments for bills. More time could be found for scrutiny of amendments because there is often not enough time for MSPs to grasp what amendments mean. Finally, as a former member of the previous session's Equal Opportunities Committee, I oppose recommendation 32, which proposes that each committee should have a champion for equal opportunities. That would turn equal opportunities into a single-member pressure group when it should be an all-encompassing concept. The recommendation is contrary to the intention of the founding principles to mainstreaming equal opportunities.

You look like him.

I welcome Frank McAveety back to the reality of the chamber after his starring role in the MTV awards. I congratulate him on his thespian versatility. Today, he is starring in the role of Conan the librarian. It is relevant that the stage on which the minister is playing the part is Edinburgh, a city that has  done so much to promote libraries and that, during the explosion of learning that was the Scottish enlightenment, set the foundations for public libraries through the establishment of circulating libraries. The University of Edinburgh library, founded in 1580, predates the university. The advocates library, founded in 1680, published Scotland's first printed library catalogue in 1692. The first British circulating library was, as we heard from the minister, founded by Allan Ramsay in 1725. This is the city where Thomas Nelson, the publisher, started the Nelson reading rooms. My friend, Brian Monteith, will continue with the historical legacy later; I shall now move to modern times. In August 2002, John Crawford—in a paper that he delivered to the International Federation of Library Associations conference in Glasgow—said of Scotland's past association with libraries: "It is now accepted that Scotland, in common with other northern European countries, had a national educational ideology which aimed, at low cost, to instil basic literacy and numeracy into the entire population and encourage a participation in the search for knowledge at all social levels. The ideology of mutual improvement complemented this by providing the literate with an inexpensive opportunity for book use." He was, of course, speaking about the benefits of the library system. Those who were behind the national education ideology that existed then would surely be very worried if they saw the figures for attainment in publicly funded schools that were released in December 2002. Those figures show that the percentage of secondary 2 pupils who attained level E or above was only 53.6 per cent in mathematics, 58.9 per cent in English reading and 49.8 per cent in English writing. Level E should be attainable by some pupils in primary 7, by pupils in S1 and certainly by most pupils in S2. The truth is that more than two fifths of S2 pupils are failing to read, write or count to an acceptable level. As those who are involved in trade and industry keep pointing out to us, that will pose huge problems for Scottish businesses when they want to take on young employees in the future. Today, we must hope that the role of libraries can help to address that dire situation. Young people must be encouraged to read and to make use of the lending libraries and all that goes with them. Five or six years ago, Chris Smith, the Labour secretary of state, commissioned a survey on libraries. During the consultation, focus groups identified the main concerns and needs. Two points emerged above all others: the first was that more new books were needed; the second was that libraries should be open more often. The proposal was to spend £800 million on improving United Kingdom libraries. However, the reality is  that there are now fewer books and many libraries are closed for one or two days a week. Neil MacGregor, who was the director of the National Gallery and is now the director of the British Museum, tells us that more people in the UK go to public libraries every week than go to football matches. I was amazed by that fact, but it is true. Our cultural institutions, such as libraries, are still a vital basis for the diffusion of knowledge as, for that matter, are many of the knowledgeable and committed staff who have accumulated expert knowledge over years of experience—that knowledge and experience can never be truly replaced by computers. On the issue of computers, local authorities are voicing concerns about the sustainability of the people's network now that the funding from the new opportunities fund is to run out. Councils in my region pay large sums for line rental. Argyll and Bute Council, for example, is paying £77,000 per annum. Because of the lack of choice in the region, Argyll and Bute Council and some other councils in the Highlands, such as Western Isles Council, are forced to use BT because there is no competition from cable companies to bring the price down. The question must be asked whether money should be ring fenced for computers in libraries. Surely the money should be used to respond to the needs and wants of those who go to the libraries—which have been identified as more books, please, and extended opening hours for libraries. There is nothing wrong with the internet cafes, but libraries exist primarily for the circulation of books and that should remain the case. The travelling libraries are very useful to people in rural areas. Councils in rural areas recognise that fact and are trying to keep the number of travelling libraries at the maximum. The libraries provide an invaluable service to all people, but especially to the older and infirm readers in our communities and to those who cannot afford to spend money on books but still wish to read them. New Scottish literature is often missing in Scottish libraries, yet the Scottish literary tradition is rich and vibrant—its voice sings through history from the incomparable verse of Robert Burns to the exciting books of today's authors such as Kenneth Steven, Alexander McCall Smith and Giles Foden, to name but three. Unfortunately, not enough of that new writing is available in our libraries. On average, only five copies of each new book published are bought for the 500 libraries. It was a great Conservative, Bonar Law, who made the library service truly comprehensive. We believe that libraries are an essential aid to people in lifelong learning and we will continue to support them.  I move amendment S2M-594.1, to insert at end: "and notes the importance that libraries play in improving literacy rates for people of all ages."

I ask the Scottish Executive yet again: when will it publish its review on area tourist boards, in order that tourist operators in Scotland may be clear about what is intended for their industry?

I, too, will have to leave before the end of the debate, for which I apologise. I am grateful to my friend Murdo Fraser for lodging a motion which I hope will clear the air of the thundery atmosphere that has existed since the proliferation of applications for wind farms commenced. It has not been easy for MSPs, who have been regaled with arguments on both sides and who have watched communities being divided and split on what has become a highly contentious issue. Neighbour has been fighting neighbour; that is a bad thing. I do not want to go into the arguments on the efficiency of wind energy, but it is interesting to note the comments of the former leader of the Labour Party, Neil Kinnock—known as the Welsh windbag—who wrote, in 1994: "My long established view is that wind generated power is an expensive form of energy, it can only provide a very small fraction of the output required to meet total energy needs and it unavoidably makes an unacceptable intrusion into the landscape." I would prefer to see more offshore wind farms and more research into tidal energy, which would not be so visually intrusive. I suggest again that forestry biomass—of which there is plenty available in Scotland—could be treated in the same way as other renewable sources because it is carbon neutral. That said, we are set to have some wind farms. It is interesting that the applications that are most complained about relate to places such as Edinbane on Skye and Inverliever in Argyll, where the turbines are to be situated in close proximity to people's houses. I have also noticed that many applications are for 27 turbines, because that figure produces enough kilowatts of electricity to allow applicants to bypass council planning decisions and go straight to the Scottish Executive. The fact that the defences of the local  planning authority have been taken away in those instances means that it is vital that the Executive listens and responds to the concerns of people in those areas. The problems here are lack of consultation on siting of the turbines and the absence of a clear understanding of what compensation will be paid to those who suffer as a result and of how much money will go into community funds so that people in the vicinity of wind farms can at least see some benefit in their locality. The employment benefit in places such as Campbeltown and Stornoway is obvious. I can remember the complaints about hydro power and the erection of pylons. In the case of hydro power, the dams were carefully planned and there was a clear policy: compulsory purchase was used where proposals were deemed to be in the public interest and compensation was paid to fishery owners and others for perceived damage or changes to their property or fisheries. Although communities could well benefit from compensation money, they would benefit only if their tourist businesses continued to benefit as well. Therefore, it is vital that people with artistic talents are employed in the building of wind farms, so that the turbines blend in with the scenery. Until the Executive produces a cohesive and sustainable energy plan that can be properly understood, people will continue to suffer from worry and to complain. I ask the minister to tell us the Executive's policy.

On a point of order, Deputy Presiding Officer. I wish to declare an interest—I live in the vicinity of the sites of several wind farm applications.

Only last week, I spoke in the Parliament on the Rural Development Committee's report on integrated rural development, which identified farming and crofting as being vitally important to the future of rural communities in Scotland. The fact that the CAP reforms were first proposed by EU farm commissioner Franz Fischler makes me nervous, because the same man recently presided over the disastrous common fisheries policy. Let us hope that he is more successful in finding a solution to the common agricultural policy that is in the interests of both consumers and producers. Although we must put consumer interest first, we must think of the long-term interests of Scottish consumers, rather than try to secure the cheapest food in the short term. In my view, any country that is prepared to depend to a great extent on imported food does so at its peril. It makes itself vulnerable to price hikes and the results of monetary inflation. Although we might be in a commanding position regarding imports at present, that might only be temporary. Therefore, it is vital that we maintain a healthy agricultural sector and sustainable farming; of course, the most sustainable business of any sort is one that makes a profit. In any negotiations on the CAP, it is important that our politicians fight for measures that give our farmers a playing field on which they have the chance to prosper. The fact that Scottish farmers have complied with quality controls over the past two decades means that our produce, especially our livestock, is of exceptionally high quality and is probably safer than any in Europe. Those quality and welfare regimes do not apply to a great many countries, such as Argentina, from which we and the rest of Europe import vast quantities of meat. It is vital that imports are carefully controlled and that there is an honest labelling system, so that consumers have a choice in what they want to buy and producers gain some advantage from advertisement of the quality of the Scottish product. Figures show that employment on Scottish farms has fallen from 76,000 in 1982 to 68,000 in 2002. That is hardly surprising, given the drop in farm incomes. The fact that the industry is still so important to Scotland means that it is important that the CAP reforms are used sensibly, both to improve the environment and to leave a strong food-producing sector in Scotland. Scotland is  famous for quality commodities and deserves to retain that reputation.

In a moment. Decoupling subsidy from production will be helpful in some ways. For example, it should lead to a more diverse livestock sector and stop the gluts that are caused by the same sort of lambs and calves coming on to the market at exactly the same time of year. We support the move to a fully decoupled system. If that is to be a truly agricultural policy, it must be about changing the pattern of farm support, rather than about redistributing available funds to different areas, which the flat-rate area system would do. Therefore, we prefer the historic method. According to the representatives of the National Beef Association and the National Sheep Association, to whom I spoke yesterday, the industry's biggest fear is that the cattle will disappear from Scotland's hills and that, as a result, cattle finishers will lose the source of Scotland's famous beef industry.

Not at the moment. In addition, environmentalists are agreed that cattle on the hills are good for the environment and should be maintained to graze Scotland's hills. Therefore, it might be clever, as my friend Alex Fergusson has suggested, to provide a financial incentive—in the form of a calf subsidy—to the producers of beef, bullocks and heifers to encourage them to keep on producing. That could be done through the national envelope or, better still, if the practice is thought to be of environmental benefit, through modulation. One per cent modulation would raise more money than 10 per cent national envelope. That money could go to the beef-sector producers and the hill men who are making such a valuable contribution to the beef industry and the environment.

I am sorry—I will not. We are told that modulation is to be compulsory throughout Europe. That is enormously unfair to Scotland and the rest of the UK, most of whose farmers will be modulated, whereas the majority in Europe will not be, because of the small size of their farms. It appears that Scotland and the rest of the UK will continue to subsidise the rest of Europe through modulation. Our minister should highlight that enormous injustice whenever possible.  If we are stuck with the clawback tax of modulation, which may also have social implications by creating unemployment, it is vital that as many farmers as possible join the agri-environment schemes. Otherwise, we will have too many contributors and too few beneficiaries of modulation money. I will take Rob Gibson's intervention.

I have always argued that subsidies should go to the most disadvantaged areas, if that is what Rob Gibson means. The point that my friend Alex Fergusson made was that modulation should be match funded so that if it returned to farmers, farmers would receive twice as much money. In conclusion—

I support total decoupling. We should get rid as soon as possible of all the red tape that has long crucified farmers. Farmers tell me that whatever system Scotland chooses must be similar to that of England and Wales, to avoid another bureaucratic nightmare.

The First Minister will doubtless be tucking into a dinner tonight at the MTV awards while the rest of us tuck into our fish and chips. Why is that dinner being produced by a south British company when there are so many excellent catering companies in Scotland?

Last week, I spoke in the debate on integrated rural development, and much of what I said then applies to the debate on a sustainable Scotland. The previous Rural Development Committee identified the road infrastructure and transport in the Highlands as major priorities, but the Green party's transport policy seems to be based on bicycles and wind, and I sometimes wonder whether its highly popular leader, Robin Harper, travels by TARDIS like Dr Who. Unfortunately, we mere mortals have not reached  the age of "Beam me up, Scotty," and until we do, we will have to rely on the internal combustion engine to get around, especially in areas with few trains. In urban areas, we want first-class public transport, but in the region that I represent, the private car is a must. Low fuel costs and a good road infrastructure are essential to sustain life in rural areas. They are important for local businesses, particularly tourism, which is an important Scottish industry—and the environment matters for tourism.

I will do that in a minute, because it appears later in my speech. I assure my friends in the Green party that caring for the environment is central to Conservatism, because Conservatives believe in good biodiversity, which means recognising what is around us and making the most of it without damaging it for future generations. However, to do that, we need people who have confidence to populate and look after the rural areas. They need to know that they can make a living and that their children have a future. Transport is a key to that, as are happy and confident people. I have a haunting fear that a slow nationalisation of nature is taking place. It is driven by environmental bodies and quangos that may have good intentions, but appear to have limited practical experience of the realities of living in Scotland's countryside. If we want a sustainable Scotland, we need a profitable Scotland, and it is often local people's activities, livelihoods and pastimes that have protected species of flora and fauna that thrive in certain places. All too often, the practical views of local people are not taken into account when Scottish Natural Heritage decides to impose the designations special area of conservation and site of special scientific interest. In many cases, those designations are forced through against the wishes of local people, without enough consultation and without a thought to how so-called conservation measures will affect the sustainability of people's livelihoods. We must reverse depopulation, or we will not have a rural culture, and culture, as well as Scotland's landscape, is important to tourism. In Scotland, we are lucky to have a beautiful, open landscape and prodigious wildlife. We have bigger herds of red deer than any other country in western Europe. They are a priceless national asset, but are being demonised by so-called conservationists who appear to want to create a  different landscape of so-called native woodland. Members might think such a woodland lovely, but the reality of such an experiment in the hills in the northern hemisphere is often a landscape comprising stunted scrub and tick-infested shin-tangle, which is unpleasant and impossible to walk through as well as being species poor.

Overgrazing is not good, but Mark Ballard would need to tell me what he thinks is a proper level of good grazing. Good grazing can be achieved by good management, and it is perfectly possible to grow woods of beautiful deciduous trees—such as oak, ash, beech, birch, Scots pine and rowan—in the sheltered glens without having to slaughter huge numbers of the beautiful red deer.

No, I will not give way now. Along with sensible, sustainable numbers of sheep, the red deer keep Scotland's hills properly grazed, thus ensuring easy access for people who enjoy hill walking. We simply put a fence round the trees, which will keep the deer out—that way, we serve the trees and the deer—and manage the deer herds, taking a harvest each year to maintain the sustainability of a herd.

When the trees are mature, the fences can come down. On the sustainability of a good tourism industry, the Executive must reassure us that a proliferation of wind farm towers will not be detrimental to tourism. I have lived in Scotland most of my life and have seen the erection of electricity pylons and hydroelectric dams, all of which caused opposition and furore at the time, but which have not affected tourism in the long term and obviously benefit those who receive the electricity. The Conservatives are in favour of renewable energy, but ask that wind farms be sensitively situated so that they are not offensive to local people and do not spoil Scotland's wild and beautiful countryside.

How am I doing for time?

A sustainable Scotland relies heavily on small businesses and is underpinned  by good infrastructure. It is up to the Executive to provide that infrastructure.

Last weekend, I spoke to fishermen from Kinlochbervie who told me that they were unable  to fish for deepwater species from that port, because they could not get a licence. Does the member think that it is unbelievable that Scotland has only 2 per cent of the quota for deepwater species in her own waters?

Will the minister give way?

Does the member agree that forestry biomass should be used as a renewable energy source?

I was a member of the Rural Development Committee when it undertook its inquiry into integrated rural development. I enjoyed working on the inquiry and I am relieved that the Parliament is eventually debating this important report. We Scottish Conservatives want to see a thriving countryside, because we know that a nation is secure only if the peripheral areas prosper and the rural barns are full. It is no good depending on the central belt to deliver prosperity that will somehow drip down to rural areas. We need sustainable jobs and good housing, health and education to encourage people to live in rural areas and to be proud of living there. Rural areas require continuity of families and family businesses, which means that they require confidence in the future. That will not be achieved if rural communities feel deprived, forgotten and ignored, like the people whom we visited on the distant and beautiful island of Colonsay—a paradise indeed, but a paradise that is restricted by very limited ferry options, as are many of the islands in the inner and outer Hebrides as well as Orkney and Shetland. Fare structures, prices and routes on inter-island ferry services play a significant role for all island businesses, and unless there can be a fairer system, those businesses will always be fighting a chronic disadvantage. Last Friday, I was privileged to attend the Scottish Thistle awards for tourism, where I was delighted by the number of winners from the Highlands and Islands. I was especially pleased by the Isle of Coll Hotel's win in the flavour of Scotland category. I have often eaten in that famous establishment, and its award is richly  deserved. However, the owner of the hotel telephoned me yesterday to express his horror at next season's ferry timetable for the island of Coll. Last year, ferries left Oban at 8 or 9 o'clock in the morning, which allowed for day trips to the island with passengers returning on the vessel on its way back to Oban from Tiree. That ferry service encouraged day trips. Next year, passengers will have to leave Oban at 6 o'clock in the morning and will be able to return only two days a week. Already, people are cancelling reservations at the hotel. If anything is a good example of a blow against integrated development, surely that is. I urge the Minister for Transport to ensure that islands such as Coll are not ignored when it comes to supplying ferry services and that cost reductions for businesses are instigated for all island transport services. The Scottish Executive must ensure that its subsidised ferry operators—such as Caledonian MacBrayne and NorthLink—provide a service that encourages entrepreneurs to succeed in the islands. If that can be done in Norway, it can surely be done in Scotland. The report identified the importance of crofting and farming, and one of the committee's key recommendations was that farmers and crofters should benefit from the rural stewardship scheme. I am glad that access to that scheme has recently been improved, but the future for farming looks bleak if the clawback taxes of modulation and degression take away the income that agri-environmental schemes may bring. Perhaps the Minister for Environment and Rural Development will tell me why his UK counterpart, Margaret Beckett, is so determined to implement European-led taxes on farming that would disadvantage rural communities. The rest of Europe is turning its back on those measures which, if implemented, will mean that there will be virtually no help for UK farmers and crofters within 10 years. That policy goes directly against the recommendations in the committee's report. What has the Executive done to introduce a single marketing and labelling scheme for Scottish farm produce? That is another recommendation. What is the Executive doing to resume normal exporting of our beef to Europe? Will it put a stop to the proposal for the double tagging of sheep? Those ideas, coupled with honesty in labelling and meaningful import controls, are straightforward ways in which the Scottish Executive could help to achieve integrated rural development by helping farmers and crofters. The Executive could also help by standing up for the interests of the Scottish fishermen and by improving conditions for the aquaculture industry so that it will thrive and not be disadvantaged by bureaucratic rules and red tape. Good biodiversity is a key issue. That means  making the most of the assets that exist in an area for the benefit of the population and not ruining those assets for future generations. There are thousands of acres of forestry, but the industry is not contributing enough in terms of income or jobs. New markets are needed, as is the development of a more sympathetic procurement policy to encourage the use of local products. Rural areas need good roads and reasonable fuel costs, but we have high fuel costs and roads that are full of potholes. Those are further barriers to integrated rural development. The Conservatives are committed to the rolling out of broadband technology to rural areas and small telephone exchanges to increase income potential for rural people.

We would pay for it out of the Scottish Enterprise budget.

Well, that is what we would do. The committee identified rural housing as an area that requires improvement and recommended a rural rates relief scheme. However, we know that businesses in Scotland pay more in rates than businesses in the rest of the UK. That is another barrier. Conservative policy on rural housing would be to relax planning guidelines to allow the building of affordable homes for sale and rent in rural communities. Farmers would benefit from the capital injection and housing associations would be able to purchase land at reasonable prices, all of which would enhance the viability of rural communities. The people who live at the edge have amassed much practical knowledge about what works in their environment and what does not. I therefore ask Scottish Natural Heritage to consult local people better in areas that it intends to designate as special areas of conservation. Often, it is the traditional livelihoods and pastimes of rural people that provide the protection for rare species of flora and fauna that still exist in those areas.

The 54 member countries of the Commonwealth contain 1.6 billion people. That is more than one quarter of the world's population. More than 50 per cent of that population is under the age of 25. More than 100 million children around the world have never seen the inside of a classroom and double that number are forced to drop out before they complete primary education. Seventy per cent of those children come from Commonwealth countries. I am glad that someone of the stature of Eddie George is chairman of the Commonwealth education fund, and I am fully behind its aims. It is so important that Commonwealth children should possess the right to an education and that they learn that along with those rights come a responsibility to use that education for the betterment of themselves and their communities. Let us hope that Scottish teachers will play as important a role as they have done in the past. Scottish education was famous all over the world because it offered people from every background a solid grounding in useful subjects by which they could make their own way in the world. It emancipated people and gave high standards that people respected and followed. It was the basis of civilised society for a great many people. McGill University was the first university in Canada; it was founded by James McGill, a fur trader from Glasgow. Even today, many Canadians of Scottish descent are prominent in the modern academic world, such as the economist J K Galbraith and the writer Alistair MacLeod. Australia's first college of higher education was founded in Sydney in 1830 by a Scot, John Dunmore Lang. The most prominent Scot in Australian education in the 20 th century was the philosopher John Davidson, who ensured that Australia's higher education system was based on the Scottish model rather than the English one. In India, the earliest permanent institutions offering western education were founded by two Scots: Alexander Duff in Calcutta and John Wilson in Bombay. In Hong Kong, the education system that is now superior to Scotland's was set up by Frederick Stewart, a crofter's son who ended up as governor of Hong Kong. Scottish influence is legendary. In South Africa, the first college in Cape Town was also founded by Scots, and the anthropologist W H Macmillan, the son of Scottish missionaries, tried to fend off racial discrimination in the 1930s. Much of black Africa was schooled by Scottish missionaries. People such as Nkrumah, Jomo  Kenyatta, Julius Nyerere, Kenneth Kaunda, Hastings Banda and Nelson Mandela were schooled by Scottish missionaries. In his autobiography, "Long Walk to Freedom", Mandela comments: "The missionaries built and ran schools when the government was unwilling or unable to do so. The learning environment in the missionary school, while often morally rigid, was far more open than the racist principles underlying the government schools." It was a Scotsman, the eighth duke of Argyll, whose influence produced the act that made education compulsory in the United Kingdom in 1872. Scotland's contribution to education in the Commonwealth in the past has been enormous and the Scottish education model was considered to have no equal, in the same way that Scottish medicine was held in great esteem. Alas, that is hardly the position today. During the past five years, the Scottish Executive's approach to education, consisting of a centrally planned one-size-fits-all model, has trapped many young people in schools in which there are falling standards and which are plagued by indiscipline. Rather than being emancipated, enlightened or given hope, those children are being let down by this country's politicians who have delusions of adequacy. That is regrettable and I call on the Executive to provide more choice in education and put that right. As I said, I am glad that Eddie George is in charge of the Commonwealth education fund because he is a proven economist. However, he has a tough fight on his hands. The fund target of £30 million, to which the British Government has committed £10 million, represents only 40 pence per child in the Commonwealth who is not currently receiving primary education. My friend Lord James Douglas-Hamilton has pointed out the big problem of teacher shortages in the Commonwealth, which has been sparked by teacher shortages in the UK. Recruitment agencies from Britain and North America are currently recruiting teachers from countries such as Jamaica, India and the West Indies. How can the aims of the Commonwealth conference on education be met when the UK Government's failure to deal with teacher shortages in the UK is causing a teacher drain in other Commonwealth countries? We must put our own educational house in order before anyone will envy the Scottish educational model as they did in the past. What about the future? The New Zealand model, which James Douglas-Hamilton mentioned in his speech, seems to work very well. After all, 82 per cent of parents there are happy with it. The policy, which shifted authority from the central  Department of Education to individual schools, replaced the Department of Education and its 4,000 employees with the Ministry of Education and a staff of only 400. District school boards were replaced by local school boards, which have created working partnerships between teachers and communities. I hope that other Commonwealth countries will consider that model when they come to set up their schools. Decision making should be as close to the school as possible and the curriculum should have the flexibility to suit the needs of different communities and areas. In this ever-changing world, the Commonwealth is still a pillar of strength and must continue into the future. We in Scotland and the UK must ensure that we play our part in achieving good education for all Commonwealth citizens. Surely it would be appropriate for this Parliament to play some welcoming role in the coming conference. Will the minister take account of the thinking of all parties on this issue?

To ask the Scottish Executive what the outcome was of the recent meeting of the steering group on tourism with regard to promoting tourism. (S2O-590)

What is the Executive's decision on the future of the area tourist boards? Moreover, what is it doing to promote the training of tourism skills to Scottish youth to ensure that young people properly represent and benefit the tourism industry and take pride in their jobs?

In answer to Elaine Smith's comments about Conservative ladies, I have to say that we are proud of our female Conservative MSPs. I remind Elaine Smith that we had a female leader once and that is something that the Labour party has never had. She did not recognise glass ceilings as an impediment and she got to the top of her profession through merit alone. She did not like to be patronised either. I congratulate Cathy Peattie and the Equal Opportunities Committee on the report. I was on the Equal Opportunities Committee in the first session of the Parliament and I remember that we had an equalities checklist that was developed by the Commission for Racial Equality in partnership with the governance of Scotland forum at the University of Edinburgh. The first questions on the checklist were, what is the policy for, who is the policy for and what are the desired and anticipated outcomes? When we are discussing mainstreaming equality in committees, it is necessary for us to identify who suffers from inequality in Scotland and why. As my colleague Bill Aitken said in his response to the Scottish Executive's equality strategy for Scotland: "A real equality is not going to be achieved by politically correct and trendy thinking, but rather by giving people genuine equality of opportunity. The Executive's policies in housing, education and health alone are denying people equality of opportunity and they should recognise that it is the policies that need to change if inequality is ever to be properly addressed." In education, many people are restricted to catchment areas and do not have a proper choice of schools for their children. There should be more equality of choice. Recently, I heard Mr Blair calling for fairness, but there is still no sign of the delivery of fairness. Until the Government can do something about creating reasonable discipline in schools, there will be no equality for the pupils who wish to take their studies seriously but are unable to do so. The inequality gap in schools is extraordinary and is demonstrated by the enormous gulf in attainment between Scotland's best-performing and worst-performing state schools. In 2001, in the top 10 per cent of state schools, 45.3 per cent of the total secondary 4 roll had achieved three highers by the end of secondary 5. The figure for the bottom 10 per cent of schools was 4.5 per cent. That is an astounding difference. That is where inequality is starting.  In health, people are stuck with postcode prescribing. People can get certain medicines in Glasgow but not in Edinburgh, and vice versa. Where is the equality in that? It is the poorest and most vulnerable in society who are suffering from the decline of our health services. In housing, the Government's failure to deal with the problem of antisocial neighbours is taking away the right of people to live equally in peace and harmony. As it is the poorest and most vulnerable who are most likely to suffer from ill health and most likely to be the victims of crime, the only way in which the Executive can truly offer more equality to those people is by reforming the key public services that I have mentioned. In the Equal Opportunities Committee's report, a key part of mainstreaming is for committees to assess whether policies will have a different impact on different groups. I agree with that. However, if the policies currently in place are failing some sectors of society, those policies must be changed. I agree with another key point of the report, which is that training for decision makers and policy makers is very important. That means practical training for MSPs, by which I mean visits to the areas of concern and interviews with the people who are affected. An ounce of practical knowledge is worth a pound of theory, in my very humble opinion.

Attitudes have to change, but the way to do that is probably through a change of Government. Recommendation 1 in the Equal Opportunities Committee's report suggests a definition of mainstreaming, which includes "rethinking mainstream provision to accommodate the equal opportunities categories as identified in the Scotland Act." I agree that the principles of mainstreaming equality should always be considered by committees in their deliberations. I was a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee in the previous session of Parliament, and I remember taking part in the report on Scottish Gypsy Travellers and visiting many sites where we uncovered some distressing inequalities. On one site, people were not allowed keys to get in and out of their site with their vehicles. The key was with a man who was miles away down the road and who was available only two hours a day. That was changed immediately after we went there. I also remember, at the site near Dumbarton, that  the access was unbelievably bad and no normal car could have been expected to get in. I hope that that has now changed. I ask the Scottish Executive whether it has taken up the recommendations of our report. In housing, often people with disabilities can easily be accommodated if certain elements—such as electrical fittings, and bathroom and kitchen fittings—are used in new-build housing with disabled people in mind. It is no hardship to the enabled to use many disabled facilities. It is just a question of thinking about what we take for granted. A general shift of thought is required so that we do not miss out on providing equal opportunities for all. To disabled people, an infrastructure that enables them is of enormous advantage. As our population lives longer, many more of us may be very grateful for well-thought-out provisions for the elderly and disabled in our housing and transport infrastructure. That is also true of our older railway stations, which I know disabled people find particularly difficult. As Cathy Peattie said, equal opportunities should be built in at the beginning rather than tagged on at the end. The previous Equal Opportunities Committee recommended that the Parliament adopt the mainstreaming of equality issues. We agreed with that. We know that that will involve training and a good information base so that the issues can be recognised and, above all, prioritised. However, the real inequality is not within our committees but out there, in the cities and in the country. The policies that have caused that disadvantage are what need to be changed.

When I told a local teacher in Argyll that I was making a speech on the national theatre, he said, "Do you mean that Holyrood building farce? That is the biggest tragi-comedy of all time." Perhaps that is why the national theatre will not entail the erection of a building. Seriously, it is a bit much for the Executive to commend itself and pat itself on the back for producing the funding for a national theatre out of the underspend. People have been campaigning for a national theatre for years and the Executive has had an underspend every year. Why has Scottish theatre had to wait for so long? It is not as though any extra money was going on the arts. The funding for the Scottish Arts Council has stood still, as has the funding for most cultural work in Scotland, despite all Labour's promises. Rather than patting itself on the back, the Executive should pat the backs of those who have campaigned relentlessly for 60 years to achieve a national theatre. I take my hat off to those people, although they may be disappointed that no bricks or mortar are attached to the project and that it will not have its own theatre company. It will, according to the SAC briefing, be a commissioning body that will put on a minimum of three to five productions per year in venues throughout Scotland. I am glad that the target market includes the world of education and training; to bring theatre to children is to bring them a great gift. High-quality training for actors and other theatre professionals is vital. However, why is it the intention to target local authorities? I am not sure that they would consider themselves experts in theatre. We are told by the SAC that the national theatre of Scotland has similarities with the Swedish model. I point out that the three key principles that underpin the Swedish theatre are the voluntary dimension of its governance, which keeps the theatre close to audiences; its willingness to listen and find out what is happening in the country and what audiences want; and, most important, its independence from the state and from local authorities. It may be sensible to include some local authority officers on local committees to promote and arrange performances, but never to decide what is to be shown—that is for theatre professionals. We are told that First Minister Jack McConnell is scared witless that the national theatre will  somehow give extra credence to the Scottish National Party. How utterly ridiculous—one only has to look at the SNP's position in the polls after its championing of "Braveheart" and its attachment to the well-known thespian and absentee lift attendant, Sir Sean Connery. I do not know why Jack McConnell is worried. Arts policy and an independent Scotland are two totally different things. On the subject of independence, it is true that the Czech National Theatre helped to sustain that proud and independent people in their desperate fight against the Austro-Hungarian empire and later against the brutal totalitarian regime of the Soviet Union. The Czechs' theatre was always based on excellence. The love of theatre in that part of the world was so great that the theatre building—which was built in 1881 and was the most excellent piece of architecture in Prague—was financed by contributions from the populace and 21 foundation stones were brought from different parts of Bohemia and Moravia. The people had a great wish to be part of the project. Despite the original building being burnt out, it was refurbished within two years, again with public donations. We should note that the reason for the success of Czech theatre is that the Czechs have always had first-class, highly trained actors and actresses and good stage designers, and their repertoires have always been of the highest order in combining the classical with the contemporary and the national with the international. Having Mozart as a patron has helped, but the Czechs have always striven for excellence, which has produced a great national interest and pride in theatre. It would be wonderful if Scotland could do the same. Recently, the well-known journalist Jenny Hjul wrote an excellent article in The Sunday Times on the Scottish national theatre. She said: "As Scottish Opera proved with its production of Wagner's Ring Cycle excellence alone will put Scotland on the map. That must be the National Theatre's priority." She is right. Scottish Opera is now being talked about as a rival to Covent Garden. Excellence and quality must be looked on as goals to be sought by all and elitism should not be seen as a dirty word. As Eddie Friel, the chief executive of the Greater Glasgow and Clyde Valley Tourist Board, said about opera: "Elitism is sometimes used as a derogatory term. That is an abuse of language. There is nothing wrong with striving to be the best." What kind of theatre will Scotland get? We should hope that, although it has secured Government funding, it will not be beholden to any  Government's politically correct agenda or feel obliged to fulfil a quota that is geared towards special interest lobbies. As Ian Rankin, the author of the Inspector Rebus novels, said: "I think artists should feel free to express themselves. I don't believe that before they start painting or creating they should have to ask themselves: How does this fit in with the Executive's stance on social inclusion?" That does not mean that playwrights from special interest groups should not write plays, but that they must write excellent plays. Is there a Gaelic writer out there who can produce a new spectacular Gaelic musical to sweep across Scotland and then the world? That would really help the Gaelic cause and preserve the Gaelic language. I throw out that challenge to the Gaelic community. Rather than impinging on regional theatres, the national theatre must inspire other dramatic companies in Scotland and must showcase all that is good in writing, acting, lighting, set and costume design, direction and production to domestic and international audiences. The national theatre must reinvigorate new interest in theatre in Scotland and must produce thundering performances of plays such as Liz Lochhead's "Medea", David Hare and Howard Brenton's "Pravda" and Arthur Miller's "The Crucible", to name a few. What about Shakespeare's Scottish play? That has certainly stood the test of time. The motto that is emblazoned on the curtain of the Czech theatre is: "To the nation for itself". That reminds all Czechs of the wonderful present that they once gave to themselves. We should make Scotland's national theatre a present of equal value. I move amendment S2M-406.2, to leave out from "commends" to end and insert: "recognises that this is the culmination of a sixty-year campaign for a National Theatre Company; regrets the Executive's past failure to deliver on its promises despite repeated underspends in its budget, and hopes that this commissioning body will produce theatre of such excellence and quality that theatre-going audiences will be captivated and enlarged in Scotland and that it will bring greater understanding of theatre to all corners of Scotland, provide inspiration and opportunity for actors, writers, designers and production staff to showcase their talents and provide greater cultural entertainment and enjoyment for present and future generations of local inhabitants and visitors."

It is interesting to note that Prime Minister Blair's strategy unit is due to publish a strategy on alcohol this week. As usual, the contents of the bottle seem to have leaked in advance. We are told that the strategy is likely to include evidence that shows that the British are the worst binge drinkers in Europe. It is thought that the strategy will introduce measures to encourage people to drink more carefully, in what is termed a continental-style cafe culture. Although global warming seems to be improving the weather in Scotland, and although anti-midge machines are proliferating in the Highlands, it is unlikely that we will ever be able to compare the cafe societies of Inverness and Oban, or for that matter Glasgow and Edinburgh, with those of Rome and Barcelona. The continental picture is completely different. People eat much later, they have siestas in the afternoon and children stay up much later at night. However, weather conditions vary throughout Europe, and there is an undoubted link between the number of cases of alcoholism and lateral degrees north on the map. From a tourism angle, we would like to be able to make foreign tourists feel as welcome as possible and to give the customer what he or she wants in a Scottish way. However, one problem that has been raised with me by visitors to our country and by Scottish hotel owners is the fact that children under 14 have to leave some licensed premises by 8 pm, and that is when many families wish to sit down together and start eating. They are bemused and often offended by laws that prevent them from enjoying a meal in a pub together with their children, so it is good that the Nicholson report addresses those outdated laws, which have discouraged tourism. I hope that a new approach will lead future generations of children to enjoy sensible drinking without bingeing. Happy hours owe much of their existence to the restrictions in licensing hours and different closing times alleviate the level of violent incidents, as they ensure that fewer people appear on the streets at the same time. I know that Scottish people who visit the south often find that the early closing times in England are both inconvenient and annoying. The Conservative party certainly does not believe that the Executive should interfere in setting the price of alcohol products. Scandinavian countries have severe levels of alcoholism despite the prohibitive cost of alcohol in those countries—notably Sweden, which my friend Brian Monteith mentioned. We prefer a flexible approach that frees up drinking times, and an end to restrictions  that, by their very nature, lead to binge drinking and excess. If we consider the importance of the Scotch whisky industry, we should certainly not be discouraging people, especially visitors, from having the opportunity to partake of Scotland's national spirit as and when they want to. I take this opportunity to remind the Presiding Officer that many people think that it would be a good idea if Scotch whisky were served at Scottish Parliament receptions by way of an example. As David McLetchie emphasised, we believe that it is now time to end the ban on alcohol in our sports grounds. I note with interest that Northumbria police have said that the policy of selling alcohol at St James's park has been a success and has made it easier for the police to control the crowd. In Scotland, we are currently penalising football and rugby fans by banning the sale of alcohol at football pitches and at Murrayfield. That is an example of too much nanny state; it is patronising in the extreme and its effect is to make people resent authority. Why should cricket supporters in England be allowed to drink at a test match lasting five days, when Scottish football fans cannot enjoy a drink during a game lasting 90 minutes? Why should the barmy army enjoy a drink when the tartan army cannot? The assumption should be that we can trust people to drink sensibly, and the vast majority of people do. Bringing back alcohol to our sports stadia would—especially in the case of Murrayfield—allow us to secure more major sporting events, with an associated increase in revenue. I welcome the philosophy behind the Nicholson report, but I question whether it will ever become reality. Although the Executive speaks of the modernisation of Scotland's drinking laws, it shows no commitment to the liberalisation recommended by Nicholson. Individual premises will continue to be controlled by the current licensing boards, which could lead to little change in the present situation. We have a chance to change the law. It is important that licensees should be allowed the freedom to set the hours that will suit them, their communities and their customers. Before the Presiding Officer calls, "Time, gentlemen, please," I shall drink up and sit down.

Is Mr McAveety aware of the current upheaval at the National Library of Scotland, where several top library keepers are being made redundant? Is he aware that that will probably affect the service provided to Scotland and will he please investigate those redundancies?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Earlier, I asked for time to speak on the bill.

Will the Scottish Executive consider new models of funding for Scottish Opera and Scottish Ballet, such as endowment, to allow them to have full artistic control?

It is high time for the Scottish Executive to bite the bullet on aquaculture and encourage its growth as a major part of farming in Scotland. Fin-fish and shellfish farming should receive the same encouragement as terrestrial livestock and cereal farming. It should be immaterial that one industry is based on land and the other is on water; it is all farming. We in Scotland must make the most of all our industries and our biodiversity, so I hope that "A Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture" becomes a living document, rather than just some nice words. It must boost those industries, support jobs and protect the equally valuable wild salmon and sea trout fishing industry, which is important to Scottish tourism.  I have spoken with the west coast trusts and some of their scientists, and I will make some points about area management agreements, which are good. They go a long way towards solving long-running disputes between salmon farms and the wild fish industry and shellfish farmers, but some big problems remain. Not all fish farmers have agreed to participate, and that must be remedied to achieve a level playing field. The AMA process is voluntary in Scotland, but mandatory in Norway. I am not sure which process is best, because it is sometimes difficult for smaller fish farms to comply because of the extra expense and lack of sites. However, it is vital that the targets that AMAs set are high enough to make a difference to achieving the collective goal of a successful farmed fishery and a successful wild fishery that co-exist sustainably. We Conservatives have asked before for a one-stop shop for fish farmers, rather than numerous regulating bodies, and for better funding for research and development. It is worth considering the situation in Norway, because it has been fish farming for longer than Scotland and has encountered the same problems vis-à-vis wild fish. For example, in some areas of Norway with valuable sea trout and salmon fishings nearby, fish cages cannot be sited within 20km of river mouths. In some areas, no fish farming is allowed at all. Scotland has plenty of room for fish cages to be in areas where they will not affect migratory salmon and sea trout runs. The Scottish Executive should give help if present site locations need to be changed. Mistakes on locations might have been made in the past, but that was not the fish farmers' fault. Our biodiversity is vital, and Scotland is one of the last strongholds of populations of freshwater pearl mussels, which are a globally threatened species. They depend entirely on migratory fish. The tiny mussel spats lie on the gills of small salmon for six to eight months before they drop off into a river, where they can live for 130 years. Yesterday, I spoke to a scientist from the Argyll Fisheries Trust, who informed me that on a recent research project, he netted one pool in the River Fyne from which he captured 36 farmed salmon and only 11 wild ones. I will not give John Farquhar Munro the location of the pool. All of the rivers that flow into Loch Fyne have suffered an almost total wipe-out of wild stocks since salmon farming started in the loch. It would seem that fallowing is improving the situation. It is to be hoped that AMAs will produce recommendations to put right the situation, but if they are to have a meaningful effect, it is essential that they are acted upon. For example, the timing of sea-lice treatment on farms and reducing the number of escapees are absolutely vital. Consents  for the use of medicines such as Slice are far too slow. Because of the high licence costs to pharmaceutical companies, Scottish fish farmers have few choices—far too few medicines are available. The Executive should take an active role in finding alternative sites for fish farmers to help the farmers to achieve a single year-class of fish in one area. In order to fallow properly, farmers need more sites and more room. That should not be difficult to find on the west coast of Scotland, which has thousands of miles of useable coastline. Argyll alone has more coastline than the whole of France. In the time that I have left, I will concentrate on shellfish farming and particularly on mussel farming, which is a success story in Scotland. Shellfish farming is expanding each year at a sustainable rate. In contrast to salmon farming, shellfish farming is mainly Scottish owned and employs an increasing number of people who live in Scotland's more remote areas. Loch Etive, in Argyll, is the premier mussel-growing loch in Scotland, but the farmers in the area are experiencing problems with water quality, which seem to be a new phenomenon in an area that should have pristine water quality. During the main marketing period of the year, the water quality in the loch is reduced from A to B. That restricts the sale of mussels to certain buyers who will only buy mussels from quality A water. In this instance, it is suggested that local sewage plants are not doing their job properly. I ask the Executive, through Scottish Water, to look into the problem as a matter of urgency so that this new, exciting and extremely clean form of aquaculture can continue to expand and bring benefits to many of the people who live along our sea lochs. Further to that point, I suggest to the Executive that research into the causes of water pollution and the development of measures to improve water quality around our coastline are of extreme importance if Scotland wishes to maintain its reputation for having the best-quality shellfish, both farmed and wild, of any country in the world.

The Conservative and Unionist Party welcomes an extension to First Minister's question time. We believe that question times are the most effective way of holding ministers to account. We are surprised therefore that the First Minister is pushing for a 12 noon slot, as that would halve the audience figures that are normally achieved when questions to the First Minister are carried on the "Holyrood Live" programme. One of the founding principles of the Parliament is transparency; another is easy access by the public to the Parliament. We can fit only 400 people into the public gallery, but 63,000 watch our proceedings on television. Televised broadcasts are the way in which the Parliament extends its activities into homes all over Scotland. Is that not what we want? Do we really want to see a possible drop in our audience of 30,000?  I am not suggesting that the Parliament should be bossed around by the BBC, but neither should it be bossed around by the First Minister. Apparently, the First Minister thinks that the audience would follow him to an earlier slot. Far be it from me to suggest that he is being big-headed about the matter; he is a handsome and eloquent man, but he is neither Robbie Williams nor Johnny Depp. The First Minister might believe that the 12 o'clock slot will allow him to grandstand over the lunchtime news and set the press agenda for the rest of the day. However, if the change goes ahead, he will upset and inconvenience thousands of Scottish people who regularly watch the Parliament on television in the afternoon. Perhaps Labour wants to argue with the BBC, because that seems to be its stock in trade at the moment. The BBC's advice is sensible and we should take it. The minister, Patricia Ferguson, says that the proposed changes would bring an open, accessible and transparent Parliament. However, that will not happen if we decide to have a 12 o'clock slot for First Minister's question time. Here are the facts. Viewing patterns for political programming show that afternoon programmes have higher audience figures than those in the morning. Furthermore, since the beginning of the year, the average audience for First Minister's question time in its current slot has been 63,000, whereas "The Daily Politics", in its 12 noon to 12.30 slot, has attracted only 32,000 viewers. A 12 o'clock slot would also mean less time for Opposition parties to scrutinise thoroughly the political developments of the day. Such a reduction in scrutiny can result only in a reduction in the ability to check the Executive and thus a reduction in the chamber's democratic processes. Surely there is too much apathy towards politicians at the moment to allow us to shut the door on 30,000 people who are interested enough to turn on their television sets to watch us. The Executive says that a 12 o'clock start would benefit schoolchildren. That, too, is nonsense; most schools say that a 2 o'clock start would be just as good. Parliamentary question times give back-bench members the chance to challenge ministers on topical issues. People find that very interesting. The Conservatives would like time to be made for an additional ministerial question time, to which the previous Procedures Committee's excellent report alluded. A rotational ministers' question time would greatly enhance our parliamentary week. We believe that, to raise the Parliament's profile, First Minister's question time should be held at a time when viewing figures are high. We fundamentally disagree with paragraph 46 of the  Procedures Committee's report, especially as the original draft recommended a 2 o'clock start. I find it somewhat peculiar that the current committee convener would not support the recommendations in the original draft, which he must have helped to compile. Is this the beginning of the new coalition politics? When Jack shouts "Jump!" do the Liberals ask "How high?" I hope that the convener will see common sense and agree to a First Minister's question time that is as convenient as possible for the Scottish people and is not just designed for the First Minister's convenience. I move amendment S2M-286.1, to insert at end: "but disagrees with the recommendation in paragraph 46 of the report that First Minister's Question Time should start at 12 noon and instead recommends that First Minister's Question Time starts around 2 pm."

I sat on the Robin Rigg Offshore Wind Farm (Navigation and Fishing) (Scotland) Bill Committee and listened to a great deal of evidence regarding concerns about interference with navigation and fishing rights in the Solway, which is the whole point of the bill, so I am very surprised that an amendment that would remove section 5 should be lodged so late in the day, on behalf of the promoters, when those same people and the committee went to such lengths to ensure that the section, about exclusion zones, was put in the bill in the first place. I have to say that I find the timing and the lack of consultation with the Parliament very unsatisfactory. I understand why the promoters now want section 5 to be removed—they see that it might prevent their bill from getting royal assent—but they agreed, as did the committee, that exclusion zones would be necessary during the possible construction of a wind farm in the Solway, especially for safety reasons. I point out that, in its consideration stage report, the committee stated that the exclusion zones were required "to properly address the hazard to mariners and for the safety of those who are constructing the wind farm". The committee also agreed to the promoters setting the minimum blade clearance at 18m, subject to there being an active management system in place. The point about that is that the active management system was there to ensure that people did not break the exclusion zones. If section 5 is removed, there will be no need for exclusion zones, so why should there be an active management system? John Home Robertson has had a letter, which he says has reassured him enough to change his position. I do not wish to be melodramatic, but Neville Chamberlain had a letter when he came back from Munich. This is the Parliament's first private bill. It was scrutinised by a committee of the Parliament and that scrutiny should not be diminished by a last-minute compromise.

Mr Rumbles knows that I was involved. Why was there no mention of the safety zones when we started our consultations?

Is the Executive preventing Caledonian MacBrayne from tendering for the route? If so, why?

I am delighted to have a chance to speak in the debate. I would like to highlight the importance of culture and sport in the development of Scottish youth. If we want good culture and sport in Scotland, it is essential that we encourage the involvement of young people from an early age. That involvement in culture and sport enriches the lives of children and young people, so it is necessary to correct misconceptions about the arts and to provide introductions to demystify classical arts such as opera, ballet and the theatre, for young people's benefit. We must open more young eyes to the myriad pleasures that those arts can produce. There is an organisation in Edinburgh called TAB—The Audience Business—that has helped to increase visits to the arts from 3.3 million in 1998 to 3.9 million in 2002. One of its successes has been a campaign for residents, called wiZ kidZ, which has encouraged parents to take their children to artistic events. There is a free newsletter, which provides an overview of arts events for young people and gives information on what is available and what it is about. It is estimated that, over the past three years, the campaign has inspired more than 60,000 visits to arts events by children and their parents here in Edinburgh. Monitoring in 2002 showed that 82 per cent found the scheme most useful and that 86 per cent had taken their children to an arts event as a direct result of the wiZ kidZ campaign. In 2001, TAB also ran a campaign called arts explorers, which concentrated on helping  disadvantaged young people in the 15 to 18-year-old age group to get a better understanding of and better access to the arts. It ran workshops on being an audience and how to be a critic, and sought to explain different art forms in a way that promoted understanding. Many of the young people had never considered going to plays, concerts or ballet, but they have found their lives greatly enriched. That is good news both for them and for the arts. I would like to see that kind of scheme repeated all over Scotland. In the Highlands, Highlands and Islands Arts, or HI-Arts, is active in that field. The good thing about such initiatives is that they involve young people and their parents together, because parents are usually the people who are best placed to help their children and shared cultural experiences are of enormous value to families. Last year, I attended a meeting at Murrayfield on finance in sport, and the businessmen there were looking for instant success and quick profits. They look the whole time for stars, but what is important for young people is participation, rather than simply watching their football heroes on television. Physical activity and the spirit of competition of active games are healthy and work against obesity, which is a growing problem among young people all over the United Kingdom. It is therefore important that more sports facilities and playing fields are made available and that there is proper sport education and training in schools and colleges. A bid was launched recently to make Inverness and the Highlands the European capital of culture in 2008. As a precursor, Highland Council made a pledge to young people in the area that they would have the opportunity to participate in sports and games for at least six hours every week. It also pledged a programme of free music tuition in schools and free attendance for young people at cultural events that visit Inverness and the surrounding area. Sadly, the bid failed, but I seem to remember someone in the Scottish Executive saying that they would do their utmost to ensure that those pledges were honoured. I look forward to that happening, and perhaps the minister, who knows the Highlands well, can enlighten me further and tell me whether there has been any progress. In the Highlands and Islands—the area that Peter Peacock and I, among others, represent—there are diverse activities specific to the region in which young people should be encouraged to participate. The truly Scottish game of shinty should receive more attention and support, and angling—particularly trout angling—is underutilised in the Highlands. It would prove useful if more young people received training in  angling, which is potentially a good source of tourist income in all parts of Scotland. That is healthy recreation, and with the advances in eco-tourism there should be more opportunities for youngsters to become experts in such subjects as ornithology, geology, mountaineering, hill-walking, sailing, skiing, local history and, of course, the Gaelic heritage. Those are all subjects that can produce not only extreme satisfaction for the participant, but the possibility of job creation in the future. The Conservative amendment stresses the importance of parents and the family in the development of young people. That is absolutely right, and I agree with Fiona Hyslop's criticism of the nanny state. Government can help by providing a good infrastructure and opportunities. Government can identify things for young people to do that are relevant to their futures and which will make them stronger and forge them into better citizens. Above all, we should encourage young people to do things that will help them to gain confidence. Scotland has previously experienced a golden age of enlightenment; perhaps this Parliament can help to promote the foundation or another one. Talent abounds among Scottish young people and we must ensure that it is not hidden under a bushel.

Does the minister accept that 90 per cent of the toxins that are found in scallops are in the gut and the mantle of the scallop, which are the pieces that are thrown away, and that if one bought a fish from a fishmonger in the round, with its guts still in it, one would hardly cook the fish with its guts inside? Is not this an example of the nanny state? Are we really discussing something that is designed to help the industry?

I congratulate Ted Brocklebank on an excellent maiden speech and I thank Stewart Stevenson for his concern about my well-being. The other day, I was in a restaurant in the west Highlands where an Italian tourist asked me what he should eat from the menu. "Try the Scottish scallops or the local prawns," I said, "You simply cannot beat them." "Oh," he said, "I cannot eat the scallops or I will get the amnesiac poisoning and forget where I am and which lady is my wife." Although that might seem amusing, to many scallop fishermen, farmers and processors it is no laughing matter. The scallop industry is hugely important in terms of income and employment to our remote communities. The product used to have a reputation that was second to none. Today, after four years of a testing regime and Liberal-Labour, the product lies in tatters. Cheap, inferior, foreign imports are taking over what were once firm Scottish markets. Despite scallop fishermen's efforts to comply with the new rules, they are going down the tubes. The regulations are unfair and unnecessary. In a members' business debate on the problems of the scallop industry on 10 February 2000, I pressed Susan Deacon, who was the minister with responsibility for health at that time, to allow an end-product test that would "ensure both public safety and a future for the scallop industry." Susan Deacon replied that the monitoring of the internal programme was  "a carefully thought out and long-standing programme that meets our EU obligations as well as protecting public health."— [ Official Report , 10 February 2000; Vol 4, c 1059 and 1070.]  That shows how, as usual, the Scottish Executive puts EU obligations before the interests of Scottish fishermen. We have seen that happen throughout every aspect of the fishing industry and despite all of its current problems. It is probable that the Scottish Executive is under instructions from Tony Blair. Why else would the Executive blindly follow EU directive 91/492, as amended by EU directive 97/61 and 97/79? Why, when the so-called science is based on an outbreak of ASP in mussels in Canada, will the Executive not stand up for Scottish scallop fishermen and a product that has not harmed anyone in Scotland or anywhere else? I ask the minister to tell the chamber what the Executive has done to discover the cause of ASP in scallops. What has it done to discover the cause of the algal blooms, which is where the toxins come from? What research has it commissioned into the biochemistry of the scallop to try to ascertain the level at which the synergy of domoic, aspartic and glutonic acids becomes toxic—or, indeed whether there is such a level? The Executive has had four years to do all that, but all that has happened is that the FSA has used three-quarters of its budget in an ever-more complicated programme to track down a disease that does not occur in Scotland. Meanwhile, the scallop industry is much worse off than it was four years ago. Its income has been slashed without any form of compensation being made. It is dangerous and expensive to go fishing. If we want a Scottish fishing industry, the Executive should provide it with the encouragement that it needs. The Executive should do that rather than being concerned in the main with meeting its EU obligations.

Will the minister tell me why the less favoured area support scheme is not benefiting crofters in the most severely disadvantaged areas of the Highlands and Islands as much as it is benefiting farmers in areas of Scotland with richer agricultural land? Is not the main point of the less favoured area scheme to help those who are in the less favoured areas?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I congratulate Tavish Scott on securing the debate. I agree that the Scottish Executive should take the opportunity to provide the islands with a properly integrated transport system. I know that Tavish Scott's friend John Firth would also agree about that. The debate is a bit late; to be frank, a cynic might be forgiven for saying that the timing of the debate makes Tavish Scott's motion nothing more than a blatant vote-buying dodge to mask the Labour and Liberal Executive's transport failures over the past four years, particularly with regard to the islands. I hate to say this, but Tavish Scott should apologise to his Shetland constituents and his ministerial colleague, Jim Wallace, should apologise to his Orkney constituents for the way in which the people of those islands have been disadvantaged by the Liberal-Labour Executive's flagship partnership, NorthLink Orkney and Shetland Ferries Ltd.

Which new boats?

All I know is that P&O Scottish Ferries provided a better service than NorthLink Orkney and Shetland Ferries Ltd does. That company has hardly been a success for Orkney and Shetland: boats do not fit piers and run at the wrong times; there has been a huge increase in cancellations; and the company has ignored the islands' lifeline requirements. There was also confusion over the cassette system for animal transport, which is yet to materialise, and Shetland has been forced to make alternative unsubsidised arrangements that are now being ground down by discriminatory state-subsidised competition. It is all too familiar an example of Liberal-Labour Scottish Government bungling. The building of piers, in  particular the new Scrabster pier, is way behind schedule.

No. The new ship that should be servicing Orkney is tied up at the pier in Leith beside the offices of the Scottish Executive. What does Tavish Scott mean by an "integrated transport service"? In the past, Shetland and Orkney had a fully integrated transport system; Tavish Scott and Jim Wallace's achievement over the past four years has been to replace an integrated system with a fully disintegrated transport system. It is not only Shetland and Orkney that have suffered. I remember Sarah Boyack's declared intention of having an integrated transport system for Scotland. She went, and the system never materialised. Despite many promises, the much-promised Campbeltown to Ballycastle ferry is yet to materialise, which is a huge blow to the people who live on the Kintyre peninsula. The vehicle service that was provided by Caledonian MacBrayne from Gourock to Dunoon has also been removed, even though Dunoon was hailed as being one of the gateways to the new Loch Lomond national park. The transport facility has been taken away, so Dunoon is not much of a gateway, is it? We have also had the Executive's attempt to remove the air service from the isle of Barra. I am glad to say that that was foiled by the hard work and persistence of the people of that island, who descended on Edinburgh. They appear to have succeeded in saving the air service that they have enjoyed for more than 70 years. As a member of the Rural Development Committee, I remember well the committee trip to the beautiful island of Colonsay. That trip made me realise the huge disadvantage that the people of that island face because of an inconvenient and infrequent ferry service. The main problem that is faced by the northern isles and the Western Isles is their geography. Those islands depend on sea and air transport rather than on the arterial roads, motorways and railways that are enjoyed on the UK mainland. Surely the islands are entitled to some form of equality when it comes to support and investment for transport infrastructure. There should be more support for air and sea communications to those islands, not only to encourage business and to support health and education lifelines, but also to show that there are benefits that island inhabitants can enjoy which make up for the possible disadvantages of living off the beaten track. A return flight from Inverness to Shetland is £350, which is far too much by any standard.  Proper integration of transport involves, for example, the passenger taking an aeroplane, which is met by a bus, which takes them to a ferry, all without endless delays. That is what happened before nationalisation in 1948, so surely with a little intelligent forethought such a system can be made to work again under devolution. There is no doubt, however, that the Liberal-Labour Scottish Government has failed the islands and the nation when it comes to transport—they will not easily be forgiven.

There has been no consideration of the fact that 100 vessels were decommissioned last year.

Does the member agree that it is scandalous that some fishermen from Kinlochbervie have been left with 2 per cent of the deep-sea species quota?

In Ross Finnie's statement on fisheries on 30 October 2002, he stated: "Let me make it clear from the outset that neither I nor the Scottish Executive has any intention of presiding over the destruction of the Scottish fishing industry. That is why, two weeks ago, I gave an undertaking to the industry, which I reiterate today, that we will work with it to ensure a sustainable Scottish fishing industry."— [ Official Report , 30 Oct 2002; c 14707.]  On the same day, in the Daily Record , there was a picture of Ross Finnie and Franz Fischler apparently sharing a joke. The headline quotes Ross Finnie saying that he would work every hour to save the Scottish fishing industry. What has happened to Mr Finnie's pledge? It appears that his clock has stopped working, even if he has not. The package that he has presented to us and on which we must vote is nothing less than a poisoned chalice for Scotland's fishing industry. The decommissioning package is wrongly balanced. Although the £50 million would be welcome transitional funding towards compensating for the temporary cessation of fishing—which is perfectly allowable under the financial instrument for fisheries guidance  regulation—the fact that £40 million, or four fifths, is dedicated to decommissioning makes it nothing short of a redundancy package. That is not what fishermen want and is not in the interests of the Scottish economy. It is like giving an army officer a pistol and telling him that one does not want to see him again.

There is currently more haddock in the North sea than there has been for 30 years. The fractions of the package are that £10 million will be put towards the industry's future and £40 million will be used to bury the industry's past; £40 million will take far too many boats out of the industry and £10 million is not nearly enough to help with the transitional funding, especially if the new cod recovery plan does not start in July. The package might mean not the decommissioning of some boats in the white-fish fleet, but the decommissioning of almost the whole white-fish fleet. Mr Finnie says that he is working with the industry to save it. I do not know who he is speaking to, because the members of the fishing industry that I speak to tell me that they want to go on fishing and do not want to be redundant. If Mr Finnie is talking to the industry—I mean fishermen and processors—he will know that what is needed is restructuring; he has just said that he wants restructuring. The industry employs thousands of people in different sectors. We cannot have a successful industry unless we have modern boats and modern equipment. Modernisation of the processing sector is also required. Decommissioning will not achieve that; the decommissioning of vessels under 10 years old will certainly not achieve that. All that decommissioning does is prohibit fishing and shrink the white-fish industry. I cannot believe that the minister has consulted the industry on the formation of his package. I therefore ask the minister to reverse the package, so that £40 million goes to the future and £10 million goes to the past. That would be a much closer reflection of what the fishing industry needs and wants. The Scottish white-fish fleet has bent over backwards to accept every conservation rule that has been hurled at it. A hundred vessels have recently been decommissioned; that greatly lowered effort in the North sea. We have had closed areas, bigger mesh sizes, quota cuts and huge decommissioning. Why has time not been allowed for scientists to assess the results of those extra conservation measures and the enormous fall in fishing effort before this new, draconian,  unnecessary and inexplicable measure is allowed to ruin Scottish fishing? If one were to ask the scientists what will be the result of all the conservation measures and the huge drop in effort, they would say that they do not know. Is it wise, if the scientists do not know, to bring in measures that might destroy the Scottish industry before they know the answers? It is not wise; it is thoroughly stupid. It would be better to wait until the scientists know. Why is the days-at-sea scheme necessary when the quotas have already been halved? The loss of quota is the worst problem that the industry currently faces. If the new round of decommissioning is taken up by 100 vessels, which would only have been allowed to fish for nine days at sea per month, that will equate to 900 fishing days being lost to the Scottish fishing industry. If, as some people predict, 80 boats are left in the white-fish fleet they will gain 160 days. The agreement that Elliot Morley and Ross Finnie achieved in Brussels in December will have the effect of losing 740 fishing days to an industry that is already hanging on by its fingertips. The situation reminds me of Jack, who sold his family cow for a handful of beans. Messrs Morley and Finnie are selling the Scottish fishing industry for a handful of days, but in this scenario the beanstalk does not grow. However, there is an Austrian giant who stomps around shouting, "Fee, fi, fo, fum, I smell the blood of a Scottish fisherman". The soul of the Scottish fishing industry is being torn apart. The massive problem is the 50 per cent cut in quota. It does not matter how many days a boat can fish if it is not allowed to catch the fish. It is a double whammy against the Scottish fishing industry. The package, if it remains as it is, might sound the death knell for a way of life that has supported the people in Scotland's fishing communities for hundreds of years. What would the Executive put in its place? There can be only so many call centres in Stornoway, Peterhead and Lerwick. Who will help the processors and all the people they employ? Who will help the fishermen to look after their families in areas that are heavily dependent on fishing? Who will help those who are involved in the nephrops industry when displacement of effort lowers the price of their prawns even more? That sector also faces huge problems. The weighting of the package so heavily in favour of decommissioning shows that the Government has no faith in the future of fishing. That is perhaps the saddest thing of all. What hope does the Scottish fishing industry have if even the fisheries minister does not believe in its future? What hope does it have when the Austrian bureaucrat who is in charge is obsessed with his cod recovery plan? The kite that that man  flew for the total closure of the Scottish fishing waters was always intended to produce a draconian effort-limitation scheme, which was the only element that the cod recovery plan lacked. He has succeeded and his dream of a single European fishing fleet draws ever nearer. Let us not sacrifice the future of the Scottish fishing industry for a handful of days and a pocketful of broken promises.

I hear what the minister is saying about upgrading, and I agree with that. Wick has Caithness general hospital, yet trips have to be made all the time to Raigmore. Would it not be better to upgrade the hospital, rather than having to upgrade ambulance services continually?

I congratulate Jamie Stone on highlighting the ambulance service in this way, because the service is of the utmost importance to people's lives. In a perfect world, there would be 24-hour rostered working covering all of the Highlands and  the Western Isles. However, such expense might not be within the Scottish Executive's budget. In the Highlands, only Dingwall and Inverness stations are full-time at present. I sympathise deeply with any ambulance crew that is sent out on a long-distance transplacement during call hours, when they have just worked a long roster shift of eight or 12 hours. When I spoke to the manager in Inverness, he highlighted that point and said that everything possible is done to avoid such situations, but they are unpredictable and only occur occasionally. The nature of ambulance crews' work is that when they are on call, being paid only 90p per hour, they must be immediately reachable; there needs to be a three-minute response time. British Telecom workers, some of whom work along the same sort of lines, have to be reached only within about an hour. That is why any Wick ambulance crew must live within three miles of Wick. Crew members must also notify the Scottish Ambulance Service of any secondary employment that they undertake, and have it approved. Ambulance crews sacrifice a lot. Their job is very important and is undertaken only by individuals who have a vocation for it, because the job most certainly has its drawbacks. Jamie Stone is asking for an upgrade to full-time cover for Wick. Again, although I sympathise with that, other areas will, I presume, also seek upgrades; for example Thurso, Golspie, Lairg, Lochinver, Kinlochbervie and Bettyhill, all of which have ambulance crews. The ambulance crews in those places surely feel that they, too, deserve more rostered hours. Stewart Stevenson mentioned Peterhead, which has a larger population than Wick and still works part time, but which would, I presume, make a similar call. One other point that has been put to me is that if Wick station is made full time, it might be necessary to shorten the hours or reduce the crews to keep within the budget, which might weaken the service. At the moment, when on call the crews receive only 90p per hour, but once on a mission they move to the full-time rate. Some ambulance crews do not mind working like that, but others would prefer full-time rostered employment. The situation calls for constant review of each station, because the Scottish Ambulance Service is a publicly funded body that provides a service that is based on patient demand. The service has come a long way since the days pre-1995, when many small stations were worked by contractors. Now, the staff are better trained and generally work in pairs. Wick has performed brilliantly, and is ahead of all its targets. Finally, centralisation of health services is  increasing the distances that are travelled by ambulance. For example, Caithness to Raigmore is a 200-mile round trip. Such a journey can be made longer by the need to pick up patients from different addresses in Caithness and Sutherland on the way south, by delays at Raigmore hospital, and by the delivery of patients to different addresses on the return journey. I sympathise very much with the ambulance crews, and I agree that people who live in remote areas should have the best of health care, but centralisation is working against that. More emphasis should be placed on upgrading the use of community hospitals which, in turn, would reduce the length of many ambulance journeys.

Will the minister give way?

In the Scottish Executive's motion, the word "welcomes" is repeated at least four times, but it is the wrong word—"laments" would be more appropriate. If it said that the Executive "laments the destruction of our once-proud Scottish fishing industry", it would be more apt. During the four years of the Parliament's existence, we have watched the fishing industry lurch from one crisis to another—crises not of the industry's making, but caused by the appalling common fisheries policy management which, as I have said before, hides behind scientists and blames the work force. Any other management that did the same would have been sacked long ago and replaced by something that managed the Scottish fishing industry properly. That is what must happen if the Scottish fleet is to have a future. We cannot allow micromanagement from Brussels to continue. It has failed to protect fish stocks and fishing fleets. If ever there was an example of bad governance by Europe, the common fisheries policy is it.

Certainly not. I did not mention withdrawal. We should like to see national control by all member states of their own waters. The Scottish white-fish fleet which, despite doing more to adopt conservation measures than any other fleet in Europe, is being driven into the ground as the prime scapegoat for the collapse of the cod stock to satisfy Franz Fischler's obsession with his cod recovery plan—a plan that was simply a footnote to his common agricultural policy plans. The deep-sea species fiasco should have been a warning. Franz Fischler said that total allowable catches and quotas were the wrong way in which to manage the industry. Two days later, he introduced TACs and quotas that left Scotland with about 2 per cent of the deep-sea species in their waters; he gave 80 per cent to the French. Yesterday's Rural Development Committee  meeting, in which we questioned the UK fisheries minister, Elliot Morley, gave me no reassurance at all. It rather deepened the gloom, because he, too, seems hidebound by science and is obviously more impressed by European institutions than by any of the inside knowledge and practical experience that he would benefit from if he only listened to people in Scottish fishing communities.

In a moment. It was interesting yesterday to hear John Farnell—one of Fischler's chief assistants—saying that TACs and quotas are possibly not the right way in which to produce a sustainable fishing industry. It has taken 30 years to work that one out.

I am not suggesting that.

In his evidence to the Rural Development Committee the other day, Professor Tony Hawkins did not seem to respect much of the science that had been carried out. Indeed, it is a question of how the science is interpreted. However, I will address that point later when I talk about the hake recovery plan. The fishermen themselves are turning against TACs and quotas. After all, although the Scottish demersal sector has a very good percentage of quotas in haddock, cod and whiting, there is no point in having them if the fishermen are not allowed to catch the fish. Furthermore, there is no point in Mr Morley and Mr Finnie congratulating themselves on having secured another 10-year derogation for six and 12-mile limits, relative stability and the Hague preference if no decent Scottish fleet is left to take advantage of them. I welcome the Scottish Executive's £50 million aid package; however, four fifths of it is targeted at decommissioning, which is a gross imbalance by any standards. Fishermen want to fish. The Scottish Fishermen's Federation is appalled by the proposal, and Elliot Morley would not answer my question about the number of vessels that he expected the Commission would want to be decommissioned in return for extra days at sea. The Commission itself acknowledges that the practical operation of the days-at-sea scheme is flawed. It is compromising safety, making working conditions hell, and not giving the fishermen time to catch their very limited quotas. The Executive  must call on the Commission to entertain claims for time lost due to bad weather. Moreover, time lost during long transit passages should be refunded to vessels that are able to demonstrate that their gear was not used during the passage. Less powerful vessels should be permitted to transfer their days at sea to more powerful vessels based on kilowatt days. However, despite all the arguments over days at sea, the main problems lie with the quotas. Vessels will have to increase their income in order to survive, which can be done only through taking on other vessels' quotas. Will the minister tell us what has happened to the quotas that belonged to vessels that were decommissioned in 2002 and whether those quotas can be used now? Even if vessels receive a larger quota, they must be allowed the time to catch it safely, and a scheme must be evolved that allows them to do so. As it appears that the so-called interim measures might go on well beyond July, the minister must tell us about his contingency plans if that happens. For example, is it possible to increase the allowable catch for haddock and whiting by fishing in areas that have very few cod? As for the science, it would appear that it is interpreted in different ways to suit different people. Draconian measures have been brought in for cod, but why has there been an 11 per cent increase in the TAC for hake when the science suggested that there should be a virtual moratorium on catching that stock? Is it because the Spanish like catching hake? Indeed, what has happened to the hake recovery plan? Scotland seems to have been singled out to carry the can for the failure of the CFP. That is simply not good enough. It is time for members to stand up for our fleet and to stop giving tacit support to bad decisions that are made miles away in Brussels. Geographically, Scotland might not lie in the heart of Europe, but Peterhead and Fraserburgh sit in the heart of Europe's richest fishing grounds. It is time to realise that only with the national and local management of UK waters can we save the Scottish fishing industry and the people who depend on it. I move amendment S1M-3914.2, to leave out from first "welcomes" to end and insert: "recognises that the results of the EU Fisheries Council in December were disastrous for Scotland; notes the severity of the crisis now facing the Scottish fishing industry; believes that the effects of the conservation measures already taken by Scottish fishermen have not been taken into full consideration; further notes the Scottish Executive's £50 million aid package but questions the balance of allocation between decommissioning and transitional funding, and notes that the Common Fisheries Policy of collective management has been disastrous for the Scottish fishing industry and must be replaced and that only a move to national and local control will bring  sustainability to the Scottish fishing industry in the future."

The £10 million part of the package that has been allocated to transitional funding presumably covers the six months of interim measures that will, hopefully, end in July. Bearing in mind the fact that the European Union has rejected cod recovery plan proposals on more than one occasion in the past, is the minister confident that those draconian interim measures will end in July? What provision has he made if they do not?

Does the minister realise that it is taking fishermen from Scotland's north coast up to 10 hours to steam through the areas that are closed to fishing due to the cod spawning box? Does he realise that the rush to beat the 15-days-at-sea scheme is therefore putting vessels and crews at risk?

I welcome the chance that Robin Harper has given us to debate organic farming. Recently, farming has been in a dreadful state and organic farming appears to be a growth sector that produces benefits. For example, organic farming uses less energy, it is good for biodiversity, it is good for wildlife—especially bird life—it is good for species, rich vegetation and more labour is employed on organic farms. I disagree with Angus MacKay, who said that organic food is better quality. There is no factual evidence to support that. Although I agree with Robin Harper that the Government should help organic and environmentally friendly farmers and producers, I do not believe that a target of making 20 per cent of Scottish land organic is the way to go about it. Peter Stewart of the National Farmers Union of Scotland said: "If I were struggling to find the premium that I require and a mechanism to market what I produce in an orderly manner, the thought of having to produce an entire further tranche—without the policy being thoroughly thought through—would probably mean that I would give up organic production tomorrow."—[ Official Report, Rural Development Committee , 3 December 2002; c 3884.] Store lambs and store calves raised in the Scottish hills are just as organic as the wild red deer that roam the same terrain. However, many hill farmers winter young breeding stock on better land elsewhere—that is accepted practice for sheep and cattle—and those wintering areas would also have to be organic to comply with the  rules. If an organic hill store producer finished their lambs on better grass in an arable area that was not organically certified, those animals would lose their status.

I just do not have time to talk about that now. We can talk about it later. Winter feed also has to be bought in, and that would have to come from organic areas. All those factors greatly increase the overheads of the average hill farmer, so a way must be found of linking producers and finishers together. Otherwise, much of the value of the organic aid scheme will be lost. Government support should be not for land targets, but for targets that improve the profitability and sustainability of organic farming. We recently had a debate on recycling. Having talked to councillors in the Highlands, I was left with the words, "No targets without markets," literally ringing in my ears. The organic sector is the same. Last Saturday, I visited the Edinburgh farmers' market in Castle Terrace and viewed the many stalls selling excellent produce, much of which was organic. That was very encouraging. Organic farming is a good niche sector and should be encouraged, but we must link the environment and farming. I support organic farming as part of the Scottish agricultural sector.

First, I notice that £40 million of the £50 million on offer is for decommissioning. In other words, it is a redundancy package for the Scottish white-fish fleet. Does the First Minister honestly think that the £10 million left over will be anything like enough to cover the losses of the affiliated fishery workers and processors? Secondly, what is to happen to the boats that carry on? They will labour under 50 per cent cuts in their quotas and 50 per cent cuts in the number of fishing days. What will the First Minister's Government do to help those fishermen who are bravely trying to soldier on against the most appalling odds?

One day, we might have an aquaculture bill—I hope so. One day, we might also have a single regulatory body for aquaculture, which would make things very much easier for the aquaculture industry and for the other industries that live alongside it. However, until that day arrives, we will have to rely on secondary legislation in bills such as this. It is encouraging that, through these amendments, aquaculture and fish farming are being put into the planning system. It is a good start in improving reasonable controls. In the past, there has been considerable concern about the accuracy of SEPA's discharge controls and the incompleteness of the environmental impact assessments in regard to fish farming. The example at Ardmair stands out. The assessment there took little account of tidal flows in a fish cage site where there was not enough tidal flow to shift the build-up of detritus on the sea bed. Any pollution on such a scale is a potential environmental time bomb. Again, the environmental impact assessment had no information on the levels of sea lice in the cages prior to the use of the new medicine, Slice. If councils have new planning powers, it will be important that they investigate thoroughly applications for fish farms. In the absence of an aquaculture bill, there must be binding rules and strict statutory national planning policy guidelines that will give councils the guidance that they need when considering applications from different sections of the aquaculture industry. Only in that way will we achieve good biodiversity and sustainable co-existence among different stakeholders within our coastal environment. It would indeed be an achievement to give better control over the aquatic environment of Scotland—and a better management system—out to a 3-mile limit. I hope that the minister will give us an assurance that the amendments will achieve that end.

I agree with the thrust of the motion, but I also agree with John Scott that attention must be paid to local communities' concerns about the siting of wind farms when they impinge on people's lives. I have heard many concerns about wind farms from people in the Inverliever area of Loch Aweside and from residents of Skye. I am excited by the suggestion that an enormous ocean energy plant might be established off the Western Isles. Construction might revitalise the Arnish yard in Stornoway, which would be enormously important for that town, just as the construction of the Vestas factory at Machrihanish has been important for Campbeltown. I will talk briefly about a subject that I raised during the Executive debate on forestry the other day. It would be a good idea to put the non-fossil-fuel premium on forestry wood chips. That would open up a new industry in Scotland with a material that is carbon neutral and eternally renewable and can be used for heating and light. In Malmö in  Sweden, 100,000 houses are heated with that material. A pilot project near Lochgilphead in Argyll heats some 50 homes. Putting the non-fossil-fuel premium on wood would give an added bonus to the forestry industry, which is going through a hard time. It would also allow extra employment through the creation of new mills. Finally, it would cut down on the waste of forest products, which would mean tidier and cleaner forests in Scotland.

In relation to amendment 38, it is worth emphasising that ensuring continuity of employment would benefit the crofting community, as the community would be able to draw on the existing knowledge and professional expertise of the river workers who already worked on the rivers. It would also help the crofting community to maintain the existing angling tenants. Many ghillies are old friends of tenants, going back years and years, and they draw the tenants back to the rivers each year. I am amazed by Stewart Stevenson. He seems to have had more jobs than any man I have ever met. It would not surprise me if he told us that he had been an astronaut. With regard to what Fergus Ewing said, the fact that salmon fishings are falling in value, or have fallen in value, by as much as 75 per cent in some cases, is evidence that we are right and that the bill will damage the value of salmon fishings. Anyone who says—as Stewart Stevenson did—that the bill would widen the scope is wrong, because limiting the buying to crofting communities will certainly not widen the scope, but will narrow it.

Amendment 58 deals with conservation and netting. Over the past 10 years, a great many netting stations have been closed as part of a conservation drive to halt the decline of wild salmon and sea trout stocks. Although some stations have been bought out or formally closed down, many others have become dormant as conservation has become the overriding factor. Although there is little doubt that some dormant netting stations could, if reactivated, be quite profitable in the short term, any short-term gain would be very short lived, because additional netting effort would inevitably reduce future numbers of returning salmon. As a result, reopening dormant netting stations would also impact adversely on anglers. After all, a salmon that is caught on rod and line is worth several thousand pounds to the local economy, whereas a netted salmon contributes no more than the fish's value on the fishmonger's slab. Amendment 58 simply seeks to remove the possibility of reopening dormant netting stations.

I am not saying for a moment that crofters would be more liable than anyone else to reopen fishings; the amendment would cover whoever had the fishings. It has been so difficult to close some estuarine netting stations that it would be disastrous for conservation if they reopened. The provision would apply to everyone. When the draft bill was published in February 2001, salmon fishings were part of the eligible additional land that crofting community bodies had to show it was necessary for them to acquire to  achieve sustainable development. However, when the bill was introduced, that requirement was dropped for salmon fishings; amendment 10 would restore it. Extra safeguards need to be in place in cases where crofting community bodies are allowed to buy neighbouring land, which is a more draconian power than that in any previous legislation. Amendment 11 would introduce another criterion for use by ministers in considering an application by a crofting community body. Like amendment 10, it is designed to safeguard well-run salmon fishings, this time by placing a requirement on ministers to decide on which salmon fishings sustainable development is not taking place. If, as we heard many times this morning, the legislation is intended to apply only to badly managed salmon fishings, there is no harm in making that clear. I expect that Jamie Stone will speak to amendment 38, in his name. The amendment proposes to safeguard employment, which we talked about this morning. Amendment 59 seeks purely to show what sort of people are employed on salmon rivers and to make it easier to identify those people. We have been told that well-run and sustainable salmon fishings have nothing to fear from the bill; we heard that time and again this morning. However, the bill includes no such assurance and the effect of that omission might be to deter investment by river owners. Investment is vital to conserve salmon stocks for the future. The incentive for river owners to invest in salmon conservation projects will inevitably be reduced if there is a possibility that the community may seek to acquire the fishings by compulsory purchase. Amendment 60 would give some security to the many salmon river owners who invest considerable sums with the aim of improving salmon stocks for the benefit of all. It is worth noting that Amhuinnsuidhe estate, which has some of the best salmon fishings in the Western Isles, has apparently attracted no bids for the estate as a whole. One cannot help feeling that potential buyers have been put off by the impending legislation. I move amendment 58.

I have to declare an interest, in that I am an honorary warden on a river system.

Just "a salmon fishery", I note. The witnesses representing the Crofting Counties Fishing Rights Group were indeed allowed to give evidence to the Rural Development Committee, but were treated with such hostility by certain MSPs that their evidence was swept aside in a torrent of prejudice that, frankly, made me feel ashamed to be a member of the Parliament, let alone of the Rural Development Committee. The Crofting Counties Fishing Rights Group represents some 600 river managers and workers, who are unhappy with part 3. The Highlands and Islands Rivers Association represents some 500 owners, who are also unhappy with part 3.

Collectively, those people represent the expertise that has made Scottish salmon rivers the envy of the world. Surely it is the job of MSPs to listen to the evidence of experts before they make up their minds, and not just to use committees as stages on which to display their personal prejudices?

The proposed legislation under part 3 is objectionable because it introduces the compulsory purchase of permanent interests in which the applicant had no previous interest. It differs from part 2, which gives communities the first refusal on land that comes up for sale. The proposals on salmon fishings make the legislation discriminatory. The Executive has never explained why salmon fishings on neighbouring land have been included under the provisions. Why not include golf courses or hotels? Why just salmon fishings?

No, sorry. The policy memorandum states:  "The Bill will enable crofting community bodies ... to buy all the land which the crofters use including ... the salmon fishing exercisable from that land".

Yet there are no provisions—

No. There are no provisions to restrict compulsory purchase powers to salmon fishings that are actually used by the applicant. In written answer S1W-30827, the Executive stated: "The bill does not provide for the purchase of adjacent salmon fishings but only for the purchase of salmon fishings that are exercisable from and on croft land."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 14 November 2002; p 2244.]  Will the Scottish Executive please explain the difference between an adjacent salmon fishing and a fishing that is exercisable from croft land? We are confused. Despite the promise that Rhona Brankin made of an in-depth analysis of the freshwater fisheries sector, no research has been carried out on the effect of part 3 on that sector. Because of the employment and investment concerned, surely such an analysis is vital. One of the requirements of European Union law is that legislation is proportionate to the benefit that it is to provide. In this case, however, the question of any benefit to crofting communities is completely outweighed by the disastrous loss to the salmon fishery owner and to the fishery itself and by the number of redundant fishery employees. Unless the Scottish Executive intends to pay for existing and future fisheries projects, salmon fishing will suffer. I object to the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill because it is extreme, unjustified, unchecked, unscrutinised, disproportionate and unresearched. Part 3 should be removed.

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

It would be unfortunate if the reform in part 3 had the effect of interfering with the wild salmon angling industry, which brings many millions of pounds to areas that are lucky enough to have good salmon rivers. In 1997, £70 million was spent on salmon fishing. For centuries the management of Scottish salmon rivers has been considered throughout the world to be excellent. That is because the management expertise exists and the necessary investment for improvement is available. Part 3 is about compulsory purchase. Compulsory purchase should happen only in the public interest. That Scottish salmon fishing should suffer is blatantly not in the public interest. As a result, angling tourism will suffer and river workers will lose their jobs.

Salmon fishing and angling tourism will suffer if part 3 is enacted.

Who will pay for that damage?

Members saw the Highland river workers making their dignified protest outside the Parliament yesterday. Why did those workers feel that it was necessary to travel hundreds of miles from areas such as Sutherland and Caithness? They felt it necessary simply because they realise that their jobs and livelihoods are under threat from part 3 and they do not feel that they were  fairly treated by the Parliament in that they and the Highlands and Islands Rivers Association were refused the right to give oral evidence to the Justice 2 Committee.

I am delighted to hear about the new ferry, but does the minister agree that it could not possibly compensate for the loss of the air service?

I congratulate Duncan Hamilton on securing the debate and the people of the Isle of Barra air service campaign group on their good organisation. It is obvious that those people are worried about their air service and they will be glad to hear Alasdair Morrison assuring them that the air service will continue. Barra is a famous and historic island and transport issues have always ranked highly there. In fact, there is a local legend that, before the great flood, Noah was good enough to put out an early equivalent of an e-mail that asked various parties whether they would like to come on board. The Macneil of Barra is reputed to have replied, "Thank you, but I already have my own vessel." During the recent inquiry into integrated rural development—the report of which has just been published—the issue of transport links was raised again and again. While we were on Colonsay, local people suggested that there was a two-tier policy for islands and that Colonsay was in the second-class section. I hope that that is not the case. If it is, I hope that the same does not apply to Barra, although that unfortunately appears to be so. I want to make several points. There is no requirement from Europe for a survey to justify a public service obligation. The issue is down to the Scottish Executive. It is necessary only to have a review to fix ticket prices, seating capacities and the regularity of flights. Such matters need to be discussed between the member state and the carrier, which in this case is Loganair. There would  be no need to review the PSO unless there was evidence that the peripherality of Barra had been removed. However, how a 50-minute passenger ferry link in a flat-bottomed boat between Barra and Eriskay could possibly be seen to make up for the loss of an hour-long flight that links Barra directly to Glasgow, which is Scotland's biggest city, is beyond me and beggars belief. The vast majority of people on Barra would prefer to keep the air service, but the question has never been asked of them. They have certainly not had the chance to respond to any consultation. If Lewis Macdonald or anyone else is saying that the impact of the extra ferry service changes definitions of peripherality and lifeline services, there could be huge implications for air services to other islands and to peripheral mainland areas such as Campbeltown and Wick. It would be unreasonable if a consultation exercise on this subject did not include people from those areas. The building of the Eriskay causeway and the new ferry link to Eriskay, for which I remember campaigning in 1997, are good for Barra and the Uists, and fit in with the sensible policy of linking island archipelagos. However, if the result of those projects is the loss of Barra's air service, which would make Barra the most peripheral island in Scotland, the price is far too high to pay. We are trying to support rural communities. Barra is a strong community and it is valuable in relation to saving the Gaelic language. It is important to stress the fact that the school has a Gaelic-medium unit. I cannot believe that a backroom deal was done whereby the loss of Barra's airport was traded for the construction of the Eriskay causeway, but I have heard that suggested. If that were true, it would be scandalous. I ask the minister to confirm that the rumour is untrue. The Barra air service has existed for 80 years. It provides great value for businesses in Barra and to the health and education services of the island. It certainly provides value for money, which seems to be the other criterion on which the Scottish Executive is judging the case. The service is costing £340,000 a year, which is easily justified if one considers the alternative expense of bringing in helicopter ambulances at five times the cost of an air journey at the moment. Of course, the other alternative is forcing sick people, who are often in pain, to make a ferry journey, possibly in bad weather, followed by a long drive to Benbecula and a flight to Glasgow or Stornoway to get to a hospital. The psychological benefit of being only one hour from Glasgow is most reassuring to residents, businessmen and holiday visitors, who know that they will be able to leave quickly in the event of any emergency. Barra's 1,200 residents have a propensity to fly  that is double that of the rest of Scotland. I will fight to keep Barra airport and the air service, even if that means that a new airport has to be built for modern air traffic. I know Barra well. It can be a paradise, a jewel set in deep blue sea, one of Scotland's finest possessions. There is a wonderful community on Barra that should be encouraged to prosper. The Scottish Executive makes much of an inclusive Scotland, so I say to it that it should not isolate Barra by removing the vital air service. It would be ironic if the advent of devolution and a Parliament in Scotland heralded the demise and the exclusion of an island such as Barra.

Has the Scottish Executive made an assessment of how many Scottish fishing vessels, Scottish fish processors and jobs in the Scottish fishing industry will go as a result of the outcome of the December meeting of the European Union fisheries council? If so, when will it be in a position to give us those figures?

As a member of the Robin Rigg Offshore Wind Farm (Navigation and Fishing) (Scotland) Bill Committee, I will speak only about the business with which our committee is concerned—navigation and fishery matters. I must stress that the bill will not confer authority for the building of the wind farm or for the generation of electricity. I will leave comments on those issues and on the merits or disadvantages of wind farms to my colleagues. The bill is only one of a number of applications relating to the proposed wind farm that await approval. The committee that is dealing with the bill differs from a normal parliamentary committee in that it has a quasi-judicial status. Any witness who gives evidence has to take an oath, as proceedings could be subject to legal challenge. Through the bill, its promoters seek to interfere with navigation and fishing in the Solway firth and to create exclusion zones around the proposed wind farm during its construction and operation. They also seek to make provision for the safety of the wind farm and of vessels in the area around it. It has been asked why section 34 of the Coast Protection Act 1949 would not offer sufficient protection. The promoters' answer is that section 34 would not give them a legal defence against any claims that they were causing a nuisance to fishermen and mariners. The promoters feel that exclusion zones would minimise the likelihood of accidents to sailors and fishermen and to construction workers on the site, which is clearly a major consideration. However, the Maritime and Coastguard Agency is concerned that exclusion zones would cause complex enforcement problems. Although that may be an issue, I would suggest that the protection of human life and the prevention of accidents must take precedence, especially as offshore wind farm construction in the United Kingdom is in its infancy, and as there is little experience here of the dangers and problems that may exist.  Exclusion zones in the offshore oil and gas industry provide a precedent. The promoters put the case that an exclusion zone puts mariners on notice and creates a boundary around a hazardous or dangerous area. It will be important that measures are taken to advertise the whereabouts of any exclusion zone. The second purpose of the exclusion zone would be to give the promoters the right to seek police action in the event of deliberate interference by individuals or groups of people with the construction or operation of the wind farm. Mr Cubbin of the Maritime and Coastguard Agency said that nobody would be able to police the exclusion zone, and that the agency would not be responsible for that. He said that those who have exclusion zones should police them themselves. The agency argues that the alternative to exclusion zones is for the area to be designated as one to be avoided. The promoters feel that, although that would meet their first wish, which is to put mariners on notice of the site, it would not deal with the other matter of preventing deliberate interference. I feel that the promoters are right about that. In layman's terms, exclusion zones would give the law some teeth. Whether or not there is an exclusion zone, it is likely that vessels will, from time to time, be it through bad visibility, bad weather, navigation error or engine failure, find themselves in proximity to the wind turbines. It is therefore essential that there be plenty of clearance between the tips of the rotor blades and the vessels' masts. Sometimes, masts can be very high. It is unlikely that a rotor could catch the rigging of a yacht, but it would be catastrophic if that were to happen. I was concerned by the promoter's wish to amend the bill to increase the length of the rotor blades from 100m to 104m without raising the rotors further above the water. That is being proposed because such an increase in rotor length will give the turbine a significantly higher energy yield, which is obviously what the promoters would like, but it is important that safety is not compromised as a result of that. The promoters claim that the blades could be stopped within 30 seconds, but a great deal of damage could be done in that time. The Royal Yachting Association does not object to the bill in principle, but points out that it provides the first opportunity for a full public examination of the effects of such a development on navigation and fishing rights. Aside from the issue of danger, which I have already raised, the association had concerns over the removal of derelict machinery at the end of the wind farm's life. The Commissioners of Northern Lighthouses are satisfied with the terms of the bill as it applies to them, provided that the establishment of the site is  considered under the Coast Protection Act 1949, which will ensure a proper degree of marking buoys and lights. There is fishing for high-quality white fish, brill, flatfish and hake in the area, and a small number of vessels fish for brown shrimp, mainly between November and April. There is concern on the part of fishermen, in particular on the part of the Cumbria Sea Fisheries Committee, that their activities might be compromised by the wind farm. We noted the concerns of local fishermen and felt that there must be further consultation between promoters and fishermen with regard to their activities. Indeed, there has been a late objection from the Solway fishermen. Bearing all that in mind, the committee was happy with the general principles of the bill.

I thank the minister for giving me a copy of his statement. I associate the Scottish Conservative party with the minister's remarks about the terrible tragedy suffered by Winnie Ewing and her family. Our deepest sympathy goes out to them. I am glad that the minister said that the pelagic and nephrop sectors will be unaffected. The nephrop industry was, however, looking for an increase in quota, rather than a small decrease. How can the minister say that the quotas for member states will continue as before if he also says that there is to be a total allowable catch reduction of 40 per cent on cod, of 50 per cent on haddock and of 55 per cent on whiting? Those are all stocks on which the Scottish white-fish industry depends. What is the point of Scotland's having quotas if Fischler can simply turn off the tap? Given that the scientists say that any cod plan might have to be in place for seven years, how many vessels does the minister estimate will remain in the Scottish fleet at the end of this year and in future years? Will he provide an estimate of the size of the Scottish fleet at the end of the seven-year period? Can he guarantee that there will be a Scottish fishing fleet? How many processing plants will be lost this year and in future years? How many jobs connected with the fishing industry will there be at the end of this year and at the end of future years? I ask those questions because the real test for the fisheries minister, following the appalling Brussels result, lies in managing to save the Scottish fishing fleet, the jobs that depend on it and the livelihoods of so many rural communities that depend on the fishing industry. Fishermen have asked me why, when we are dealing with Scottish fish in Scottish waters, the Scottish fleet should have to suffer the pain while other fleets go relatively unscathed. The regulation refers to days away from port, rather than days at sea. Will the minister confirm  whether the regulation means days away from a specified port or days away from any port? Does the fact that the figure of 15 days—or nine days, which we are led to believe is the real figure—relies on decommissioning, the results of which will be monitored, mean that the number of days may be altered downwards in future years? Can the minister confirm that the six-month emergency measures will last for six months and not for a further two periods of six months each if there is no full agreement on the future cod recovery plan? What plans does the Scottish Executive have to ensure that sufficient resources will be invested in the fishing industry by the beginning of February, to ensure minimum disruption to fishing communities? Even if the minister does not believe in our policy of national control of fisheries, does he agree that nothing could be worse than this mess, which has been orchestrated by unelected Brussels bureaucrats?

Every form of flexibility must be used to keep the Scottish agricultural sector competitive. For that reason alone, I am pleased that the bill seeks to address landlord and tenant agreements by making them better for both parties. That would represent progress. It should be possible for those who have agricultural expertise to rent farms—professionalism has always been a strength of our agricultural industry. It must also be possible for landlords and tenants to make agreements that are honoured by both sides. I see value in the proposed legislation  on short limited duration and limited duration tenancies and there are certainly advantages in the diversification and dispute resolution proposals. Since the enactment of the first Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 1883, arbitration has been the primary method of dispute resolution between landlords and tenants and, in recent years, the cost of arbitration has escalated while incomes have plummeted and been the subject of much criticism. The bill seeks to diminish costs by taking prime jurisdiction away from the arbitrator and placing it in the hands of the Scottish Land Court. The bill seeks to give the Land Court much wider powers, including the ability to decide on whether a tenancy exists or has been terminated. That is a major improvement because, until now, that question had to be determined either in the Court of Session or a sheriff court, with a consequent multiplication of costs. There is relief that the proposed legislation appears to recognise that limited partnerships have been in use for many years and that, in order to not disturb long-standing commercial expectations, section 42 of the bill will apply only to tenancies that are entered into after the commencement of the proposed act. If the new forms of tenancy meet the economic needs of the industry, limited partnerships will disappear anyway, which means that there will be more privacy for tenants in conducting their affairs and—from a landlord's point of view—they will know more precisely where they stand under one or other of the new statutory tenancies. Those are the good points of what was originally intended in the consultation, but that has all been hijacked by the inclusion of the pre-emptive right to buy leading to demands for an absolute right to buy. To be frank, if that approach wins favour with Parliament, there is little point in spending a lot of time on the other aspects of the bill, because no one will let agricultural land. There is already evidence that new letting is not taking place, which is disastrous for the agricultural industry because tenancies are the first rung on the ladder for agricultural workers who rightly aspire to running their own farming businesses. It seems to me to be unfair that those workers should be denied fulfilment of their ambitions because of preferential treatment of one sector of the industry, namely those who have secure tenancies. We must always remember that permanent security was introduced to encourage tenants to invest in farming improvements, in order that the UK could be self-sufficient in food. That was in the 1940s. It was a national strategic goal and was deemed to be in the public interest, but things have changed dramatically since then. There are food surpluses, and if we continue to import Black  sea grain at £35 per tonne, no amount of production and investment facilities will enable our farmers to compete on price. New investment must be made in marketing and diversification. Far from its being in the public interest, the absolute right to buy will simply increase fragmentation and reduce investment, and will possibly produce a situation similar to the one in Ireland, where arable land is £5,000 an acre, there is no land to let, and tenants are coming over here to try to get leases. There are hundreds of agricultural workers who would give their eye teeth for a secure tenancy, but that will be denied them if an absolute right to buy goes ahead. Members should bear in mind the fact that secure tenants often pay less rent for their holding than the house alone would fetch on the open market; in fact, the house is often thrown in free. They enjoy the same security that we will have in Parliament, if we ever reach our new dome—sorry, I mean home—in Holyrood. Unfortunately, one can hardly say that that house was thrown in for free.

Does the minister agree that cuts in industrial fishing should be the same as those that are offered to the Scottish white-fish industry—total closure or a cut in quota of at least 80 per cent? Does he also agree that it is ridiculous, given all the conservation measures that the Scottish fleet has taken, that people who pursue industrial fishing can do so with mesh sizes that are no bigger than those of fish-net stockings?

Does the minister believe that the announcement of the news will be a wake or just an autopsy for the Scottish fishing industry? Will he ask Herr Fischler who will benefit from the destruction of Scottish fishing jobs?

On November 14, at First Minister's question time, I asked the Deputy First Minister to pass on to the First Minister and Tony Blair the fact "that we have 30 days to save our fishing industry and that the clock is now ticking".— [ Official Report , 14 November 2002; c 15425.]  The clock is still ticking, louder and louder. The fishermen are protesting strongly and are standing up for their industry, but when will their political leaders do the same? Will Tony Blair and Elliot Morley kowtow to Franz Fischler and his unthinkable plan, which will close an industry that supports upwards of 40,000 jobs and that is the mainstay of many Scottish fishing communities? The awful thing is that it appears that that may be the case. I watched the Prime Minister answer a question on fishing in the House of Commons yesterday. He implied that all our fisheries stocks were in a bad way. That shows ignorance of the real state of play. Haddock, which is the main fish caught by the Scottish fleet, is more plentiful than at any time since 1971 and stocks of other fish are also on an upward curve. The only stock that seems depleted is cod, which are plentiful further north and indeed in some areas of the north North sea.  The North sea has warmed up. Cod do not like warm water; in fact, they do not feed in water that is warmer than 9 deg C. That is probably why they are not in abundance in the central North sea, but it is certainly no reason to stop Scottish fishermen catching haddock and whiting. After all, Scottish fishermen have done all in their power—often unilaterally—to accept conservation measures and the cod recovery plan in order to help the cod stock. The ICES scientific data were collected in 2001, before stringent conservation measures were put in place, so the benefits of those measures have not yet been assessed. Scottish fishermen extended their net mesh sizes to up to 120mm and fitted square-mesh panels to help the young fish to escape. Last spring, the fishermen suffered the 12-week closure of 40,000 square miles of cod spawning grounds in the North sea without compensation and the decommissioning of 170 fishing vessels. All that left many thousands of tonnes of fish swimming in the sea that would otherwise have been caught. There are recorded precedents of failures of fish stocks in our waters. In the 1920s, cod stocks were in a similar situation. In the late 1950s, the sea was virtually devoid of haddock. That species recovered within six years, despite the fact that there was no haddock recovery plan. In May this year, the UK fisheries minister, Elliot Morley, assured fishermen that the Scottish fleet would escape further cuts. What has happened to that promise? What is Mr Morley saying or doing now to avert the calamity? He has been nowhere near Scotland's fishermen to offer them any help or support, which seems extraordinary. After visiting fishermen in the north-east last week, Iain Duncan Smith wrote to the Prime Minister, saying: "You have an opportunity at Copenhagen this week to make it clear that there is no justification for these proposals ... I believe that you should take personal charge of this vital issue. To do so would illustrate the Government's commitment to our fishermen." Mr Blair's response, which I have before me, was to say: "I believe that to raise the issue at the European Council would be a mistake." He went on to wriggle away from responsibility, hiding behind outdated science.

That is an historic about-turn because, in his letter dated 11 December 2002, the Prime Minister said precisely the opposite.

As Phil Gallie says, I have it in writing. It is unbelievable that the Scottish fishing fleet, which has done more for conservation than any other, should have to accept the blame and penalties for a situation that has been caused by years of bungling and mismanagement of the CFP by unelected Brussels bureaucrats. I regret to say that the management of the CFP has been on the poor side of appalling. It is time that the unfortunate experiment of collective harvesting of a common resource came to an end, before it exterminates a fishing industry that has benefited Scotland for 1,000 years.

I do not have time to take an intervention. If ever there were a monument to failure, the CFP is that monument. It should be scrapped and replaced by a system that combines local and national management with science and fisheries expertise. In the CFP reform proposals, the Commission calls for an approach that will bring EU fleet capacity into balance with available fisheries resources. However, in Scotland's case, it has totally abandoned that principle. Its proposals would wipe out the entire Scottish white-fish fleet, despite the fact that there is an abundance of haddock, whiting, plaice, saith and, of course, prawns. Quota cuts of 80 per cent would amount to a total closure. In that situation, the fishermen would not fish, the processors would not be supplied and the whole Scottish fishing industry would go down the tubes. Scottish fishermen were expecting a rise in quotas or, at the very least, the maintenance of the status quo. The plain truth is that any further cuts will make the industry unviable. We saw Herr Fischler's duplicity over the allocation of quotas for deepwater stocks, which ended up with Scotland getting a paltry 2 per cent of the quota for those species. This is the same Herr Fischler who awards an industrial fishing allocation to the Scandinavians of 1,020,000 tonnes. That means their catching accidentally 204,000 tonnes of baby whiting, haddock and cod, which they turn into pig feed. That is nearly three times the allocation of those species for the entire UK fleet. What kind of conservation is that? Herr  Fischler has isolated the UK position by allocating reasonable quotas of plaice and sole to Belgium and Holland to placate them, while calling for catastrophic cuts in the haddock quota, which is important only to Scotland. This is crisis time for the Scottish fishing industry. I wish Ross Finnie and his team a successful outcome to their mission, but I tell him that there must be no backing down in the face of what is an obscene threat to one of Scotland's most important industries. Politicians must unite behind the fishing industry. They must say no—no to Fischler and no to the end of Scottish fishing. I move amendment S1M-3700.1, to leave out from "supports" to end and insert: "recognises the importance of sustainable fisheries for the well-being of the Scottish fishing industry and fishing communities and therefore strongly rejects any advice that would close Scotland's mixed fishery; believes that more time is required to assess truly the current state of fish stocks and the effects of the conservation measures already taken by Scottish fishermen; believes that elected MEPs should have the opportunity to debate and vote on any new quota cuts before they are implemented; urges fisheries ministers Ross Finnie and Elliot Morley to ensure that they do not preside over the decimation of Scotland's fishing industry but instead achieve an outcome that is fair and equitable to Scottish fishermen, and ultimately believes that the Common Fisheries Policy of collective management has failed and therefore should be scrapped and replaced by national and local control and management of European waters as the only way to ensure future sustainability of fish stocks and thus the fishing industry."

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister also accept that 80 per cent cuts are unacceptable?

I agree with Irene McGugan's opening remarks about the need to give children the best possible start in life. I only hope that the SNP offers some new ideas rather than more of the same failed policies that Labour has promoted. Those have not dealt with Scotland's social problems and have therefore not dealt with the problems that face our children and young people. If the lot of children in the 21 st century is to improve, that will be brought about only by policies that create wealth and opportunity and therefore security. Those things can be achieved only in an atmosphere of peaceful public order. Everyone agrees that there has been an explosion of youth crime, an increase in truancy and that there is among our youth apathy towards society that is dangerous for the future. Our institutions are failing young people, but the SNP blames parents. In 2001, the SNP proposed that parents should be fined when their children commit crimes—I question whether that would be helpful. Individual families might be made up of badly behaved and well-behaved children, so it  seems to me to be wrong that those who are well behaved should suffer because their parents would be made poorer by fines that result from the actions of their brothers and sisters. Unfortunately, the Scottish Executive's 10-point plan to combat youth crime seems, as usual, to be spin rather than substance. It is devoted to creating good media coverage for the Executive rather than to addressing the causes of youth crime and tackling those causes head on. Why will the Executive's campaign of high-visibility policing end after December? That is like telling the horse when the stable door will be left open. All the reviews and feasibility projects that we hear about from the Executive simply fill in time on Scottish television when there is no other news.

That demonstrates the spectacular U-turn that the Executive has made. Why does not the Executive do something about the causes of youth crime and the detection of such crime? We need more high-visibility community police officers who get to know local people and work with parents, schools and community groups to encourage good behaviour among children and young people. Police officers, social workers and, above all, parents must instil in children a sense of responsibility to members of their own family, because that in turn breeds responsibility among individuals for their respective communities. Those communities then feel a responsibility to the nation as a whole. That is how good civil society is achieved.

I am glad that Michael Russell at least admits that child poverty was a lot better under Margaret Thatcher than it is now. It is encouraging that the Executive has given up on its idea of sending 16 and 17-year-olds to children's panels. That was common sense, because such panels should deal with the vulnerable and those at risk. Unfortunately, the Scottish Government's targets  for eliminating child poverty within a generation are not being met. Although the SNP offers no alternative policies other than independence, it at least admits that child poverty is worse now than when the Conservatives were in power. That was reiterated in Michael Russell's words this morning. It is left-wing socialist policies that have failed and are failing Scots children. One in five Scots of working age is on benefits. That is shameful. The figure has been brought about by years of a dependency culture. The way to end poverty is to allow wealth-creation policies that provide economic opportunity and security for all, and to find solutions that pull everyone up rather than pull more people down and which pull the vulnerable in our society backwards.

No. It is essential that the causes of the 21 st century poverty that affects children, which has been brought about by increased fragility of family and community, be identified, acknowledged and addressed urgently. We believe that every child's individuality is important and that a diverse education system will better suit the needs of all our country's children. The best way in which to achieve that is to provide real choice in education and to give head teachers the flexibility to cater for that choice.

If a mistake has been made and an enormous amount of money has been lost for the Highlands and Islands, does the minister intend to get the money back and, if so, how?

Does the Executive accept that, if all the people in the Highlands and Islands had a say in the development of transport services, there would be an overwhelming chorus of voices emphasising that the car is a necessity in that region and that more should be done to improve roads in the area and reduce the cost of motoring?

Will the member take an intervention?

Recently, Hugh Allen, the secretary of Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association, told me that a fish processing factory in Mallaig had closed down because it could not find enough housing for the factory's employees. That is a terrible situation, especially when the Scottish Executive says that it is committed to maintaining rural communities. The Rural Development Committee, of which I am a member, has recently travelled to several areas of rural Scotland to take evidence for our inquiry into integrated rural development. It became obvious from that evidence that affordable housing was a key issue that must be addressed if we are to have thriving rural communities. Gone are the days when the communities would pull together physically to build a house of stone and thatch for someone who needed one. Housing associations should fulfil that need, but they face many difficulties. For example, the issue of second homes poses a difficulty. No one can blame people for wanting to have a holiday home in a beautiful place, and some people let holidays homes as their business, which brings in useful income. However, it is extremely frustrating when houses are snapped up for that purpose while young people who want to live in the area who cannot find a home. A recent survey in Mull, Iona and Ulva concluded that local people have high dependence on low and seasonable incomes, but that the housing market is distorted by significant immigration of people who want retirement and holiday homes. The decision on charging council tax for second homes should be devolved to individual councils so that they can decide what is in the best interests of their own areas. A one-size-fits-all solution seems wrong. After all, there are different rates of council tax in different areas. Skye and Lochalsh, Lochaber and the inner Moray firth are particularly affected by second home ownership, as are many areas in Argyll and Bute. The resale of former council homes also  reduces the supply of affordable rented housing and the supply of further houses has dried up. Out of 140 homes in Plockton, the village that John Farquhar Munro mentioned, 51 are holiday homes and only 22 are council houses. In the Highlands in the past 10 years, council right-to-buy sales totalled 6,198. During the same period, 2,263 new houses were built by the council and by housing associations, leaving a shortfall of 4,000 houses. With so few houses available for rent, the sale of even a few creates a serious imbalance. We require houses that can be erected quickly, using modern high technology, in areas where housing is most needed. They should be built with enough space to accommodate young families and should be highly energy efficient and built with modern materials. Above all, their appearance must fit in with the environment. If enough houses were fabricated, the costs would be low enough to make them affordable. Some building contractors who are making inroads in that direction, which is very encouraging. Alasdair Morrison mentioned the crofting building grants and loans scheme, which is a good way of producing new low-cost houses in crofting communities. However, that scheme has failed to keep pace with inflation and I ask the Executive to review and update it as soon as possible. Relaxing planning controls would guarantee a greater supply of affordable housing. That is one of the key steps that should be taken.

Will the member give way?

In order to understand the full impact of the foot-and-mouth outbreak on people in the Highlands and Islands, one must first take account of the fact that incomes from the primary industries, such as farming, crofting and tourism, were already at a low ebb. Since 1996, prices have fallen disastrously. The light was beginning  to glimmer at the end of the tunnel, as was shown by the high prices in the European markets—especially for lamb—in the autumn of 2001. The outbreak was particularly galling for Highlands and Islands farmers and crofters, much of whose income depends on the sheep annual premium. That premium is paid to farmers in less favoured areas and its level is governed by the average lamb price in Europe. At one point, Irish farmers were selling lambs for £70, while farmers in the Highlands and Islands were lucky to get £15. It is ironic that the high European price meant that the sheep annual premium payment to farmers here was cut drastically to less than half of the payment in the previous year. That one effect of foot-and-mouth disease slashed the incomes of farmers and crofters and the measures that had to be taken for protection against foot-and-mouth disease greatly increased their costs.

No. I am sorry. My main memory is of letters and telephone calls from confused farmers, crofters and tourism operators asking what was and was not open and where they could get advice. There was a lack of information from Pentland House and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food's veterinary service at Jeanfield House in Perth, which is responsible for veterinary matters of state importance. It was difficult to contact that service by fax or phone—it appeared to have gone underground. It is vital that if foot-and-mouth disease recurs, a proper strategy is in place so that people know clearly what they should and should not do. The lack of information led to backbiting between tourism and farming interests, which should never have happened. Farmers who did not wish to bring foot-and-mouth disease on to their farms put up signs, but they were attacked by the ministry for doing so. Where was the ministry's advice and reassurance? I am chairman of the Loch Awe Improvement Association, which manages some 80 miles of bank fishing for trout and coarse fish. Forest Enterprise closed its land, which constitutes between 60 per cent and 70 per cent of the area that we also manage, but no advice was given to our association. The opening of the trout season was on 15 March, when Loch Awe is usually visited by many anglers from the central belt and the south of Scotland. Many of those people might have come from infected areas. We received calls from members of the public, angling associations and the police about what we were doing and whether we were open or closed. We could not get any clear advice from any Government source about what to do.  After a special meeting of our committee, we decided to follow Forest Enterprise's lead and close the fishery; we refused to sell fishery permits. If the Executive told Forest Enterprise to close its land, why were not private landowners told to do the same? As a result, our association suffered financially. We reopened three weeks later when Forest Enterprise removed its "Keep Out" signs, but the only way in which we could let the public know about the situation regarding fishing on Loch Awe was through The Oban Times and the Daily Record , which were both extremely helpful, for which I thank them. There should have been Scottish Government advice, but there was none. Councils such as Argyll and Bute Council and Highland Council put disinfecting mats on road entrances to their areas, but they received no help in doing so. The reports were published in July, but what is being done properly to control meat imports? We live on an island, which should make things easier. Iceland, Australia and New Zealand manage such controls, but what are we doing? Fergus Ewing mentioned Margaret Beckett's sniffer dog—I believe that it is still in quarantine. Margaret Beckett's idea of putting an insurance indemnity on to farmers is unfair beyond belief. She is suggesting a form of mutual insurance scheme, which is quite unacceptable to the industry. Scottish farmers have earned a high reputation for security and should not be blamed for Government faults over imports. It is hard enough for farmers to make a living without an extra expense being added. By far the most important thing to be learned from the outbreak is the need for an immediate response and good leadership. That is what saved the Irish and that is the lesson to be learned from the nightmare of the foot-and-mouth outbreak.

The Scottish Executive already has in its hands evidence that prawn fishing does not take significant bycatches of cod. Does the minister recognise that almost 90 per cent of the prawn quota is in British hands? Will he ensure that, aside from the 10 per cent that should not have been taken away in the first place, there will be no further cuts? Can he get Franz Fischler to guarantee that there will be no further cuts in the industry, which will come under huge pressure thanks to what is going on in the demersal fishery?

Yesterday, in a statement in the House of Commons, David Blunkett said that the Government had set up a task force to tackle child abuse on the internet. I am glad about that. As I mentioned in my speech on 24 April 2002 during Fiona McLeod's members' business debate on the United Nations children's summit, the modern internet has exposed children to a new abuse that is increasing at an alarming speed. Child abuse must be fought on every front. The six-month Operation Magenta that was carried out by the police throughout the United Kingdom successfully achieved prosecutions against people who used internet chat rooms to advertise and trade images of child abuse. Can anyone imagine how a child who has been abused must feel when he or she realises that images of that abuse could be available worldwide on the internet? The most worrying aspect of Operation Magenta was that the people who were arrested included people in child-care work, teaching and medicine. They appeared perfectly normal and would not easily be suspected of child abuse. That concern  was confirmed by recent revelations from the Federal Bureau of Investigation's Operation Candyman: thousands of British people logged on to a child pornography website in the United States of America, 700 of them from Scotland. The FBI was alerted by a message that said, "This group is for people who love kids." The group turned out to be a hideous child pornography site. John Ashcroft, the US Attorney General, said: "It is clear that a new marketplace for child pornography has emerged from the dark corners of cyberspace." As long as this kind of pornography continues to be available on the internet, more and more people will get caught up in its horrible web. The spiders doing the spinning at the centre of the web must be crushed. That must be the long-term goal. The bill's purpose is to establish a list of people who are deemed unsuitable to work with children, to criminalise them if they try to find employment in child care and to criminalise such organisations if they knowingly employ them. The Conservatives welcome the bill. We will support any avenue that improves the safety and well-being of our children and young people. We must, however, be careful with the detail of the bill, to ensure that it is effective in meeting the intention and that it will not simply generate extra, burdensome, bureaucratic hurdles that get in the way of child-care organisations. The Scottish Executive has promised that criminal record checks made on volunteer workers will be free of charge for the voluntary sector. Children in Scotland tells me that organisations will require initial and on-going training and that a funded advice source for child-care organisations would be welcome. How voluntary organisations will be affected and how they will be enabled to cope with the new measures must be made clear. It is also vital that willing and innocent volunteers are not frightened off. It also appears that students undertaking field work with children and young people that involves conducting interviews in private might not be subject to criminal record checks if they are not working for an educational institution, as there might not be an employer to ask for a standard or enhanced disclosure. That is a worrying loophole that I ask the Executive to address. There should also be indemnity for an organisation that has correctly followed procedures to make a referral that proves to have been misplaced when subsequent information comes to light. As Ian Jenkins mentioned, in relation to the gatekeeping criteria in section 2(2)(a), which deals with an adult who has harmed a child or placed a child at risk of harm, organisations will need advice and training in  outlining what might be included and what might not be.

If an organisation had correctly followed the criteria suggested by the bill but, as a result of something it had not known about, evidence that the referral had been misplaced came to light, there should be some indemnity for that organisation.

I am delighted to hear that. Yesterday, the Home Secretary revealed new measures to introduce stricter controls in relation to sex offenders and to protect victims of sex crimes. I am happy to say that he adopted four of the six suggestions to increase the protection of children that were made by the Conservative party some months ago. He has obviously listened to some good sense in this case. As Oliver Letwin, our Shadow Home Secretary said yesterday, "All good criminal law strikes a balance between public protection and the protection of civil liberties."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 19 November 2002; Vol 394, c 508.] We do not want to see a witch hunt against innocent people who genuinely wish to help children.

I am sure that it is not intended to be a witch hunting bill; I only hope that it does not end up being one.

I must make progress. The Scottish Executive says that most sex offences are covered by Scots common law and  so the UK reforms will not apply in Scotland. South of the border, the new offence of grooming children for sexual abuse will be applied to every aspect of life, not just adults who lure youngsters onto the internet. The Scottish Executive says that Scots law is sufficient to deal with such grooming and that, because Scots law is more flexible, it will not be necessary to undertake a full-scale review of sex offence law in Scotland. I hope that that assumption is correct. We are told that steps are being taken to combat the use of the internet by paedophiles. I hope that those steps are big ones and that they are being taken swiftly. One change that will happen in Scotland is that convicted paedophiles will have to confirm their details in person each year with the police, provide national insurance details and notify the police of any change of name or address within three days of the change. Further, overseas offenders will have to register here, which is extremely important. Such measures are welcome. We welcome the intentions of the bill but it is essential that the regulations that are made under it achieve those intentions for the benefit of better child protection. It is only the detailed drafting that will determine whether the bill will have the right effects in practice.

Will the Deputy First Minister try to ensure that, in 2003, technical and management measures are uniform in all areas of the North sea and west coast to stop the present discrimination against Scottish fishermen? When he speaks to the Prime Minister, will he tell him that we have 30 days to save our fishing industry and that the clock is now ticking?

indicated agreement.

We are led to believe that the occurrence of tuberculosis in cattle is on the increase in several areas of Britain. With the continued rundown in the numbers of state vets, will the Scottish Executive make certain that there are enough vets to deal with the increased testing that may be required due to the rapid advance of the disease?

Although I am sure that the Forestry Commission will see advantages in the strategy review, the one thing that stands out is the call for value for money. With that in mind, we must hope that the grant schemes will concentrate on key priorities. The emphasis appears to have shifted from growing and harvesting timber to the development by Forest Enterprise of partnership projects such as the Dalriada project in Argyll. Forest Enterprise has linked with British Waterways and voluntary community groups in promoting environmentally friendly schemes for the public good. Those schemes are good and I am all for the public good. On the public good, I note that one of the documents mentions tackling deer problems and that the minister spoke about the value of wildlife. I hope that Forest Enterprise will consider red deer and roe deer as an asset rather than a menace and will immediately stop its scandalous policy of incessant year-round slaughter of those species, which are a priceless part of Scotland's natural heritage. If those species are managed properly, they can be incorporated into forestry policy. The main issue is that more attention should be given to making the forestry industry a more robust player in the Scottish economy. Now that  there are three separate countryside agencies in Great Britain, it is essential that they operate with minimum bureaucracy and that duplication of services is avoided. For example, a single unit provides machinery and vehicles for Forest Enterprise throughout Great Britain, which works efficiently. The system must stay efficient. If we want a good forestry industry, we must tackle the practical problems that hinder it. I will make five points, the first of which is on transport. I ask the minister to consider specifically the Argyll timber transport group's bid—which has twice been refused—for a grant to produce more haul routes on roads of the group's making, which would remove pressure from public roads. The Executive should promote payment of more freight facilities grants by building new piers and maintaining old ones in areas where timber can be transported by sea. I am thinking of places such as Loch Striven, Craighouse on Jura and Bunessan pier on Mull. The transport of timber by sea saves huge Government expenditure on the damage that timber lorries do to roads. Secondly, as the Scottish Executive cannot see the wood for the trees, we had better thin the trees. The point of the forestry grant scheme must be to produce quality saw-log timber from the existing forestry crop and to improve forests' commercial quality. We need good productive forestry plantations. The Executive should look to Belgium and Austria, which offer generous grants—supported by the European Union—for non-commercial thinning, which is essential to the production of quality timber. Thirdly—and very important—there is not a level playing field in relation to grant allocations to Forest Enterprise and to the private sector because new planting is not taken into consideration. Although private companies have created 10,000 hectares of new planting, Forest Enterprise has planted only 100 hectares. That is a sad reflection of the fact that state-run enterprises continually receive Government support at the private sector's expense. Fourthly, Scotland should use forestry for biofuel. The scheme at Whitegates in Lochgilphead is the first district scheme of that type in Scotland. Under the scheme, 48 homes are heated by wood chips from local forestry. There is a central boiler and the users are metered individually. In Malmö in Sweden, the homes of 100,000 people—half the population of the city—are heated in the same way. I point out to Robin Harper that such schemes do not involve fossil fuel, but carbon-neutral fuel that is endlessly renewable, which is what he likes. I wonder why he did not mention that scheme because it is a key point and is based on the principle of biodiversity. The practice is similar to that carried out  centuries ago on the hillsides around Loch Lomond, where timber was coppiced on a 20-year cycle to make charcoal. The new system combines an age-old product with modern technology to create a non-polluting benefit. If enterprises such as the Whitegates scheme were given the benefit of the non-fossil fuel premium, which goes to other renewable sources such as hydro and wind power, there would be a rush to create a new industry in Scotland. Finally, the Executive should support any initiative to bring a new pulp mill to Scotland and to create a biofuel plant alongside it. Scotland has an enormous paper-making industry. It is ridiculous that the Arjo Wiggins Carbonless Papers Ltd site in Fort William makes high-quality paper with 100 per cent imported pulp in an area that is surrounded by forestry, but there is no doubt that the company would prefer to use local pulpwood. In Scotland, the timber and customers exist, but the methods must be changed. Scotland needs three forest products: quality saw-logs, biofuel timber and pulpwood. That is how to make the forestry industry profitable.

Schools in the Highlands and Islands are not being treated fairly. The McCrone settlement proposals cannot be implemented because the money to fund them is distributed by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to the councils in the wrong way. The money would have been adequate if another formula had been used; however, it is another case of the Scottish Executive's one-size-fits-all policies not working. The Executive is letting down pupils, parents and teachers in the Highlands and Islands.

No. The one-size-fits-all Scottish Executive formula gives grant aid on the basis of population rather than teacher numbers. That penalises rural areas with low populations, thereby penalising the children in those areas. Let me give some  examples. Under the formula, Highland Council will lose £6.6 million over three years and Argyll and Bute Council will lose £3.3 million. Only the increase in teachers' wages can be covered; none of the extra promises in the McCrone agreement can be afforded by those councils.

No. For example, there are meant to be new conditions for teachers concerning administration, to allow them to escape from bureaucracy and paperwork and actually do some teaching. However, while West Lothian Council has been able to afford business managers, Highland Council has not. There was also meant to have been a wind-down scheme for older teachers, but that cannot be implemented because of a lack of funding. Highland Council would have been able to employ 30 new probationary teachers and 104 extra support staff under the McCrone settlement, but none of that can now be afforded.

No. Why was that not thought of by the Scottish Executive before it allowed the implementation to be carried out in this way? It is woefully unfair. The minister mentioned Ardnamurchan. That is one of the many areas where teachers cannot even find affordable housing in which to live. I remind the minister that schools in remote areas incur more than double the expenses of urban schools. For example, the cost per pupil at the secondary school on Tiree is £10,000.

All right. A very short one.

I am just coming to that. The cost of the school on Tiree is paid by Argyll and Bute Council. The same council finds that the cost is only £2,500 per pupil at the Hermitage Academy in Helensburgh. We have some small but important primary schools. For example, the school on Lismore has 15 pupils and the school on Gigha has only seven pupils. Those schools are vital to the communities,  but the cost per pupil is £4,500 to £5,000—a huge extra cost. If the minister needs further proof of the inequity and unfairness of the funding system, she will get it from the councils that I have mentioned and from the Western Isles Council in Stornoway. Western Isles Council has 4,200 pupils spread over 12 islands. In an urban context, 4,200 pupils would probably require five primary schools and four secondary schools—nine schools in all. However, Western Isles Council has 40 schools. That means that the council must pay 40 head teachers rather than nine. The McCrone settlement also says that each school should have someone to look after reception duties. Forty people would be required in the Western Isles: who will pay for them? In rural areas, the funding should be based on teacher numbers, not on the population. I ask the minister to listen to Brian Monteith's sensible proposals to encourage diversity in schools. He is not saying that everybody should leave school at 14. In the Highlands and Islands, it would be excellent if pupils older than 14 could spend some of their learning time at further education colleges, learning trades and gaining qualifications and practical experience that would help them in their later lives. Perhaps they might follow careers in agriculture, fish farming, forestry or tourism—industries that are on their doorstep. Those subjects can be taught by the university of the Highlands and Islands, which has 13 colleges that are underutilised at the moment. That would help the pupils and it would help the UHI. Finally, Donald Gorrie referred to a man who was educated during his holidays from Eton. I believe that he was Osbert Sitwell, who was in any event a very brainy fellow.

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that TACs and quotas are the wrong management tools for a deep-sea species industry?

The loss of 20,000 jobs would be bad enough in the UK, but for Scotland, and particularly the north-east, job losses on such a scale would be nothing short of calamitous. Although it seems extraordinary that the Scottish fishing industry could ever face such a situation, the possibility is staring us in the face. The Conservative party will never agree to a wholesale closure of Scottish fishing. Although Herr Fischler might be flying the flag of fishery closures to achieve his aim of a draconian, one-size-fits-all effort limitation as part three of the cod recovery plan, someone should tell him that he should not play politics with people's lives and livelihoods. His only contribution to fisheries as a footnote to agriculture is his famous cod recovery plan, which he is determined to implement fully. Indeed, he has based his reputation on it. However, if the cost of his reputation means the destruction of the Scottish fishing industry, he must have another think. It is not his, but Scotland's, industry we are talking about. In whose interest is the EU managing our seas? The blow comes on the back of the Commission's about-face over deep water species, which has left Scottish fishermen with hardly any quota at all for such species. It is a scandal.

Not now. Yesterday, Alex Smith, the president of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, told us that it was unusual that the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea should have to break the bad news and to browbeat our fishing industry on behalf of the Commission. Usually, the Commission would do that itself. However, we now have a situation in which the managers are hiding behind the scientists and are at the same time blaming the work force. It is logical to ask any manager who is going down that road what they have done to improve the situation. Hamish Morrison, the secretary of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, says that it is a management failure of cataclysmic proportions. In any other industry, the management would face the sack. P45s would be showering down, but who sacks Brussels bureaucrats? Who is in charge of this sorry show? It is unbelievable that Scottish fishermen, who to the detriment of their own incomes have done more to adopt conservation measures than any other fleet in Europe, should be blamed for the decrease in cod stocks and penalised by not being  allowed to fish for haddock, which, barring prawns, is by far the most important fish to the industry. The fishermen, who know the waters, have been saying for a long time that the rise in sea temperature, the north Atlantic drift and industrial pollution are the main reasons why cod have moved further north. Cod do not like warm water or pollution from major European river systems such as the Ruhr and the Rhine. Last year, 700,000 tonnes of cod were caught in the north-east Atlantic. That is hardly an indication of a species in decline. There are plenty of cod around the Faeroes and Iceland. Added to that is the fact that seals take at least as much fish as our fishermen, seabirds take twice as much, cetaceans take four times as much and other fish 200 times the quantity. No one is suggesting the mass destruction of any of those creatures, so why destroy the people in the Scottish fishing industry? There is no reason to throw 20,000 Scottish and United Kingdom fishery workers on the dole to stop the migration of cod northwards. All that will happen is that Britain will have to rely on fish imports to feed its people, thus enriching other nations at the expense of British jobs. I have never suggested that the UK should leave the EU. I am suggesting that management and control of fishery management should be repatriated to a local level. That falls in line with the concept of subsidiarity, which itself is European. The proposition that national and local control will provide sustainability makes sound sense to me. People will want their fishery to survive for future generations. The present system of collective harvesting of a common resource simply does not provide conservation or protection for fish stocks. The CFP has not worked. It has been a failure for all Europe. We have a responsibility to protect Scottish and UK waters, which should be the richest in Europe, from being decimated by management tools that have not worked and do not work. Our fishing industry needs strong local management of its different regions based on fisheries knowledge and good science. It should not be a political parcel to be opened at random. Above all, the industry needs powerful leadership from our politicians. Mr Finnie says that he wants to lead the UK delegation, but the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs says that he cannot. That is a pathetic and confusing situation. What matters is that our fishing industry gets a fair deal. If they cannot decide between them who leads, we have a secretary of state with time on her hands, so why can she not help? We have a British Prime Minister who spends most of his time abroad, so can he not do something on behalf of the fishing industry? It has never been more important that  our Government representatives stand up for Scottish fishing. They must be seen and heard to do so now. I move amendment S1M-3511.1, to leave out from "and believes" to end and insert: "regrets that this latest crisis comes on the back of the announcement that Scotland is to receive only 2% of the total allowable catch for deep water species on the west coast of Scotland, and believes that we need to restore national and local control and management of our waters to ensure sensible conservation measures and to protect the interests of Scotland's fishermen."

I am glad that the minister says that he will not preside over the destruction of the Scottish fishing industry. I am also glad that he says that he will listen to the fishing industry representatives, who should be at the forefront of the management of stocks. It is they who know the waters and they who have long maintained that whenever water temperatures rise, cod stocks fall.  Has the minister asked why Franz Fischler is suggesting closure this year, when he did not do so last year, when stock figures were worse? Does he agree that the common fisheries policy has been a miserable and catastrophic failure of management, which has damaged and continues to damage the Scottish fishing industry? Does he agree that a change is required and that restoration of national control and management of our own waters are the best way to conserve stocks and save thousands of livelihoods in the Scottish fishing industry?

On 19 September I supported the bid during a debate in the chamber. I highlighted the pledge that the Highland Council is making to young people to give them the opportunity to participate in at least six hours of sport and games per week, to give them free musical tuition in schools, and to give children and young people free entry to cultural events that visit Inverness and the Highlands. The pledge is scheduled for 2003 and 2004 and it is intended that, by 2005, the area will have a generation of young people who are more adept in sports and more culturally adapted than was previously the case. Even if the bid fails, that incentive will allow young people to reap in later life the physical and mental benefits that those extracurricular activities will bring. But the bid must succeed. At any rate, the minimum target must be a place on the short list and to be one of the four areas that will be able to use the name "centre of culture". However, the object is to win. That will bring huge benefits to Inverness and Highland, and the rest of Scotland for that matter, as it did when Glasgow won. In Inverness and Highland we have a special complexity of cultures, such as the environmental culture, where surely we reign supreme. Where else can one see herds of deer, eagles and ospreys, whales and dolphins, and a plethora of other animals and birds? There is a plan for an environmental orientation centre, if the bid wins, where people can be informed about the finer points of bird, animal and plant species, where to find them, when is the best time to see them in their natural habitat, and how to cause the least disturbance. I like another idea, which is for tourist centres to provide inquiring visitors with individual computerised itineraries relating to their length of stay and particular interests. We also have a scientific culture, which includes the highest medical research, marine biology centres and, of course, the university of the Highlands and Islands. When will the UHI receive full university status? We have our Highland heritage culture, which is unusually strong, comprising archaeological and historical artefacts. There are plans for a Highland archive centre, to which many of the original Highland artefacts that clutter various shelves in Edinburgh could be returned.  Genealogical heritage could be a huge market. We should examine Ireland's progress and success in that sphere. We have a great arts culture, with music, dancing, painting, sculpture and drama, and a particularly strong language culture based on Gaelic, especially through the fèis movement, which has done so much to transpose the traditional Highland music into a form of popular music that has received strong acclaim. That should prove to be a particularly strong point in the bid of Inverness and the Highlands. We also have a multisport culture in the Highlands, in which angling reigns supreme, fast followed by shinty. Inverness Highland is unique. Capital projects around Inverness, such as Eden Court and the bringing back into use of Inverness Castle, would be advanced. Other areas in the Highlands would stand to benefit, such as Fort William, with an arts centre and waterfront development, and Thurso, with an arts centre. The market centre project in Dingwall might well be advanced. Success in the bid would bring many benefits. My recent involvement in the great glen raid on the Caledonian canal showed me only too clearly the value to Scotland in foreign advertising that can be generated by new innovative projects—15 million Europeans viewed and read about Scotland in a wonderful light. While we must never forget our traditions of bagpipes, kilts, cabers and whisky, we must show that Scottish culture is not static, but continually moving on. That is why I urge the Scottish Executive and all people in Scotland to get behind Scotland's one and only bidder, Inverness and Highland. I wish the bid every success.

What is the Executive doing to ensure long-term funding for alcohol and drugs counsellors? Mid Argyll council on alcohol and drugs receives referrals from local doctors, hospitals, social work departments, the reporter to the children's panel and the courts, as well as from clients who refer themselves, on a budget of £2,500. The council wrote to me recently to say that it will have to close at Christmas unless further funding outwith the core of £2,500 can be found and quickly—

It has been pointed out that the roll-on, roll-off service would be cheaper than the passenger-only service. If that is the case, how are the vehicles subsidised by the passengers?

I am glad that George Lyon has secured this debate on a subject that is vital to the people of Dunoon and of the Cowal peninsula. The importance of maintaining the CalMac vehicle service from Gourock to Dunoon cannot be stressed strongly enough. I ask the minister to listen to the people of Dunoon and to take action to ensure that their lives are not disrupted and diminished by the withdrawal of the service. A similar situation arose in 1982, and it was an intervention by the then MP for Argyll and Bute, the late John MacKay, who brought the matter to the attention of Malcolm Rifkind and George Younger, the Secretary of State for Scotland, that resulted in the vehicle service being maintained. That Conservative Government listened to the people of Dunoon, and I hope that the current Lib-Lab coalition will follow that example. The main problem seems to lie in the evidence that was given to the European Commission by  the Scottish Executive and on which the Commission has based its responses. The foot-passenger service is subsidised, but not so the vehicle service. However, the Executive seems incapable of identifying a way of showing that there is no subsidy leakage from foot passengers to vehicles. That is the key issue and the one in which changes must be made to ensure the security of the service for the people who want it and need it—the people of Dunoon and Cowal and the tourists who want to visit Scotland's new national park and other parts of the west Highlands. What on earth is the point of the Executive trying to publicise Dunoon as a gateway when it seems to be intent on closing the main gate? Since news broke of the possible withdrawal of the vehicle service, there has been public uproar and indignation in Dunoon. I hope that the minister is aware of that public resentment. I have been involved in the hard fight to resurrect the historic Dunoon pier and would like there to be a roll-on, roll-off service for vehicles and passengers using the Gourock to Dunoon route. The Deloitte & Touche report points out that carrying vehicles would reduce considerably the necessary subsidy compared with a passenger-only service. Why then is the Executive so intent on creating an unpopular passenger-only service, which would be more of a drain on the public purse than a popular RORO service would be? It certainly does not make any sense to the people of Dunoon. The Scottish Executive has failed to provide the Commission with any excuse to agree to the continuation of the CalMac vehicle service. I do not believe that the Commission wants to inconvenience the people of Dunoon with long ferry queues. It has been forced into the current position by the Scottish Executive's wrongful portrayal of the facts of the case. The Scottish Executive, not the Commission, has produced the mess, and the Executive must now extricate itself and the ferry users from that mess. That is perfectly possible, but the Executive must establish an accounting system that shows the costs and revenues of an extra vehicle service separate to the costs and revenues of the basic subsidised foot-passenger service. That would satisfy the Commission. The Scottish Executive has asked the Strategic Rail Authority to do something similar. If it can be done for rail services, why not for ferries? Bidders for the CalMac networks could be instructed by the Executive to use accounting methods that prevent subsidy leakage. The Executive could ask the SRA or the OFT how to do that, and they would tell it. As a PSO is necessary for the Gourock to Dunoon route, it is surely the Executive's duty to consider the best option of delivering a PSO,  bearing in mind the needs of passengers and the cost to the public purse. It is obvious to most people that the best option is a RORO service between Gourock and Dunoon that subsidises passengers only. That would please the people of Dunoon. Along with Western Ferries, it would make Dunoon a gateway to the Highlands and it would satisfy the European Commission. The Rural Development Committee has just completed a report on the barriers to integrated rural development, which highlights transport infrastructure as a key barrier. Ferries were mentioned again and again in evidence. Membership of the EU is meant to help our citizens rather than disadvantage them. I urge the minister to work on a different decision for the ferries to Dunoon that will prove advantageous to local people and tourists alike and will help Dunoon to prosper.

Does the First Minister agree that the best way in which to increase Scotland's population is to encourage private enterprise to prosper, thus creating the jobs, wealth and security that give people the confidence to stay in Scotland and plan families?

Will the minister give way?

It was good to hear Alasdair Morrison speak in glowing terms about the Western Isles and its causeways and bridges. All of them were instigated by the Tory party. I want to highlight how we can regenerate one sector of the Scottish rural economy in the Highlands and Islands. I will highlight the problems facing people in the salmon farming industry and in the wild salmon and sea trout angling industry, which have received so much comment in the press recently. After attempting to show how the problems of those two industries are linked, I will suggest solutions that will help to encourage enterprise, employment and wealth creation so that both sections can flourish and do better. For many years, there has been a furious debate about whether the huge growth in salmon farming over the past 20 years has been a key factor in the decline of wild salmon and sea trout stocks in the north-west of Scotland. Many believe that the explosion in the numbers of parasitic sea lice is a result of the increase in salmon cages in sea lochs. That explosion has led to a huge increase in mortality in the smolts, which are the young wild salmon and sea trout starting their journey to sea. If the smolts have to pass through clouds of sea lice, they are easily overwhelmed and killed by parasites. The lice also do immense damage to the farmed salmon.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. Both circumstantial and scientific advice show that those claims are correct, so it is vital that the situation is reversed to allow more money and employment to be generated by angling tourism. I cannot stress enough the importance of wild freshwater fisheries to the economy of rural Scotland and especially to that of the Highlands and Islands, but the reality is that the Scottish farmed salmon industry is now a key industry, which produced 40 per cent of Scotland's food exports last year. The farmed salmon industry employs some 7,000 people, many in remote areas and others in processing plants within towns. When will the Scottish Executive face up to the issue and find a solution so that the wild and farmed industries—which are equally vital to the Highlands and Islands—can live together in sustainable co-existence? Both industries underpin the future of people, families and communities. On the one side, the wealth of experience in river management and angling that has been amassed by generations of river ghillies and managers has now been added to by the scientists who work on the fisheries trusts. The trusts are making progress in delivering area management agreements with the different fishery stakeholders. Believe me, despite its recent deterioration, Scottish fishing is still sought after by many anglers worldwide. As such, it provides income and employment and is a large contributor to many rural hotels and businesses. On the other side, we have the salmon farming industry, which underpins the lives of so many in remote areas and the products of which support many ancillary industries. The salmon farming industry has become indigenous in the Highlands and Islands and supports local culture, including the game of shinty.

There is no increase in sea lice on the east coast. The increase has been on the west coast, where the salmon farms are. The tools now exist to resolve the sea lice problem. I ask the minister to make it easier for fish farmers to use those tools to secure the future of fish farms and of wild fish interests. The drug Slice has been shown to be effective in reducing sea lice levels markedly. Six farms that were tested on Loch Sunart had nil lice after treatment. Why is the Scottish Environment Protection Agency taking so many months to grant licences  for something that it says is safe? Surely SEPA should be pragmatic. That is the first thing that I ask the minister to do something about.

I shall just close, Presiding Officer. The second thing is that I would like to see both industries live together in sustainable co-existence. I ask the minister to do everything in his power to ensure that.

Will the member take an intervention?

A recent chamber debate centred on a report of the working group on throughcare and aftercare of young people leaving the care system in Scotland, which was published by the Scottish Executive. The report highlighted the disadvantages faced by looked-after children in Scotland. For example, up to 75 per cent of looked-after children leave school with no formal qualifications and it is estimated that between 20 per cent and 50 per cent of young homeless people have been in the care of a local authority. The report recommended that greater efforts should be made by local authorities to monitor the progress of young people after they have left care and to assist where necessary. The Scottish Conservatives were happy to support such recommendations, but were keen to point out that many problems that young people experience after they leave care are often simply the legacy of bad experiences while in care. We argued that more must be done at an earlier stage and lodged an appropriate amendment to the motion. The evidence presented to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee by Barnardos, Children 1 st and many other organisations highlighted problems that children and young people face while they are in care. Children 1 st works with children in the care system. In its written evidence to the committee, it stated: "Many 'looked after' children still do not enjoy the same basic rights and opportunities as other children; to care, intimacy, safety, schooling, to their own possessions." It was also said that, too often, children and young people in care do not speak out about their experiences of neglect or ill treatment. Some young people simply do not know who to turn to. Others do know, but fear the consequences of speaking out. For such children and young people, an independent children's commissioner could make a real difference. A commissioner could listen to their concerns and speak out on their behalf.  Children in care lack the stability and security of a loving family. It would be unrealistic to expect local authorities to replace that, but it is reasonable to ask them to do their best to provide some sort of stability for such fragile young people. Unfortunately, however, many children in care are moved from temporary placement to temporary placement and are not given the chance to find stability. Perhaps a children's commissioner could consider that issue. There is evidence to support the need for a children's commissioner to champion the rights and welfare needs of young people, but mainly when they are placed in care. It has been identified that children—and children in care in particular—tend to be shy about communicating about embarrassing or unpleasant problems. Things are doubly difficult for children in care, and any future commissioner's key function should be to make it less difficult for children to communicate their worries. It appears that the commissioner will not have the power to investigate individual cases, so it will be important for them to concentrate on avenues that make it easier for children to speak out about abuse or infringement of rights without fear and avenues that ensure better protection of young people who do not have the benefit of a secure, loving and understanding family.

I take the member's point, but we are saying that the commissioner will be best placed to try to work towards ways of making life better for children in care. In the past, Governments at Westminster have not seen the need for a children's commissioner, but there have been recent calls for a commissioner to be created. In 2000, a commissioner was created in Wales and it is probable that there will shortly be a commissioner in Northern Ireland. In both cases, the investigative role is confined to public bodies, which is important. We do not want a commissioner who has the power to interfere unnecessarily with the rights of parents. In my view, the changes in family values  that have led to many broken homes increase the need for protection of young people, but there is already a mass of existing provision and bodies in Scotland to protect children. The last thing that is needed is confusing duplication. The commissioner's role must be simple and clear and must add real value to the current situation. In our view, the main role of the children's commissioner should be to help children in care and to investigate public care services. We do not think that the commissioner should be able to investigate private bodies, as that is a job for the police and Government. The most important factor in the welfare and evolution of children is still the influence of parents and families. We would be concerned if, under the pretext of championing children's rights, the commissioner interfered with the rights of parents. As Alex Neil says, the choice of commissioner is of the highest importance. He or she will have to possess great practical experience of social work combined with first-class investigative skills.

I do not know what those figures represent, but I have my doubts about whether many crofters will have seen any increase from LFA payments. This debate is about crofting.

Will the minister take a quick intervention?

Does the minister realise how difficult it is for crofters who want to be organic to buy their feed from organic sources?

Will the member give way?

This afternoon, I participated in a debate on the role of culture in Scotland. Crofting is a  culture. Indeed, it has been a main contributor to culture in the Highlands and Islands for a very long time. Traditional crofting has linked urban and rural life in many areas of the Highlands and Islands, especially in places such as Lewis, Harris and Shetland. It provides a rich culture and the expert knowledge that has been enormously helpful to the social network of the Highlands and to preserving the tough rare breeds that are the foundation of Scottish livestock. No one aspires to make a fortune from crofting. However, the model of people having a job as well as a small module of agriculture is popular in modern Europe. It is the epitome of biodiversity—making the most of what is around one while taking care of the environment for future generations. Crofting is good for people and good for the Highlands, but it is under threat from two fronts. It is under threat of being swept away by so-called modernisers who see it as anachronistic and as a barrier to social engineering and experiments. I believe that the crofting communities are of primary importance in many rural areas and that their wishes should be listened to with respect when changes are in the air. Crofting is also under threat from the Executive's position on the less favoured area proposals. I point out that the crofters and farmers in the most disadvantaged areas are the people whom those measures were originally meant to support. However, they have been left in a situation where most will be losers under the Executive's recommendations to Europe on LFA payments. The big idea was to separate subsidy from agricultural production and to help people such as crofters, who are the stewards and managers of some of Scotland's most beautiful landscapes, which also contain some of its rarest flora and fauna. However, the Executive has followed too far the devices and desires of those who believe that there should be no change in payments to the areas. In many cases, crofters will be worse off, getting the minimum payment. I urge the Executive to reconsider the levels of payment and to increase the number of stocking and grazing categories from the present four to at least six. There should also be more flexibility in the cattle coefficient bands. Under the forthcoming arrangements, people farming in richer areas, with more cattle, will be more richly rewarded than will the crofters in the areas that truly need help. I am glad that an extra payment of £2 per hectare is being made to islanders, but frankly that is not enough. The fact that there is a difference in subsidies of £8 per hectare between different areas of what is 85 per cent of Scottish farming land is inequitable to those in the areas with the poorest land. I ask the  minister to reconsider that picture and to discuss payment levels with the Scottish Crofting Foundation before anything is set in cement.

Yesterday, I attended a briefing by the Highland Council, during which the Inverness-Highland bid to be the European capital of culture in 2008 was discussed. Highland Council is making a pledge to its young people that they will be able to participate in sports and games for at least six hours a week. They have also pledged to provide a programme of free music tuition in schools and free attendance for children and young people at cultural events that visit Inverness and the surrounding area. The programme is scheduled for 2003 and 2004. It is hoped that, by 2005, the area will have a class of young people who are physically fitter and more culturally aware than was the case previously. The programme represents part of the area's preparation for 2008, but even if the Inverness-Highland bid is not successful, it will have acted as an incentive from which many young people will benefit. I wish the Highland Council every success with its bid and with its attempt to engage young people more fully in sport and culture from an early age, so that they will reap the physical and mental benefits that those extracurricular activities will undoubtedly bring them in later life. On Tuesday morning, I attended a meeting on finance in sports at Murrayfield stadium. I learned much about what investors look for—quick profits and instant success. That is all very well for investors, shareholders and those who aspire to become stars, but it does little to encourage participation by the present generation of young people who, the media tell us, are suffering increasingly from obesity, which is partly the result  of inactivity—watching too much television while eating potato chips on their couches. Doctors tell us that inactivity is one of the greatest killers. Is not it ironic that young people, rather than participating in the beautiful game that is a huge part of Scottish culture, are growing obese from watching football coverage that is interspersed with advertisements to eat and drink unhealthy junk products? My point is that watching is not enough. Participation is the key and it is much more fun, whether in football, music, drama or anything that requires the physical and mental activity that results from individuals mixing with peers in an atmosphere of healthy competition and team effort. Although we might think of society as benevolent, the reality of society for many young people in Scotland means unhappy homes with long-term unemployed parents who see no hope of betterment. Those young people experience violence, drug taking and other crime. In a society in which the media promote stardom as being everything, such young people might regard supplying drugs and prostitution as a way of funding a better life and, as a result, might do something that could harm themselves and society. Deprivation occurs in rural areas just as much as it does in the inner cities. That is why culture, or extracurricular slices of life's cake, are so important. Intellectual culture is an outlet for expressive talent, and the rules of our physical culture allow for a positive and controlled emotional outlets for aggression, hate, anger and loneliness—the things that can turn young people's dreams into nightmares. There will soon be an international conference in Sao Paolo in Brazil on the importance of play for children. Brazilians understand the link between young people's early play and culture. That is how culture develops—the Brazilians do not have a bad football team either, by the way. Culture should grow from local communities. I therefore urge the Scottish Executive to support community efforts for young people's recreational centres, which can promote culture. There are good examples of that, from Ness in the north of Lewis to Reidvale adventure playground in Dennistoun in Glasgow. I am glad to see that Sandbank community near Dunoon is planning a young people's recreation centre. I wish it every success.

I am just finishing. The Sandbank centre is a follow-on from an establishment of the Sandbank youth community  council. I have a short letter—

Thank you, Presiding Officer.

In the light of the successful timber-loading programme at Ardrishaig in Argyll, what action is the Scottish Executive taking to restore more piers throughout the Highlands and Islands? Such restoration would allow more timber to be carried by sea and prevent huge damage being caused to the Scottish road network.

I congratulate my colleague Mary Scanlon on bringing the debate to the chamber. I have written letters to ministers and asked questions in Parliament about the subject. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I find that ferries are causing great worry and uncertainty all over the place. It is surely necessary that ferry services in Scotland be given the highest priority, because our nation, like Norway, has a large number of inhabited islands. However, islanders in Norway seem to receive better services than our own people. Apart from the northern isles ferries, I have been involved recently with many worried  people in Dunoon, who have been led to expect that one of their main vehicle-carrying services from Gourock will soon carry only passengers. That will add huge inconvenience to the local population of Dunoon and Cowal, and make it increasingly difficult to present Dunoon as a main gateway to Scotland's first national park, which it was hoped would bring increased prosperity to the town. Only this morning, I heard on Irish radio that the Ballycastle to Campbeltown ferry will not operate until at least next summer, which is enormously frustrating for the people of Campbeltown and Kintyre, not to mention those who are involved in the new factory, which is building renewable energy turbines. Why is Argyll and Bute, with a Liberal MSP and a Liberal MP, losing its lifeline ferry services? It is because a combination of blanket European directives and the coalition Government's policies are driving down the level of ferry services in Scotland, which is disastrous for the outlying communities that depend on them. Great concern has been expressed about NorthLink ever since the partnership was envisaged. My main experience of it has been through the concerns of farmers and the National Farmers Union about how livestock will be transported from Orkney and Shetland. Shetland and Orkney are highly dependent on cattle and sheep farming, and only the best transport will enable the island farmers to produce quality in order to achieve a profit and to survive. There has been enough trouble with foot-and-mouth disease, and the Orkney farmers lost their vital cattle-marketing link through Invergordon last year. The first blow occurred when, without public consultation, livestock was banned from passenger-carrying ships. The cassette system was proposed, in which animals are loaded in tiers into containers where they await transfer to ships. A similar system in the early 1970s ran into trouble because such a double-decker carriage adversely affects a ship's sea-going properties. Only two ships that were built for that system remain, and one—the Hascosay—is being refitted to take the new cassettes. We are told that the system will be ready by 1 October, but so far, not one production model has been finished. What will happen if the Hascosay breaks down? Where is the replacement vessel that will take cassettes? Orkney auction marts are worried and farmers are very worried, but that is unsurprising when livestock was overlooked in the original so-called lifeline subsidised contract that was given to NorthLink. That appears to be a public-private partnership that will result in an inferior service to Shetland and Orkney. How can Orkney, with a Liberal Deputy First Minister, and Shetland, with an ex-minister as its MSP, find their services  deteriorating? Is there a link between Shetland and Orkney and Argyll and Bute? Not only farmers lost confidence—the salmon farming industry that is vital to Shetland was so shocked by NorthLink's proposed freight increases that Shetland has been forced to organise its own freight service to Aberdeen. The problem is that NorthLink's Orkney-Aberdeen viability relies heavily on through traffic from Shetland, so there is already more uncertainty over the long-term future of NorthLink, even before a ferry has sailed. There is more uncertainty for passengers, for Orkney and Shetland businessmen and for P&O Scottish Ferries workers, who may not be covered by TUPE pension rules when they transfer to NorthLink. They and the people of Orkney and Shetland deserve better treatment, and I seek assurance from the minister that they will receive it.

Does the minister agree that total allowable catches and quotas are not the right tools with which to manage deepwater species? What is his comment on the fact that Scottish fishermen are left with 2 per cent of the quotas, whereas French fishermen apparently have 80 per cent of the quotas for those species?

Water charges in northern Scotland have gone up recently far more than anywhere else. With the creation of Scottish Water and the welcome saving of £100 million, can consumers and businesses in the north expect a reasonable reduction in their water bills?

Will George Lyon tell me who Mr Fischler listened to when he made his decision on the deep-sea species?

Will Alasdair Morrison do something about the regulating systems faced by fish farms, which make the situation grossly unfair  for fish farmers in this country?

The recent news from Brussels is both depressing and infuriating for the Scottish fishing industry. On Monday of this week, Franz Fischler, the EU fisheries commissioner, gave his word that he would protect deep-water species. However, on Tuesday, despite a huge amount of scientific evidence that suggested that TACs were counterproductive to the sustainability of deep-water fisheries, he agreed to the Spanish presidential compromise that means that deep-water species will be regulated primarily through TACs. That means that deep-water species will suffer, some of Scotland's fishermen will suffer and, more importantly, the credibility of Franz Fischler will suffer, because our fishermen will not trust him with the future of stock or CFP reforms.

Herr Fischler did not appear to support the position that would have suited us, which was the idea of permits and an effort-limitation scheme to go along with it. The UK cannot trust Herr Fischler to look after the stocks if he ignores scientific advice. What guarantee will the Scottish Executive be extracting from the Commission to ensure that the scientific advice will not also be ignored in the reform of the CFP? What will the Scottish Executive do to help the Scottish vessels that fish for deep-water species now that more than 80 per cent of the quota for those species has gone to the French fleet? France may be out of the world cup, but it has had a damn good day in the fish stakes. The Scottish boats have been left with about 2 per cent of what can now be caught. Let me give an example. Our quota for black scabbard fish is now only 20 tonnes for the year. Last year, one Scottish boat caught 20 tonnes of black scabbard fish in one outing. Other species, such as orange roughy, blue ling, grenadiers, tusk, argentines and deep water sharks have now been handed to the French because they have a longer track record of  fishing for those species in our waters than do Scottish fishermen who have only recently started to prosecute that fishery due to the intense pressure on Scotland's traditional stocks. That deep-water fishery was a valuable diversionary tool for the Scottish fleet and now it is gone. TACs have been proved to be a poor consolation tool and have led to huge discards. They are an even poorer tool for the management of deep-water species that inter-swim and therefore cannot be targeted easily as a single species. In December 2002, the Commission indicated to the UK its preference for a permit scheme for deep-water species alongside a days-at-sea scheme to limit the effort of fishing. That was a good idea. Last week, the Spanish presidency put forward the compromise. On Monday, Fischler stated that the most important thing was the protection of deep-water species, and that the Spanish plan was not acceptable and would not receive his support. However, on Tuesday, the Commission agreed to the proposal and it was passed. Such horse-trading in the Commission pays scant regard to the sustainability of the fragile deep-water ecosystem. The Scottish boats dedicated to deep-water fishing have had the rug pulled from under their feet again. Mr Finnie is right to say that negotiations will be tough. I hope that he will not buckle under fire when the first shots are fired, as Franz Fischler appears to have done. Which team is Fischler playing for? We all remember the sudden sacking of Steffen Smidt, the director general of the fisheries directorate. Was that a result of Spanish pressure? It would appear so, because the Spanish saw Smidt as being against their interests. The southern states have formed a group called friends of fishing—no friends of ours—that will aim to promote southern member state interests. The Scottish Executive must punch its weight and stand up against the forces that are lined up against it, because the Scottish fishing fleet is still the largest operator in EU waters. We lead the way in conservation, so why should we be the ones to suffer all the time? The Commission figures for overall capacity reduction in the EU fleet appear deeply unfair to Scotland, the UK and the northern states. My colleague Ben Wallace will enlarge on that. It is important that Ross Finnie gives a guarantee that the reductions made by the Scottish fleet due to recent decommissioning will be taken into account with regard to reductions sought in the CFP review. Elliot Morley and Ross Finnie have both said that that will be the case and Ross Finnie has reaffirmed that today. However, there are rumours emanating that suggest that some in Europe take a contrary view.  I am glad about the plans that foreign vessels will now have to adhere to Scottish conservation measures within the 12-mile limit and I am pleased that future marine assessments will include not only fish stocks, but stocks of cetaceans, seabirds, sea corals and the well-being of the marine ecosystem. Europe is asking for scientific research on those new subjects, which raises the question of who will pay. Will it be new money or will it come from the fisheries budget? That question must be addressed and answered. I want to see a Scottish fishing fleet live on with sustainable stocks that will ensure that Scottish fishing communities live on as well. However, the duplicitous horse-trading that we have seen recently endangers that picture and we must ensure that within the short time scale allowed, the points within the review that benefit Scottish fishing people are retained and not phased out by those with other agendas. I move amendment S1M-3197.2, to leave out from "supports" to end and insert: "but seeks assurances that Scotland's recent decommissioning programme will be taken into account with regard to reductions in fleet sizes; supports a collaborative and regional approach to reform involving the fishing industry and other stakeholders; acknowledges the need for a more sustainable balance between the catching capability of the fleet and available fish stocks; recognises that a process of tough negotiations with other member states now lies ahead, which was highlighted in yesterday's u-turn by the EU Fisheries Commissioner, Franz Fischler, over the issue of deep water species which has left our fleet with only 2% of that total allowable catch in their local waters, and further recognises that action of this kind will only serve to undermine confidence in the overall Common Fisheries Policy reform programme."

Is the minister satisfied that the level of LFA payments is adequate and that the payments are going to the areas where they are most needed? In addition, bearing in mind the fact that the rural stewardship scheme was underfunded last year for 420 applicants, how will it deal with the 600 applicants this year?

I congratulate Oban High School on completing its refurbishment after 13 years and wish it well for its opening ceremony on Tuesday, which the Minister for Education and Young People will attend. I also congratulate that school's teaching staff on the marvellous work that they are doing with children on environmental education, the results of which I saw at a Scottish Natural Heritage meeting in Oban earlier this week. They are teaching children to be aware of biodiversity and of what is happening in the surrounding areas and to keep the environment clean, which is important. I re-emphasise what my colleague Alex Johnstone said about the importance of primary schools. Last week, I visited Dalavich, which is a community in north Loch Awe side in north Argyll. That community is attempting to reopen its mothballed primary school to prevent children having to take a 25-mile journey on single-track roads every day, winter and summer. That is a question of parental choice and I hope that the go-ahead is given to reopen that school. I emphasise what Brian Monteith said about Gaelic. Gaelic is incredibly important to Scotland. It is vital that the legacy of music, poetry and song is maintained as part of our heritage. Gaelic is in crisis. Despite the Executive's so-called commitment to Gaelic and its inclusion in speeches by people such as Alasdair Morrison, little appears to be happening. The key is education. Our city centres—places such as Edinburgh, Perth and Inverness—should have Gaelic schools. There should be more Gaelic teachers in primary and secondary schools—there  is an enormous shortage of such teachers. Willing teachers should be allowed to take immersion courses, as happens in some Spanish regions, where such action has been an enormous success in maintaining languages. We have a centre of excellence in Gaelic in Sabhal Mòr Ostaig on Skye, but that must be supported by education in other areas. The university of the Highlands and Islands, which the Conservatives kick-started, is important. The momentum must be continued, so that people in remote areas can study at higher education level where they live, without going elsewhere.

The price of timber is such that the industry is not making any money. Is that situation being caused by imports? What, in the minister's opinion, is the reason for the low price?

As a Highlands and Islands member living in Argyll, I add my voice to those that are worried about getting timber without ruining our rural roads any further. Earlier in the parliamentary session, I gave a  speech arguing that the transport of timber by ship from Ardrishaig, which had taken place in the past, should be reinstated. I am glad to say that that happened—credit must go to the former Minister for Transport and the Environment, Sarah Boyack, for proceeding with the proposal. Thousands of tonnes have now been carried by ship, which has saved many millions of road miles. Huge timber lorries, along with fish farm lorries and trucks carrying enormously heavy loads of turbines for the new wind farm industry, completely churn up local roads, which were not built to carry such loads. I congratulate Forest Enterprise on linking many of its internal forest roads, which means that trips to the port are as short as possible. I ask the minister to listen to the Scottish Gamekeepers Association about the management of deer in Forest Enterprise areas. Decent march fencing should be used as a method of keeping deer out of young woodlands. That would prevent the internal and scandalous slaughter of deer by shooting that takes place nearly all the year round. Forestry was, and still is, an important employer in Scotland. However, more should be done to develop and open up the sporting and leisure facilities that exist in Forest Enterprise areas. I know of two villages in the Loch Awe area of Argyll that used to have many forestry employees. However, as the felling was contracted out, the level of employment also fell and now hardly any forestry workers live in those villages. It would be good if Forest Enterprise were encouraged to make more of the biodiversity that can undoubtedly exist in its enormous landholdings in Scotland. It has much more to offer than the monoculture of blanket Sitka spruce, which stifles life when it canopies.

I agree with Stewart Stevenson that seine netting is a good form of fishing. It is nice to hear him talking about something sane for a change. Does Ross Finnie accept that mesh size restrictions, which were proposed fundamentally with trawl nets in mind, will have a much more significant effect on seine net fishermen, whose nets are more static as they have mesh that does not close in the same way as that of a net pulled by a trawler? Has that point been taken into consideration when decisions have been taken about the mesh sizes of seine or purse nets? If not, will he please make that point?

It seems that, because of the situation in regard to GM crops, people have lost confidence in science. That is a terrible thing for this country  and an unhappy state of affairs, although it is understandable when we consider that Labour has passed the buck to the Liberals, and that the Minister for Environment and Rural Development's party recently appeared to be against his policy, while the SNP is completely shutting the door on any future development of GM. I agree that the trials should at least be postponed until scientific advice proves that they are safe for the environment and public health. No wonder people are confused. It has been left to John Scott of the Scottish Tories to produce a sensible policy, which is exactly what his amendment describes. The public is right to be concerned about public health and the environment. Nowhere are those concerns more evident than on the Black Isle. Scare stories on GM are abundant, and people are right to seek assurances from ministers based on science. Sadly, they are not receiving them. We need clear leadership on the long-term future of GM. It may be vital to the future of mankind and beneficial in ending hardship and famine. It could also be beneficial in lessening the use of herbicides, which have poisoned our land, waterways, fish and bird life for so long. Surely most organic producers would agree that that aim is laudable. That is why GM must be taken seriously and why pragmatism is needed in seeking a way to make GM work, rather than making it not work. As a farmer, I know that for centuries man has been modifying plants and crops in fields and greenhouses. This is just another chapter in a long story, but we must get it right. If it takes a year or two more to complete the trials safely, the prize will be well worth waiting for. No science is absolute, but we can eliminate as much risk as humanly possible. At the moment, there are too many unanswered questions. That is why we need a proper audit and assessment of all the science that is available to us. If that science finds that GM is safe, it should be used to sustain people who are dying of starvation. Hassan Adamu, the former Nigerian Minister of Agricultural and Rural Development, recently wrote: "To deny desperate, hungry people the means to control their futures by presuming to know what is best for them is not only paternalistic, but morally wrong." We must not stifle human ingenuity. We must continue to support progress based on safe science, rather than on conjecture or spin.

I congratulate Richard Lochhead on securing the debate. I am grateful to have been given the opportunity to speak in a debate of such importance. I wish to make four main points about the fight against drugs. First, although funds are available, they are being used in the wrong way. Rather than be used to catch drug users, they should be used to catch drug traffickers. That is a priority. It must be remembered that the drug barons are so cash rich that the funds that are available to drug traffickers are much larger than those that are used against them. That fact puts our police at a huge disadvantage. Secondly, more help is required for users and addicts. It seems that proper treatment is available only to the very rich or to those who are in prison. People should not have to commit a crime in order to get treatment. That situation must be changed. We must ensure that people who want and need help to cure their addictions can get that help. Thirdly, not enough is being done to stop young people from starting to use drugs in the first place or to stay off drugs. That situation can be changed by better education and by imparting more information about the great harm that is done by drugs. Every time a playing field is sold for development, more drug addicts are created among our young people. We must create more opportunities for games, sports and hobbies for young Scots. It is often the case nowadays that both parents work and home relationships can be far from perfect. Young people need encouragement and facilities. If they do not have them, many will become disillusioned and bored and seek excitement from drugs.

Can I give way, Presiding Officer?

Fourthly, I want to ask whether enough is being done to identify the real financial costs of drug abuse. Crime now exists in areas where it hardly existed before. Crime costs our economy many millions and there is also a cost in human terms. What is the cost to the lives of addicts and the lives of parents who lose their children to drugs? What is the cost to victims of drug-related crime? The answer to those questions is not known, but the questions are so significant that answering them must be a huge priority for all Governments. That is an area in which the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive can and must make a difference for the future of Scotland.

Does the minister accept that in some island communities the new standards for  landfill sites may make burying waste so expensive that it would be cheaper to export it by ferry, and that that would be a daft solution to the problem?

Argyll and Bute Council was one of the first to finalise a proper waste plan, which it is now implementing. That has been an enormous task, but it appears to have been successful because there has been good leadership and all concerned have worked as one. The benefit of having a single area plan is enormous, but it will take a big culture shift to make producers of waste accept the responsibility for dealing with it. We must realise that the full costs of providing modern services are not recoverable. Efforts must be made to persuade private companies that, by altering their production to a sustainable approach with less waste, they might achieve savings for their businesses. Public companies must set an example—less waste, more profit. The strategic waste fund is clearly inadequate to fund all area waste plans. Does the Executive intend to provide the funding that is necessary to implement the plans in full later this year? The plans need to be closely scrutinised to ensure that local authorities with large rural areas are not unduly penalised. In my speech in the debate on environmentally sustainable employment and recycling on 24 January, I echoed the words of Hendy Pollock of Highland Council: "no targets without markets". It may be that those markets are now coming. Glass is being used for aggregate instead of smelting. There is a genuine, worldwide market for recycled paper products, although prices are extremely volatile, which makes budgeting difficult indeed. Recently, recycled cardboard rose in price overnight from £20 to £30 per bail, but the price can fall just as easily. At £100 per tonne, the cost of landfill is expensive, so other methods must be used. Western Isles Council is doing a great job. It is using recycled products and creating jobs in the islands. At Bennadrove, the council has a new machine to bail old cars, which get sent to the fragmentiser in Inverkeithing. It has an accredited glass reprocessor and recycled glass is being used as bedding for land drains. Its recycled paper  is sold to crofters and farmers in the islands for animal bedding. Recycled cans are bailed and sent away. Aluminium cans fetch 10 times the price of steel cans—there is surely a message for drinks producers in that. Polythene and plastics are the most difficult to get rid of. When will someone produce a biodegradable plastic bag? New regulatory standards may make current landfill sites prohibitively expensive to sustain in rural areas. Are those standards truly necessary in some Highlands and Islands areas in which they have never been needed before? I suggest that imagination should be used in their interpretation. Otherwise, unrecyclable rubbish will have to be transported at a very heavy cost to the public and the environment.

The contribution that our nurses make to our health care system is phenomenal. They are the backbone of the NHS and without them the NHS would crumble. Therefore, ensuring that nurses are happy and motivated is vital for good patient care and the efficient running of our health service. If things go wrong, nurses are the first to experience the problems. While we may sit in our ivory towers, they are in direct contact with patients every day. They work tirelessly to help others for comparatively little reward. The problem is that the nursing work force is too small. Recruitment and retention problems are huge and are caused by many factors. A demoralised work force leads nurses to leave the service and does not encourage many to enter it. Understaffing leads to overworked staff who can put up with only so much for so long. Continual change leads to continual uncertainty and instability. Lack of involvement in decision making leads to feelings of being uninvolved and undervalued. The constant pressure of dealing with patients who have waited too long for treatment leads to futility and anger. Last September, I visited Lorne and Islands district general hospital in Oban, where nurses kindly gave me their valuable time to describe the pressure. It is intolerable that a huge number of nurses are being forced out of the NHS because they can no longer take the pressure. Nurses are hugely committed to a caring, vocational profession. We can only imagine what it takes to destroy that commitment. Some of the Executive's initiatives are good, but they do not address the fundamental problem. They are akin to rearranging deckchairs on the Titanic. Nurses are leaving because they are not being allowed to do their jobs properly. Patients are waiting far too long for admission, which leaves them more severely ill and needing more intensive treatment. That leaves them weaker and more susceptible to hospital-acquired infection, which prolongs their stay. By that stage, many patients must be exasperated with the NHS, deeply frightened and perhaps in pain. Nurses bear the brunt of all that. Their job becomes infinitely more difficult if they see too many people needlessly suffering and dying. They must continually apologise for a system over which they have no control. Many nurses are not leaving the health service and are simply moving to more flexible and responsive systems. England appears to be the prime beneficiary of that movement, along with other European countries and Australia. It does not take a genius to work out why. In Germany, nurses are happy, well trained and content. They  work in clean hospitals and see patients when they need to be seen—almost immediately. As a result, the recovery rate is faster and greater, and nurses feel that, rather than just stemming the tide, they are having a positive impact on the health of their patients. That contrasts dramatically with the situation in our NHS. The issue is not money. Germany puts only a small percentage more of public funding into its health service than we do, and soon, Scottish health funding will be higher than that in other European countries, including Germany. The difference is that Germany has a flexible, responsive system in which a happy work force provides patient-oriented care. There is no excuse for Scotland not to have that same quality. I look forward to the day when there will be no waiting lists, when waiting times will be short, when there will be clean hospitals and when patients will be cared for by the appropriate number of well-qualified, highly motivated nurses. The nursing profession is full of wonderful people who are doing their best under impossible circumstances. Although some of the measures that the Scottish Executive has brought in seem to be good ideas, I ask how successful those measures will be and how they will improve patient care and nurse morale when our entire NHS system is working against them.

Will the minister give way?

I come to the debate from a Highlands and Islands angle and wish to stress the importance of biodiversity at local levels. I looked up the meaning of biodiversity in a dictionary, but it was not there. However, bio means "of living things" and the dictionary added, in brackets, "including human beings". That greatly pleased me. In layman's terms, biodiversity means making the most of what is around us without spoiling it. Why are there no biodiversity targets in the document? There cannot be a sustainable development agenda without biodiversity targets.  The best way of ensuring sustainable development is at the local level. It will be marvellous if we maximise the available scientific information on the implications of new products of science and technology to enable all people to make choices in respect of healthy living, independence and sustainability. Getting that message across will be good for mankind and the environment. We certainly must act on such information at a Scottish level. I am an MSP for the Highlands and Islands and am aware that ordinary people who are trying to earn a living or run a business are sometimes left out of the sustainability equation and are finding it harder to sustain their lives in remote areas. Those are the people who will protect or destroy what is around them. There must be sustainable jobs so that people can afford to enjoy living in the countryside. Any environmental plan for sustainability that is designed by those who are in power should put people and their employment first. A high employment rate is a key sustainable development objective, as it enables people to meet their own needs and create communities in our rural areas, which in turn create the culture that enriches our nation. What is blatantly going wrong at the moment is that the Executive is not giving true, down-to-earth encouragement to the creation of such employment. A lot of bureaucracy and red tape and many rules are making it harder for entrepreneurs to set up and promote businesses in the countryside and to live there. I will take the example of agriculture. Where have our valuable beef and sheep exports gone? Why is France allowed to get away with damaging those industries, which are vital to Scottish interests? What is being done in the fisheries sector to help that industry—which is again in the doldrums—apart from the decommissioning of fishing boats? Why does the Scottish Executive not interpret European directives in a way that helps our primary industries to maintain sustainability, rather than put hurdles in their way? Recently, I attended a fisheries meeting in Gareloch to discuss problems relating to salmon farming and wild fish interests. Aquaculture—fin fish and shellfish farming—is a huge and growing part of the west coast economy, which needs encouragement. However, there is conflict between salmon cage farming and wild fishery interests, on which many people—such as those on Loch Maree—depend for their income. Action is needed to speed up giving fish farmers tools to deal with the sea lice problem that affects wild and farmed fish, so that both industries can live together and produce jobs. Will the Scottish Executive produce a simplified  regulation of aquaculture, such as that in Norway? That would encourage an important Scottish industry to be prosperous and sustainable. In a prosperous industry, conservation and sustainability fall into place, whereas in an industry that is hanging on by its fingertips, sustainability is suspect and conservation will for ever be low on the agenda. A diversity of local industries is needed rather than monoculture. Affordable transport, a good road infrastructure and reliable ferry services are vital to sustainability in the Highlands and Islands communities. We need an integrated policy and action that brings improvements. Ferries to islands such as Barra and Colonsay are woefully inadequate for people and businesses for large parts of the year. Mr Finnie's motion mentions harnessing "the talents of the people". Let us hope that he does that. Today, I met people who represented the Gaelic culture. Initially, they had hoped that the Scottish Parliament would support Gaelic. Alasdair Morrison's early speeches suggested that the sustainability of Gaelic was a key issue, but nothing has happened in the past three years and we have seen the disappearance of some 5,000 Gaelic speakers. Despite all the good words, no action has been taken to ensure the sustainability of Gaelic culture or the communities that produce it. They feel forgotten by the Executive, which seems to be obsessed with spin and has proved to be weak on the delivery of practical solutions.

rose—

Does the member agree that there should be no targets for recycling without markets for the products?

Does the Executive understand the anger of islanders and tourists alike who find that it is cheaper to fly across the Atlantic than it is to fly across the Pentland firth?

I support Murdo Fraser's amendment, and particularly commend the various voluntary organisations for the help that they have given—and continue to give—young people. It would be good if our Scottish education system could again become the envy of the world. As a father of four children, including two teenage daughters, I am a fervent supporter of young people's participation in everything, especially the washing-up. However, children and young people are now exposed far more to the workings of everyday life because of their comprehension of information technology, which in most cases is better than that of their adult counterparts. They have a new network of communication, which is broader and speedier than that of previous generations, and they use it. I remember my formative years. All was love and lettuce leaves, and the buzzword was macrobiotics. We felt the inspiration and hope that John F Kennedy generated for a better world, and the tears and despair that followed his murder. It was the era of the cold war, which concentrated our young minds on world events much more than on national politics. There was a clear delineation between right and wrong and God was always on our side. Most politicians seemed to exist only for the benefit of satirists and had silly walks and wore bowler hats. The British politicians whom I particularly remember were always lampooned figures. There was Harold Macmillan, who told us that we had "never had it so good". There was Harold Wilson, who smoked his pipe and tried to protect the pound in our pockets, and there was the inimitable George Brown, who was popular because of his style and inebriated appearances on grainy black-and-white television sets. I remember a television programme called "The Brains Trust", which implied that only old people had any brains and were certainly the only people who were worth listening to. However, young people were calling to be heard. That was reflected in the revolutionary sound of Merseybeat, wondrous new dress codes that were generated by Carnaby Street and outrageous hair styles that were guaranteed to shock the older generation. We did shock them. However, with the benefit of hindsight, a great deal  of youthful energy and thinking was ignored and therefore wasted. The older generation never considered that energy and thinking to be useful to the political process and the younger generation could not relate politics to their everyday lives. We should learn from the past and facilitate a change that will harness the thoughts and energy of our youth for the benefit of our nation. The years before responsibilities such as holding down jobs and raising children become priorities are years in which young people have time to think about what is right and what is wrong, and to formulate opinions and habits that will guide their later years; it is a time when there is still purity of thought that is untainted by cynicism. The eyes of children behold the truth and the rights of expression should never be denied to them. Everyone now complains about voter apathy, especially among young people, so the Scottish youth parliament is a welcome addition to encouraging participation and understanding of our political process. It is important that it attaches to the different regions of Scotland and not only to Glasgow and Edinburgh. Alex Johnstone and I participated in a workshop in the youth cafe project in Arbroath and were highly impressed. I hope that the Scottish youth parliament will produce future politicians of high calibre, who will be the darlings of the press and who will improve people's lives. I hope that they produce a society in which freedom reigns and there is an acceptance that duty to our fellow citizens is a price that we must pay for the acquisition of rights.

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

That is absolute nonsense.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept that, on Loch Awe, one can get a full day's fishing in beautiful surroundings for the price of two pints of beer?

Why should fisheries in particular be compulsory purchased? Why not compulsorily purchase golf courses, for example?

I draw members' attention to my fisheries interests in the register of members' interests. I support the green paper's general aims and welcome the commitment to an economic survey that would undoubtedly show the importance of Scotland's freshwater fisheries including not just salmon and sea trout, but brown trout, pike, perch and grayling. Frankly, such a survey is long overdue and the recommendations of the excellent Scottish salmon strategy task force report of 1997, most of which have been accepted by the Executive, should be enacted. The Hunter report of the 1960s, which also provided an excellent blueprint for successful fisheries, should also be closely re-examined. That is all the more important as Scotland's fisheries will shortly be highlighted as a very important European resource, which means that Scotland will under the spotlight. We must show  ourselves to be capable of excellent management of our fisheries resources.

As much angling as possible should be made available to the general public at as low a cost as possible. The Executive's aims seem to be very confused. On the one hand, it seeks to protect, promote and secure the future of Scotland's freshwater fish and fisheries. On the other hand, however, it supports part 3 of the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill, which was proposed by its Liberal partners. Far from encouraging investment in fisheries, that part of the bill will have precisely the opposite effect, as it will be detrimental to fisheries investment and employment and therefore disastrous for fish stocks. Even more confusing is the statement, in the second paragraph on page 2 of the green paper, that "the Scottish Executive's policy is not to intervene in willing buyer/willing seller arrangements." How can the Executive say that and in the same breath state that it favours compulsory purchase? The extension of compulsory purchase powers to contiguous fishings undermines security of title. For example, public sector groups that supply housing improvement grants will not fund a project if the applicant in question does not have a secure tenancy.

Yes, as long as the intervention is not too long.

I do not have time to answer that question at the moment, but my colleague Alex Fergusson will answer it later. How can river managers secure investment if there is no security of title? Some £3.2 million of investment money that was due to be spent on fishery improvement and enhancement in the Highlands has already been put on hold. How will the fisheries managers and the new trusts that were recently set up to improve Scottish fisheries  be able to find the funds? Will the Executive supply the money? Everyone involved in river and loch management, especially those who are at the coalface—or should I say the fish face—such as river managers and ghillies, are against compulsory purchase. They are worried that many jobs will go and that much of the estimated £140 million that Scottish fisheries bring into local economies every year will be lost. Furthermore, they see it as a measure that, far from securing Scotland's freshwater fisheries, will decimate them. It is shameful to sacrifice successful, well-managed fisheries on the altar of community land ownership. It is a bridge too far. Fisheries bodies are asking when the salmon consolidation bill will be introduced. It is necessary that whatever replaces the Freshwater and Salmon Fisheries (Scotland) Act 1976 covers the whole of Scotland. Good management of fisheries should be based on scientific advice and local knowledge, as the two go well together. More attention should be paid to the value and promotion of Scottish brown trout fishing. The coarse fish anglers are looking for more recognition and sensible regulations, and I agree with them. Scotland has good coarse fishing, but there is no point in making regulations that cannot be policed before a new management structure is in place. In my view, local fishery boards have done well in Scotland so far and have cost the public nothing. That should be borne in mind by those who want to replace them. They must say what they would replace the boards with and how the replacements would be financed. I know a little bit about protection orders, as I am still the chairman of the Loch Awe Improvement Association, which manages the protection order on some 80 miles of fishing on Loch Awe and Loch Avich. There are some anomalies, but they could easily be put right. When Rhona Brankin was the minister with responsibility for fisheries, she paid a visit to an Angling for Change meeting held on Loch Awe and I believe that she was impressed. From an original bank account of £300 in 1992, we now have an income of more than £50,000 per annum, generated by 20,000 fishing days for anglers. We employ four contract wardens and Loch Awe holds all the records for big fish. We employ a fisheries scientist and a project officer in conjunction with the Argyll Fisheries Trust, which was founded by the Loch Awe Improvement Association. We have a committee that is truly representative of all stakeholders, including the Scottish Anglers National Association. Many think that salmon farming has been detrimental to wild salmon and sea trout fisheries because of predation by sea lice, but I am encouraged by the new co-operation that is going  on. In many places on the west coast, runs of salmon have improved and sea trout are showing signs of recovery. To conclude on a positive note, I am delighted that the Linnhe, Lorne, Loch Etive and Sound of Mull area management agreement is being signed on Monday, with Ross Finnie in attendance. I believe that that truly is a step in the right direction. I move amendment S1M-3021.1, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "agrees that there should be a commitment to the future conservation and management of salmon and freshwater fish and fisheries in Scotland; further agrees with the general aim of the consultation paper Scotland's Freshwater Fish and Fisheries: Securing their Future , but notes with concern the substantial harm that the Scottish Executive's Land Reform (Scotland) Bill will do to the future of Scotland's freshwater fish and fisheries."

Does the member agree that the fish farming industry must be given the tools to deal with the sea lice problem that affects wild fish?

I congratulate both Fiona McLeod on securing the debate, and Save the Children on organising the forthcoming event in Edinburgh. I agree that children and young people should be listened to and involved, especially now that, thanks to ever-increasing information from television and the internet, many of them are far more aware of world events than perhaps was the case in the past. Their formative years will shape the society of the future. Children are not a class of their own. They are part of families and therefore part of society and, as such, it is up to parents and adults—who have more rights than they have—to accept the duties that are involved in piloting young people until they reach an age when they themselves can take the rudder. However, it is also vital that we in the Scottish Parliament accept that it is our duty to reduce the disparities and pervasive poverty that are outlined in Save the Children's policy briefing. They are also highlighted in Kofi Annan's report, which exposes the fact that there is still a mountain to climb. One hundred and thirty million  children are still not in school, and 20 million have been forced out of their homes by war. Although we in this country have come a long way from sending children up chimneys, child slavery still exists worldwide. Furthermore, the modern internet has exposed children to a new abuse that is increasing at an alarming speed. Can members imagine how a child who has been abused must feel when he or she realises that images of that abuse are available worldwide on the internet? Recently, police throughout the UK carried out a six-month operation called Magenta against internet paedophiles, concentrating on people who used internet chat rooms to advertise and trade images of child abuse. Those arrested included people in care work, teaching and medicine. The operation highlights the dangers of a new jungle that our children could experience and which is very far from a world fit for them. However, as they have to deal with those dangers, it is all the more necessary to involve children and young people in formulating modern policy against this evil. A report in today's Edinburgh Evening News says that officers in Lothian and Borders probed 163 cases of child cruelty last year, which is a 33 per cent increase on the number of cases that were investigated the previous year. Save the Children's figures on child poverty in Scotland are also alarming. Thirty per cent of children in Scotland are affected by poverty, and the Scottish Executive must address the fact that 60 per cent of Glasgow's population is still living in areas of multiple deprivation. Our children need hope, and tackling those problems would be a good start. The UN special session will call for a UK national plan of action, and any Scottish input to that plan should include consultation with youngsters over how the lives of families in deprived areas can be improved. That would be a key element in arriving at equitable solutions. My party believes that we should have a children's commissioner, and we also believe in the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. We are glad that the UK delegation in New York will include two young people, one of whom is Ellen Leaver from Scotland. I send all my good wishes to her. In this way, children will learn that with an individual's rights come duties to society. I hope that that lesson will mean less crime, abuse and war and more responsibility and love among the adults that young people will become.

I would agree with the minister on that, except that, having looked at the situation in Barra, I might doubt the figures.

I agree with Rhona Brankin's comment about the capercaillie. Does she agree that we should take advice from the Scottish Gamekeepers Association, that is, from the people on the ground? Predators are the real reason for the disappearance of the capercaille. Unless we do something about predation, we will have no capercaillies.

Robin Harper talked about scientific data. The point that I made about the Barra data was that it was suppressed. SNH did not report the data to the Government, as it is supposed to do.

Will the member take an intervention?

I have a question about the species on the member's home isle of North Uist. Does he not think that something really radical now needs to be done about the mink situation? If the mink are allowed to remain there, the local species will disappear.

To some extent, I agree with what the member says. However, does he agree that the messenger should report the truth?

It is extremely important that the rich tapestry of fauna, flora and wildlife, which we are lucky to have in Scotland and which is the envy of Europe, is enjoyed by future generations. The right type of conservation is necessary. It is also vital that the needs and concerns of local people in areas of proposed designations are taken into consideration. The people who live and work the land and get their feet muddy are the people who know the environment best. In many cases, they are the reason that the species are there. They are the people who have been protecting the land and the wildlife for centuries, and who will make or break the protection. A problem is evident in the growing distrust and suspicion of Scottish Natural Heritage and other conservation bodies, whether because of their lack of consultation or because of their choice of research methods. That situation must be unhealthy both for the people and for the protected species, and relationships must be improved. I have no personal grudge against SNH, which has a job to do, but it is doing it in the wrong way by ignoring local biodiversity in its mad rush to implement the European directives of Natura 2000. I have heard concerns raised time and again, in committee, with petitions—received all on the same day—from our most northerly, southerly and westerly islanders, who are united in their  frustration and who agree with one another for once. Similarly, at a meeting run by People Too, a non-political organisation that is attracting support from all walks of life, I heard from people who are fed up with being told what to do by an organisation that has little practical experience of their daily lives and struggles. When an order is designated, there is no going back. However, nature can change. I do not know of any order—of any of the varieties—that has been cancelled. There is not even an adequate appeals process. Why put an order on Skye to protect golden eagles, which have been there for centuries and were there long before SNH was invented? SNH has released sea eagles, which appear to be chasing the golden eagles off their nests. SNH is also responsible for the encouragement of pine martens, which are extraordinarily destructive to other species of wildlife such as the capercaillie and the black grouse. They recently destroyed the chicks in a red kite's nest. Pine martens also kill house martins and swallows in farmers' barns. Furthermore, SNH's scheme to eradicate mink in the Western Isles is not going well either. Beforehand, mink might have been found in North Uist, but now they have been spotted as far south as Eriskay. A constituent wrote to me of a loch where black-throated divers used to nest and where Slovenian grebes wintered in considerable numbers. An order was put on the loch, drawing attention to the species that were present, and now, as a result of the disturbance, most of those birds have deserted the areas. Why did not SNH consult the locals before it messed it up? The consultation process is hopeless for any operation in a designated area. SNH must be notified in writing at least a month in advance. If an urgent operation is required, such as the repair of a dam or riverbank or the unblocking of a drain, substantial damage results from the delay. What are needed are machines and people with spades, who will react at once and take the advice of those who have local experience. I will highlight what happened on Barra, relating to the petition against the designation of a special area of conservation for seals around Barra and Eriskay. First, SNH reported that local opinion was in favour of an SAC, but that was untrue. In fact, virtually the whole place was against it. Those who supported the petition included the community councils of Northbay, Castlebay, Eriskay and Loch Boisdale, Councillor Donald Manford of Barra, Councillor David Blaney of South Uist, Councillor Norman McKinnon, the Western Isles Fishermen's Association, the Barratlantic fish factory and the MacNeil of Barra—just to mention some. It was surely dishonest of SNH, therefore, to report to the Scottish Executive that the areas that the  designation affected favoured the designation, when—blatantly—they did not. The justification for the designation was based on two surveys that were done by the sea mammal research unit, which is thorough in its work and open in the disclosure of its figures. Both surveys, which were done in 1992 and 1996, showed that the population of common seals was well above the figure of 1 per cent of the national population, which meant that SNH was required to make a designation. The national population of seals is 30,000, so any site that has more than 300 seals can be designated. However, SNH failed to quote the most recent survey, which was done on 8 August 2000; it counted only 140 seals, which is below 1 per cent of the national seal population. The science, therefore, was against SNH's criteria for site designation, but SNH appears to have suppressed that information. I presume that it did so because the information went against political aims. SNH's action is surely unscientific, unlawful and immoral. That action might have made the minister vulnerable to judicial review proceedings on the basis that he had failed to take account of matters of which he should have taken account, which were the results of the 2000 survey. It is surely unacceptable for SNH, with its biased misuse of science, to put a minister in a position that makes him vulnerable to legal challenge. SNH, as a statutory Government adviser, has a duty to be unbiased and to report the truth to Government about local opinion and scientific data. In this case, it did neither. It was on the shifting sands around Eriskay that the ship SS Politician, which was made famous by Compton Mackenzie's novel "Whisky Galore", foundered. How dreadful it would have been had another "politician", the motor vessel SS Finnie or SS Wilson, ended up wrecked on those same sands—but not so heavily laden with whisky, I hope—because of SNH's misleading navigation. I want other members to speak, so I will end with the thought that SNH is proposing an experiment with beavers in Argyll. If successful, that experiment would result in a general reintroduction of beavers into Scotland. SNH says that local opinion favours that. However, the Scottish Crofting Foundation, the National Farmers Union of Scotland, the river boards and the angling associations are all united against the proposal. Perhaps all those bodies are wrong and SNH is right. Somehow, I doubt that.

Does the member accept that the last time her party was in power there were very few cars and therefore no transport problems? Will she tell me whether her party is following the same policies today as they did at that time?

A country that does not know its history and folklore cannot truly possess a vision for its future. Hamish Henderson's lasting legacy to Scotland will be not only his own poetry and songs but the countless songs and poems that he resurrected, recorded and catalogued for present and future generations of Scots. Everyone owes him a debt of gratitude for having undertaken and achieved so much in that field. Edinburgh should never forget that the people's festival, which he helped to create in 1951, was the precursor of the present Edinburgh festival fringe, which brings so many benefits to the city. Hamish Henderson was a founder member of the school of Scottish studies and realised the value of the folklore that the Scottish Travellers in particular had preserved. He realised the danger to Scottish culture and history should the songs, poems and stories die out or become forgotten. He also defended marginalised and pressurised groups in our society because he realised that we cannot promote and protect a culture if we do not promote and protect the people who produce it.  I particularly admire how Hamish Henderson brushed aside the polite, clean image of Scottish folk songs, which had been decontaminated to suit refined society, and dug out the real, raw, rude and vital roots of Scottish folk that had delighted and inspired the original recipients. That is what folk music is all about—the crude rough and tumble of ordinary life and the tragedies and comedies that mould the clay of humanity. Hamish Henderson was human in his desire to stand up for a peaceful, harmonious world. He was a pacifist who realised that peace sometimes had to be steadfastly fought for in order that evil should not prevail. He risked his life for peace as a young man when working for the Quakers in Germany ferrying letters and messages under the noses of the Nazis. He was reduced to despair by man's inhumanity to man in the Spanish civil war. Amazingly, it was he who accepted the surrender of Italy from Marshal Graziani in 1943. He kept the signed document in his pocket until his dying day. Hamish Henderson referred to himself and the poets of that era as having "grown up for war". His time in the army during the second world war further exposed him not only to the songs of the soldiers but to the new flowering of written poetry in that era. He was intensely proud of being a Scot, but that national pride and an international outlook went hand in hand. He once said: "I am definitely proud of being Scots, and incoming people with similar ideas are quite entitled to express it as well." When Hamish won the coveted Somerset Maugham award of a travelling scholarship, he thought that it was an attempt by the establishment to get him out of the country. When he won that award in 1949, EP Thompson responded: "I greet you with humility. You are that rare man: a poet, and you must not forget that your songs and ballads are not trivialities; they are quite as important as your elegies." I was privileged to know and sometimes sing with another great folk singer, Hamish Imlach. One of his favourite songs was called "The D-Day Dodgers", which had been written during the second world war by a Major Hamish Henderson of the 51 st Highland division in indignant response to an ill-considered comment by Lady Astor in the House of Commons. In a stupid speech, she had suggested that those soldiers who were stuck in Italy, and many of whom had died fighting the Germans in particularly bloody campaigns such as Cassino, were in some way dodging the D-day Normandy invasion. The song is great and it is long, and I find the last two verses particularly poignant: "Forgotten by the many remembered by the few We had our armistice when an armistice was new One million Germans gave up to us   We finished our war without much fuss For we're the D-Day Dodgers out here in Italy. If you look around the mountains in the wind and rain You'll find the scattered crosses some which bear no name Heart break and toil and suffering gone The boys beneath them slumber on For they're the D-Day Dodgers who stayed in Italy"

Will the member give way?

I refer members to my fisheries and land interests, which are listed in the register of interests and in Andy Wightman's book. For over 200 years, recreational fishing for salmon and sea trout has been a solid source of income and employment for the Highlands and  Islands. During that time, management expertise that is the envy of the fishing world has been built up. The reputation of those fisheries is dependent on maintaining runs of migratory fish and providing comfort, privacy and expert advice to people who come to angle. Other countries, such as Norway, Iceland and—recently—Russia, have benefited from our Scottish knowledge. Those countries must be looking in disbelief at what is proposed in part 3 of the bill. Those provisions may well unravel and destroy all the good work that has been done by many past generations. I have personal experience of more than 30 years of managing fisheries.

I did not say that crofters could not run a salmon fishery. [MEMBERS: "You said that they should not."] Would members suggest that crofting managers should run a football team? As I said, I have personal experience over 30 years of managing fisheries. I am a trustee of one of the seven new trusts that have recently been established. I am horrified to think that all the good work that has been done by scientists and others, which the Scottish Executive applauds, may now falter through lack of investment and because of a policy that even Marshall Tito thought fit to abandon in the 1940s.

No, I will not give way. While the threat of this legislation hangs over Scottish fisheries, jobs will be lost, investment will dry up and a culture that was respected by all those who were involved in it will go up in smoke. That is the danger of the legislation.

The minister and his officials say that good fishery managements have nothing to fear from the legislation. Will the minister explain how such reassurances can be relied on to ensure that owners of salmon fisheries have the confidence to continue to invest in the improvement and development of their fisheries? Will he tell the chamber by what means and against what tests good fishery managers will be judged? Why is legislation being introduced before the results of the survey that was promised by Rhona Brankin in the green paper entitled "Scotland's  Freshwater Fisheries: Securing their Future" are published? When will the survey results be published? We will not know what is at stake and what effect the changes might have on the northern Scottish economy until that happens.

Will the minister take the advice of the Highland Council, which last week reaffirmed its commitment to the removal of salmon fishing from part 3 of the bill. Will the radical new rights of compulsory purchase be accompanied by radical new responsibilities for sustaining fishings and employment? Who was consulted when that part of the bill was drafted?

Nobody. Dr Hunter was consulted and that man has amazed many by calling the views of the crofters "nuts." He has also described the ghillies and river managers as a lunatic fringe—

He said that they could go and jump in the river. The ghillies and river managers disagree with him and so, Presiding Officer, do I.

Will the minister ensure that he protects all wildlife, especially songbirds, and not just the raptor and predator sector?

Will the member take an intervention?

What is the point of the Government approaching the subject with an open mind when all the evidence shows that strip stamps do not work? Why does the Government have to reinvent the wheel time and again?

I am delighted to be able to declare an interest in the Scotch whisky industry. The industry is incredibly important to the Highlands and Islands, where most of the distilleries are. The whisky industry has been under threat from many sources of late. We last debated the issue on 2 May, when the threat came from the EU water framework directive. That threat has not entirely gone away, but the industry is working closely with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency to prove that the manufacture of Scotch whisky is not polluted. That should not be difficult. Many distilleries in the Highlands and Islands discharge into the River Spey, which is world famous for its salmon. Many Aberdeen Angus cattle, which produce the best beef in the world, are fed on draff, which is a distillery by-product. Like Scotch beef, Scotch whisky is an outstanding indigenous product that we in Scotland should be very grateful for. Industries come and go, but Scotch whisky still flourishes and provides the Treasury with one of its most valuable sources of revenue. The Scottish Parliament would do well to reflect its pride in our national spirit. Whisky is uisge beatha—the water of life. It should be produced at every Scottish Parliament reception, but I regret to say that it is not. It should be an alternative to Chilean or French wine, but we are not even offered it. If the Scottish Executive is serious about its  document, "A Toast to the Future", in which it pledges to support the industry, let us have some evidence of that support and let us have it now. The Labour Government's proposal to implement strip stamps would have precisely the opposite effect. To accommodate the stamps, the UK spirits industry would have to increase its working capital by £250 million. The interest on that figure would be a minimum of £15 million per annum. The cost of adapting machinery is estimated at another £15 million. That is before we consider the cost of the strip stamps themselves and the cost of the extra security that would be needed to protect such tiny pieces of paper. Each stamp would be worth £5.48 and a bagful of them would be worth £1 million. If the strips were stolen, they could easily be used to stamp fake Scotch whisky or contraband spirits. The minister mentioned that the Treasury estimates that £450 million of revenue is lost each year through inward diversion fraud. Inward diversion means imported drinks but, as we do not import Scotch whisky, inward diversion must refer mostly to fake Scotch whisky or other imported spirits. The Scotch whisky industry would be unfairly penalised by the proposed measure. Mind you, Presiding Officer, Scotch whisky has been unfairly penalised ever since 1909, when a teetotal Liberal Prime Minister, by the name of David Lloyd George, tried to stop people drinking at all. He increased the tax by 35 per cent, so that he could fulfil his personal crusade. In a glass of wine at a bar, the proportion of tax is 19.3 per cent; in half a pint of beer, the proportion of tax is 16.6 per cent; but in a poor wee dram, the tax is a massive 27.4 per cent, which is a huge burden for something so tiny. Only the Conservative party has at least recognised the unfairness by reducing the duty on Scotch whisky twice in recent times. The Government's economic advisers concede that spirits are highly price sensitive. As spirits are already taxed one and a half times more heavily than other drinks, applying strip stamps only to spirits would compound the competitive disadvantage that is already faced by the industry. Let us consider the facts: strip stamps have been proven not to work—as Jackie Baillie rightly said—and they are easy to forge. The USA and Greece have abolished them because they do not work. Strip stamps are tremendously expensive to apply. Most important of all, the strip stamps would be a massive burden on our Scotch whisky industry. I urge the Executive to put pressure on its UK counterpart to abandon the Treasury's dangerous proposal. The Executive must show its loyalty to the Scotch whisky industry, which flies Scotland's flag all over the world.  I end on a note of caution for the minister, which came from a little story that I found in William Ferguson's book, "Scotland: 1689 - Present". In 1725, Shawfield House in Glasgow was severely damaged by a mob. The house was looted and razed, and blood was shed, because Daniel Campbell of Shawfield, who was the MP for the Glasgow burghs, had supported the malt tax on whisky. Perhaps the minister should support the industry now. Tackle the fraud by all means, but do it by lowering the duty on Scotch whisky, so that the fraud is less attractive. HM Customs and Excise and the spirits industry should work more closely together to target and expose the criminals who perpetrate excise fraud. Strip stamps are not the answer. I hope that the Scottish Executive will support a great Scottish industry in its time of need.

I believe strongly that the bill should never have been discussed in the Parliament. It bans something that does not exist and seeks to compensate those who might lose non-existent jobs. As far as I am concerned, the one factor that relates to previous fur farms in Scotland and the one legacy that is left over from them is the number of feral mink that are destroying Scottish fisheries and threatening rare breeds of ground-nesting birds. To help clear the mink in the Hebrides, £1.6 million has been set aside. I urge the Parliament to support the efforts that are being made to do that, but mark my words: those who are clearing mink will require dogs to help them.

Before anyone votes to ban hunting in Scotland, they should think clearly about the alternatives that would take the place of the present arrangements for vermin control. That control has always been achieved by a combination of foxhounds, terriers, firearms and trained people. One cannot train a gun; one can only train a person to use it properly. However, dogs are not only trained to the highest standards but already possess the genes that enable them to achieve the highest standards of efficient control with the minimum of cruelty. Foxhounds and other dogs are as important a tool of fox control as sniffer dogs are to the police in locating drugs and explosives. If we take that tool away, we will leave a weakened control force in Scotland's countryside. The chances are that other methods will be used that are not only illegal, but more inhumane. By voting for the bill, members will condemn some foxes to slower, more lingering deaths, increase the pressures on farmers through destruction of lambs and on gamekeepers through destruction of their game and greatly lessen the population of ground-nesting birds. In other words, members will leave poorer people in a poorer countryside. Members will also create a new category of crime and thus a new class of criminals in the rural population. Many will regard the bill as a totally unjustified attack that is aimed, in malice or in ignorance, at the heart of rural tradition. How will it be policed? Will mounted police be recruited and fitted out with brand-new horses to chase groups of riders? If so, who will pay for the vast new expenditure for rural mounted police squads? In short, passing the bill will create serious problems for the police and the courts and will create an extra strain on the Scottish Prison Service when people refuse to pay their fines. The fox is one of nature's cruellest predators. Anyone who, like me, has seen the results of a  fox's visit to a lambing field or a chicken run would not fail to be sickened by the disembowelled corpses—some of which are still alive—that strew the ground. What can country people do if the Parliament takes away the tools of control? What will those people think of the Parliament? I suspect that it will reinforce their suspicion that minorities are not protected and that the Scottish Parliament is a disaster for the rural environment and rural people. Members should read the Burns report. Please vote against this ludicrous bill.

Amendment 25 would extend the exemptions in the bill to include mink. Mink are non-indigenous, pernicious predators of wildlife. Gamekeepers use terriers to locate mink in order that traps may be laid and also in conjunction with other dogs to flush the mink from cover. Without amendment 25, those necessary pest-control activities might be outlawed. The Burns report on hunting with dogs found: "Mink can be very troublesome in the case of ground-nesting seabirds especially in Scotland and on small islands. Their activities, including surplus killing, have been linked to almost complete breeding failure amongst some colonies of terns and gulls, including some rare species." The report also found: "Mink can cause localised damage to poultry, gamebirds, fishing and wildlife interests." And that: "Mink have been held to be responsible for a major decline in water vole numbers."

Mink are non-native to the UK and have spread across almost all of the country since their accidental introduction in the late 1950s, which was aided by deliberate, but illegal,  release. There is no doubt that mink have to be controlled. Until the spread of mink got out of hand, UK Government policy was for eradication. At present, £1.65 million is being spent in the Hebrides on a project to eradicate mink. I move amendment 25.

Will the member take an intervention?

In answer to Scott Barrie's point, the only place where mink have been eradicated successfully is Iceland, where all methods that were suggested by Scottish Natural Heritage were examined before it was said that it would be  unwise and costly to use those methods. The only method of successfully eradicating mink was to use dogs. Dogs are required to locate mink. It is useless to have civil servants crawling around in the seaweed looking for mink droppings. I press amendment 25.

I will speak only to amendment 84D, which is the only one of the amendments in  my name in the group that I will move. Amendment 84D addresses the central flaw of amendment 84, which is that it will compensate only those whose jobs not only cease because of but are outlawed by the bill. That neglects the much broader ripple effect that the bill will have on the rural industries that depend on hunting. Why should there be compensation for furriers but not for farriers?

The reason for including the word "fish", which amendment 7 proposes, relates to mink. Mink predate on fish and are not indigenous to Scotland. Attempts have been made to eradicate them from Scotland. They predate on fish in the redds in the autumn, when salmon and sea trout are spawning. They are damaging to fish farms and they are pernicious killers that need to be controlled. That is the reason for including fish in the list of species that need to be protected.

Will the member give way?

How can the Executive say that it supports the forestry industry when it is four months late with many farm woodland premium scheme payments? Why is the rate for those payments half the rate in Ireland?

Brian Monteith has pointed out, using valid statistics, that the situation regarding class sizes in Scotland improved under the Conservatives. We also left a legacy of improving teacher-pupil ratios. However, Labour will not achieve its much-trumpeted targets by August, because in a democracy it cannot dictate to parents where they should send their children to school. Labour likes  to dictate its own agenda and dogma, but woe betide Labour if it starts to interfere with the rights and choices of parents. Parental choice is perhaps most important in rural schools, which are often under threat of closure. It seems extraordinary to me that parents in remote rural areas are put through the hell of having to fight repeatedly to keep local primary schools open, when those small primary schools often have small classes—the very thing that the Government wants. Two summers ago, I campaigned in Argyll and Bute, alongside valiant parents and teachers, against the closure of six primary schools. Their commendable efforts prevailed and all the schools were saved. However, the schools remain under threat, because, as I was told by the board of Glassary Primary School at Kilmichael, the latest consultations on safe school buildings and what to do to develop and upgrade them is fast becoming a school rationalisation programme that will close smaller schools and move pupils to larger centres.

In England, the Department for Education and Skills has put aside and ring-fenced large sums of money to protect small rural schools that are threatened by closure. Different councils can bid for money for that purpose. I urge the Executive to do the same thing in Scotland, where the problem is far more acute. Labour is happy to blame councils but, in the case of Argyll and Bute Council, that is unfair. Education costs are very high because there are 26 inhabited islands and island education is 1.5 times more expensive per pupil. The report from Dr Arthur Midwinter—a Labour man—entitled "The Mismatch Effect on Council Tax Levels in Argyll and Bute", underlines the mismatch whereby Argyll and Bute taxpayers pay £100 more per head than they should for increasingly poor services. The report also makes a point of highlighting a disparity in education. In paragraph 16, Arthur Midwinter says:  "we would expect a remote rural authority such as Argyll to have fewer pupils per teacher because of the incidence of small schools." He goes on to say that Argyll and Bute's position in relation to class sizes is close to the Scottish average because of the deliberate decision to increase the pupil-teacher ratio in larger schools to compensate for the lower ratio in the small schools. That is shocking and shows a regard only for figures and budgets and a complete disregard for the welfare and good education of the pupils. I sincerely hope that that policy will be abandoned at once and, forby, that the Executive will follow Dr Midwinter's recommendation to grant a further £3.5 million to Argyll and Bute Council to redress the council tax imbalance. Small class sizes are desirable because they should lead to more individual attention for each pupil. Brian Monteith is right when he says that that is not the whole answer. Scotland needs good teachers in good schools with more power to decide how best to provide an education that will give Scotland back the reputation that it once had for excellence in education.

The figures I quote earlier show that, last year alone, demand for fur rose by 30 per cent through retail outlets and furriers. That completely contradicts what Mr Stevenson has just said.

It seems odd to be summing up debate about a bill that seeks to ban something that does not exist and to compensate people who also do not exist. It appears to be much ado about nothing. The other two half-hour debates this afternoon—on the Adoption and Children Bill and the Police Reform Bill—are on UK issues, which have been dealt with by Sewel motions. I see no reason why the Fur Farming (Prohibition) (Scotland) Bill should not have been dealt with in the same way. My colleague Alex Fergusson has rightly drawn attention to the fact that the bill contains a section on compensation for fur farmers who might lose their livings, yet if the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill is agreed to by the Parliament, there is absolutely no provision for people who will lose their livings. We should spend more time discussing the plight of real people, who will lose real jobs, and compensation for those people, rather than waste time introducing legislation for compensation that will never be used or needed. There is no justifiable reason for the introduction of the bill. The policy memorandum states that the bill is "grounded on a moral objection to the keeping of animals to exploit them solely or primarily for the value of their fur" However, it does not say whose moral objection that is. In June 2000, the European Commission recommended that the British Government should wait until the EU common rules on fur farming had been established. Over the past five years, fur sales in the UK have risen substantially and more and more fur is being sold through fashion retail outlets as well as specialist fur traders.

I gather from the minister that it was the SNP's fault that we are not debating a Sewel motion this afternoon. However, I should point out that Mr Gorrie's argument appears also  to apply to the other two debates. Fur sales rose by 30 per cent in the 1999-2000 season, so it does not appear that the general public think that it is morally wrong to buy and wear fur. Do they really think that it is morally wrong that animals should be raised to produce the product? Elaine Smith might want to learn that a poll carried out in December 2001 by Scottish Opinion for the British Fur Trade Association—after the Rural Development Committee had taken evidence on fur farming—found that 86 per cent of Scots supported farming for any purpose, provided that there was good animal welfare. I could well understand a ban on the ground of bad animal welfare, but the moral issue takes us into the realms of the specific political agendas of pressure groups, which might damage substantially other businesses and forms of farming. My main argument against mink farming would be the legacy left to rural Scotland of escaped mink from previous farms. Those mink now damage wild fisheries, fish farms and colonies of ground-nesting birds. Both Richard Lochhead and Mike Rumbles raised that argument. It is a sensible argument, but like that based on animal welfare, it is about farming methods and practices rather than the necessity of a complete ban. We do not ban prisons because prisoners escape; we tighten up security.

I hope that Mr Morgan is not suggesting that we eradicate escaped prisoners. I have already said that the methods available for the eradication of mink would be helped greatly if hounds could be used, rather than having civil servants crawl around looking for mink droppings. If damage is the issue, we should be debating SNH's declared intention, despite much evidence against it, to introduce the European beaver to the Highlands, which is an area that has never had beaver before. The beaver was killed out long ago in more southern areas, because it is a destructive pest to farms, forests, fisheries and waterways. If anyone wants proof of that, they should contact the environment ministers of Bavaria, Denmark and Norway, where beavers are a problem. SNH would be better using money to promote otter watching or an animal that is indigenous to Scotland that could give pleasure to thousands. Issues that are damaging to Scotland should be debated, but fur farming is obviously not one of them. Fur farming is neither a moral nor a welfare issue here. It should have been dealt with by a  Sewel motion instead of wasting an hour and a half of precious parliamentary time and much committee time, which could have been better used to debate issues of practical significance to the Scottish people.

On the point about food, mink are in fact eaten by human beings in China and they also provide an enormous amount of food for the fish farming industry.

I refer to the point about the damage being done by mink. There is an eradication programme in the Western Isles, which would greatly benefit from the use of hounds. It has been shown in Iceland that that is the only way in which to eradicate mink. Iceland has dealt with the problem in that way.

The minister will be aware that the labelling of meat imports is woefully inadequate and that the system is being abused. What is being done to protect UK livestock farmers and consumers from those bad labelling practices?

Will the minister give way?

As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I am particularly interested in creating sustainable employment in any way possible. I recently supported Alasdair Morrison's debate on wind energy. I pointed out the huge significance of the new wind farm turbine manufacturing plant at Machrihanish, both for its benefit to local employment in Kintyre and because of the technology transfer to Scotland from the Danes, who are world leaders in the field. I supported the concept of the enormous wind farm project on Lewis, with its implications for jobs in the Arnish yard, and suggested that similar projects should be initiated in other parts of Scotland, with the important provisos that every possible precaution should be taken to avoid noise and visual pollution and that the views of local people should be listened to. For those projects to go ahead, it will be necessary to substantially improve the grid, so that  the electricity can be carried to where it is needed. That would provide more employment. Significant local projects will be windfalls from wind farm projects, which will in themselves create extra local employment. The Executive must introduce a fast-track planning system so that applications can be more speedily processed. Individuals have been wrestling with applications for seven or eight years. That is hopeless if the Executive is to meet its targets by 2010. I applaud the creation of small hydro schemes—provided that they do not block the passage of migratory fish—as the financial benefit will again bring more income and thus more employment to remote rural areas. People involved in hydro schemes smile when it rains. I will now focus on recycling. According to Audit Scotland, every Scottish council failed to meet the Government recycling targets, but there is not a council in Scotland that would not trumpet recycling in evangelical terms if they were given the funding. I have one thing to say to the Executive, which sets the targets: no targets without markets. It is unfair of the Executive to snipe at councils. Recycling at any cost is not a sound policy. No target figure should be set by this or any other Parliament until there is a full economic and environmental rationale for achieving such a target. Currently, especially in the Highlands and Islands, there is a lack of reliable, sustainable and expanding markets to pass or sell collected materials to. In other words, the councils can easily afford to collect the rubbish but they cannot sell it. Two institutions—Remade, which is based in Scotland, and the Waste and Resources Action Programme, which is UK-based—are meant to identify markets, but I have been told that that is not happening. Remade and WRAP should be given the task of identifying the precise way in which targets can be met. Councils in the Highlands suffer extra costs because of the long hauls to transport collected materials outwith their areas. New incentives are needed to encourage local production of goods from waste, which would also achieve Robin Harper's target of extra employment. It is stupid to put all our eggs in one basket. We should not exclude technologies by making presumptions against incinerators and waste-to-energy plants. We should consider the policies of such countries as Denmark, the Netherlands and Austria, which lead the European field in waste management. Those countries use every means at their disposal to manage their waste and we should do the same. It is essential for Government and local councils to work hand in hand. Orkney Islands Council's record of recycling 20 per cent of waste is  commendable and Argyll and Bute Council's subsidised home composting scheme, which was advertised by leaflet drop, has been impressive. The council sold 3,500 home composters, which equates to one each to 10 per cent of all households. Thanks to its pollution prevention and control arrangement with Shanks, the council is well ahead on its targets. However, the council is faced with the expense of having to lift 1,200 scrap cars each year. Those are not counted as household waste because the nearest scrapyard is in Helensburgh. To improve local marine environments and coastal employment, we need profitable aquaculture industries in our sea lochs to co-exist with wild fisheries. Sea lochs should play a big part in future employment in diverse aquacultures. If fish farming is profitable, conservation is far more likely to fall into place. Although I share Robin Harper's wish for better public transport, I re-emphasise the fact that the private car is still essential in most of the Highlands and Islands. In that area, any movement of timber and other heavy freight from road to rail or to sea transport is most welcome.

On fishing conservation effort, will the Executive take action to clarify EC regulation 2056/2001, especially as it relates to prawn fishermen who use 100mm nets. It is causing much anxiety, fear and consternation among prawn fishermen, who are confused about whether they are fishing within the law.

rose—

I thank the minister for taking an intervention. I know people who have been struggling with applications for wind farms for seven to eight years. Will the Executive bring forward fast-track planning to prevent that? That is necessary to meet the targets by 2010.

I congratulate Alasdair Morrison on raising the issue of renewable energy, which is of immense importance, particularly to people who live on the island of Lewis. Alasdair is indeed a modern-day Don Quixote—instead of tilting at windmills, he is encouraging them, and that is great news. The Scottish Conservative party welcomes the proposals for the construction on the island of Lewis of the world's largest wind farm. The Conservative shadow energy spokesperson at Westminster, Robert Key, recently said that environmentally friendly, sustainable energy is not the dream that it was 20 years ago but a reality that we have to encourage. That will involve hard decisions and hard choices. Sometimes local environment must take second place and suffer some discomfort if the means justify the end. In this case, the end is a cleaner global environment for all. However, great care and common sense must be applied in the location of wind farms so that the visual and noise impact is kept to a minimum. I live in Argyll and overlook a wind farm in the distance near Taynuilt. I do not find it obtrusive. Some local residents lost their television signals, but the wind farm company installed Sky Television services for them. The proposed Lewis wind farm will bring huge benefits, initially in employment—especially if the Arnish yard, which now lies dormant, could be reopened for the assembly of the wind turbines. Arnish has traditionally been a main employer for Stornoway and it is sadly missed. I have been involved in a successful campaign to locate a wind turbine manufacturing company at Machrihanish in Kintyre. That will bring great local benefit. It will also bring valuable technology transfer to Scotland from the Danish company that is undoubtedly the world leader in the field. The argument for wind farms in the Scottish hills is strengthened when one considers that so much land is under huge blocks of Sitka spruce trees, which lock up land only to make a loss. That form of timber loses £1 a tonne when marketed. It would surely be much better to manufacture wind farm turbines and earn money for local residents and at the same time reopen previously forested land for other uses.  The Government has hard choices to make. Renewable wind energy is not a cheap option. The renewables obligation tax is proving to be a hurdle to green electricity suppliers. Also, suppliers of renewable energy are still awaiting the issue of renewables obligation certificates, which were promised for last October but are now promised for April. Why are they six months late? If the UK is to meet its 10 per cent renewable energy target by 2010, it must spend now to renew the grid, which in Scotland is sadly inadequate. Lastly, on the Barvas moor project, why not consider the east coast of Lewis and the Ness moor, which provide at least 100 square miles of barely visible sites for wind turbines and numerous inlets for possible wave energy. As a by-product, the much debated and often shelved plan to link Tolsta to Ness with nine miles of road might also become a triumphant reality. That truly would be progress—a windfall from a wind farm.

Why, despite the acceptance that industrial fishing is detrimental to the marine food chain, has no significant cut been made in the quotas for that sector, especially in the fishing for Norway pout, which leads to a large bycatch of immature fish of other species?

Will the member give way?

I wish the new minister well in his negotiations on behalf of the Scottish fishing industry. The proposed cuts in prawn quota will damage fishing communities throughout Scotland that are already reeling from the recent falls in income. Fraserburgh, for example, is the largest prawn port in the UK. The smaller vessels in Eyemouth and Pittenweem on the east coast will be particularly affected. A cut of 22 per cent in quota will obliterate their livelihoods; it is even worse for the west coast, where fishermen will treat a 25 per cent cut with cynicism and derision. Recently, fishermen have been far more willing to accept scientific advice than they were in the past, but all that good work will be undermined if  the Commission's proposals for cuts in nephrops, or prawn, quota are implemented. Why has there been no communication of the Commission's intentions in that regard in all the talks that have taken place with fishermen's representatives in the past year? Why, if the Commission states that it based its proposals for quotas on scientific advice, has it clearly not done so in this case? Why does it attempt to link cod stocks with fishing effort for prawns when there is clearly no connection? Last year, the Commission reduced prawn quota by 10 per cent, stating that if the UK could demonstrate that prawn fishing has a low impact on the cod fishery, that 10 per cent would be reinstated to the fleet. That was accepted, albeit reluctantly, by the Scottish fishermen, whose efforts to comply with conservation measures have been by far the best in Europe. Imagine, then, their despair and disbelief at the cuts, which are certainly not based on scientific advice. Had the quotas been based on science, the prawn TAC for next year would have risen to 18,000 tonnes rather than dropped to 12,000 tonnes. Add to that the huge reduction in monkfish quota and we have a recipe for disaster for the Scottish fishing fleet. A 40 per cent reduction in one year, in any stock, is a step too far. It would reduce the value of the monkfish sector by £10 million. Will the boats involved in that fishery simply not turn their horsepower into the mixed fishery of the North sea, where cod is a serious bycatch? Returning to the prawn quota on the west coast, where a cut of 25 per cent is envisaged, there is plenty of evidence that cod bycatch is negligible. In 2000, cod landings in the Western Isles were valued at £34,500 and the vast majority of them were caught by vessels targeting white fish with static nets west of the Hebrides—an area where no prawns are caught. During the same year, Western Isles prawn landings amounted to £4,614,000. Those figures demonstrate that there is no significant connection between prawn and cod catches. The same applies in the three other main west coast grounds where prawns are the main target species. The bycatch of cod is minute and becoming less, as an increasing share of the prawn TAC is taken up by creel fishers, who have no bycatch at all. It is ludicrous to expect inshore prawn vessels to take a 35 per cent reduction in earnings to save cod that they are not catching. The realistic option is to restore the west coast prawn TAC and accept that the technical conservation measures introduced into white fish nets will reduce the minute bycatch of cod on the west coast. Talking of west coast issues—and scallops—reducing amnesic shellfish poisoning levels to 4.6 micrograms per kg would close the fishery for nine  to 10 months of the year and wipe out the markets, the processors and the scallop vessels. There has never been any problem of illness associated with Scottish scallops, which are tested at 20 micrograms per kg—the internationally recognised level. The minister must give his support to the industry in its time of need. Indeed, while the Executive must call for an increase in prawn quotas, it must also rectify the ridiculous proposal of a 5 per cent increase in the Norwegian pout fishery. That fishery is the most damaging to bycatch of other species. What forces are behind that suggested increase? Not only are Scottish fishermen to be hit by quota cuts; vessels that also fish in the Norwegian sector need an extra set of gear with 120mm mesh size. That is handicapping them by £5,000 per vessel. The minister will probably say that state rules forbid aid on that issue, but I point out to him that no action is being taken to stop the regulation, which is an extra burden to Scottish vessels and is therefore, in effect, state aid to other member states by default. In conclusion, I demand that the Scottish Executive obtain a fair deal for Scotland and scrutinise moves by other EU states in the crucial period leading up to the review of the CFP. I end by asking the minister whether he knows why Mr Gordon Adam, a Labour member of the European Parliament from Northumberland, is seeking to undermine the efforts that are being made in the Shetlands to secure more quota for local fishermen. I move amendment S1M-2546.2, to insert at end: "; in particular calls on the Scottish Executive to seek to overturn the proposed cuts in nephrops quotas in favour of figures based on scientific advice; calls for a significant cut in industrial fishing; notes that the change in net mesh sizes will put an unfair burden on Scottish fishermen who fish both EU and Norwegian waters, and further calls on the Executive to press for retention of the internationally accepted 20-microgramme testing system for scallops to promote the survival of the Scottish scallop industry.

Will the minister give way?

In the light of much angry criticism that designations of SACs and sites of special scientific interest are made before consultations with the local people whose lives will be affected by them, will the Executive tell us who is in charge of consulting people, what the process of consultation is meant to be and how the Executive intends to improve the present unsatisfactory—indeed, inflammatory—situation?

rose—

It gives me great pleasure to speak in this debate. Although I am no longer a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I thoroughly enjoyed taking an active role in the report on Travellers in Scotland. I am grateful to the many people I met who invited me into their homes and gave me an all-too-brief insight into their way of life. I was moved by many of the stories that I heard, especially those about the bullying of children and the feeling of isolation experienced by many in the travelling community. Such isolation is a paradox. Many Scottish Travellers can claim origins in a tradition and culture that can be traced back to the nomadic hunter-gatherers of ancient Scotland. That tradition and culture led to strong bonds that built up a deep pride in home and country—traditional values that most Scots respect and that form the great strength of our nation. Although sadly those values are being eroded by the speed and pressure of modern life, they are still strong among travelling communities. That should be recognised and respected. The Travellers would have a great deal more to offer Scotland if there were more interaction between them and the static community. However, that interaction is not happening and is not likely to happen unless the situation changes dramatically. As I visited sites throughout Scotland, I got the impression that Travellers feel that they get little out of society and so do not experience a  tremendous desire to put a great deal into it. Any group in society that feels discriminated against turns inwards and tends to become defensive and distrustful. Scottish Travellers should be recognised as a group that is culturally different, not racially different. However, the real tragedy is the fact that a so-called inclusive Scotland, dominated by a socialist regime that champions social inclusion, is anti-social in its approach to Travellers. The Equal Opportunities Committee's report was a good idea and I congratulate Kate MacLean, the other members of the committee and particularly the clerks of the committee on the thoroughness of their work. The Scottish Gypsy Traveller Association thinks that the report is excellent. However, the Executive's response has been disappointing. It seems to say that all is well and that there are no major problems and it passes the buck to local councils. In other words, it appears to be burying the report. No action appears to have been taken to remedy some of the acute problems that I identified when I contributed to the report. For example, when I visited a site at Dumbarton, I found negotiating the access extremely difficult, even though I was in a Land Rover. The pot-holes were so deep that any normal cars, vans or lorries would soon have been badly damaged. I mentioned that fact to the then minister, Jackie Baillie, when she appeared before the Equal Opportunities Committee on 5 June. The site is in her constituency and I hoped that she might visit it and experience the approach road. I do not know whether she went there, but no repairs have yet been undertaken. The same problem exists at the Dunholligan site near Lochgilphead, where the access, which is shared with the Forestry Commission, is if anything worse than that at Dumbarton—there is no tarmac there at all. The rents that Travellers are paying to the council for their site are often as high as the rent that is charged for a five-apartment council house, so they should at least have a reasonable approach road and proper drainage. I also heard general complaints about the cost of the electricity that was supplied and the fact that only council electricity cards could be used. In some cases, electricity bills were given with little, if any, detail of specific charges. At the site in Spean Bridge, a barrier was installed for which only the site manager had a key. If he was not available, emergency fire or ambulance services would have had difficulty in gaining access. Moreover, people's cars and vans were trapped in the site except when the site manager was present. I am told that the site dwellers have now been given keys, so the report has achieved something concrete.  The position of some of the Traveller sites leaves a great deal to be desired, especially the one at Kentallon, which is situated in a large quarry that seldom, if ever, sees the sun and is subject to dangerous rock falls. Although the original idea behind the sites was to integrate Travellers gradually into the local communities, that has not often worked, as, in many instances, Travellers find council houses difficult to obtain. Many would like to buy their sites from farmers but are prevented from doing so by draconian planning laws. I leave the question of health and education facilities for Travellers to my colleagues. I say only that it is alarming that a section of Scottish society appears to feel so neglected in the 21 st century. The contribution that Travellers make to the economy is still useful. Tattie and berry picking has become largely mechanised, but from Campbeltown to Ullapool and all over the Scottish islands, Travellers still gather whelks and winkles, which are sold to shellfish exporters. One exporter told me that he relies on the Travellers for 70 per cent of the collection of those shellfish. I believe that that is the case in many areas. For example, in the area of Lochaber alone, around Loch Eil, there might be 20 Traveller families undertaking such work on a monthly basis. They spend money locally and the profits that are generated by the exporters mean that local garages benefit from servicing vehicles and from other business. Those types of shellfish can be gathered only by hand and their value to the Scottish economy runs into millions of pounds. Were it not for the Travellers, not enough volume would be gathered to make the activity commercially viable and the industry would suffer. Sometimes a conflict can arise between local crofters and the Travellers over where and when the shellfish should be gathered. That situation would be improved by more interaction and discussion between the interested parties. I call on the Minister for Environment and Rural Development to consider that when the Executive examines the management of our coastal waters. Kenny Gibson is right: Travellers choose to live as they do and no one should try to interfere with that choice. They have the same rights and responsibilities as other groups in society, but they have become isolated and deserve better recognition. I call on MSPs of all parties to visit their local Traveller sites and listen at grass-roots level to Travellers' concerns. I also ask the Travellers to invite their MSPs and welcome them as they welcomed me, to promote a more trusting and understanding partnership between the Parliament and Travellers. Any consultation should be undertaken with Travellers and not only with  groups representing them, whose members may not be Travellers themselves.

I commend Maureen Macmillan for   bringing  this debate to the chamber. The Scottish Conservatives have always been supportive of Gaelic. The Conservatives inherited a situation in which Gaelic was dying, but they kick-started the recovery and an industry of broadcasting and information technology that has flourished. Alasdair Morrison said in Parliament in 2000: "Eighteen years ago, a bright new sun shone on Gaelic education."— [ Official Report , 2 March 2000; Vol 05, c 390.]  I took that as one of his rare compliments to the Tories. The sky has now clouded over somewhat and further inspiration is vitally needed to reinvigorate Gaelic, which is a central plank of Scottish heritage and culture—that rich culture of poetry and music so ably demonstrated by Duncan Macintyre of old and Sorley MacLean more recently. As I have said before, protecting and promoting Gaelic means protecting and promoting the people whence the language comes. The prediction that the population of the Western Isles will fall by 14 per cent over the next 10 years must ring alarm bells in the Gaelic camp. The Scottish Executive must do more to reinvigorate the primary industries of farming, fishing and tourism. If the Gaelic language is to survive, the young must be taught; we will need more new teachers to ensure that that happens. Scottish parents should have the right to choose Gaelic-medium education for their children. Gone, thankfully, are the days at the turn of the previous century when children were banned for speaking Gaelic in the playground. We have made progress. In 1993, there were only 60 teachers in primary Gaelic posts; now, there are 150—but that is still not enough. The figures for secondary schools, where only 54 teachers exist, are now really critical. That is borne out by the fact that the number of Gaelic-medium primary pupils in the 60 units that exist in 2001 is 1,860, while the number of secondary pupils in the 14 units that exist is a meagre 300. On 7 February 2000, the Deputy Minister for Children and Education, Peter Peacock, acknowledged the need to increase the number of Gaelic-medium teachers by 150 in the next seven years. I hope that Mike Watson, or our new minister with responsibility for Gaelic—whoever he or she is, perhaps Elaine Murray—will agree with what Peter Peacock said then and do something about it. Language experts say that if a language is spoken by fewer than 50,000 people it will die. We are perilously close to that figure now. Before the language dies, the major problem must be addressed. Gaelic teacher training must be made  more available in the areas where Gaelic is still spoken. At present, it is easy enough to do a course in Gaelic learning—at Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, Lews Castle College or other educational establishments in the Highlands and Islands—but if someone wants to get a teacher's training certificate, they must spend two to three years either at the Jordanhill campus of the University of Strathclyde in Glasgow or at Northern College in Aberdeen. I might add that such courses are not available in Edinburgh, Scotland's capital city, which seems absurd. The lack of local facilities makes Gaelic teacher training extremely difficult for men and women with families and commitments at home. I call on the Scottish Executive to provide valid Gaelic teacher training courses in the Gaelic communities, based on existing further education centres such as Lews Castle College and Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, and perhaps on branches of the University of the Highlands and Islands such as Argyll College near Oban. I see no reason, with distance learning and online facilities becoming more prevalent and accessible, why the main language part of such courses could not be done at the UHI information technology outlets in such places as Barra and Tiree. In the past, a great deal has been done through the scheme of specific grants for Gaelic, which was started by the Conservatives. That work must be built on to draw up a national strategy for Gaelic-medium education, in which the Executive, local authorities, parents and other interested groups would all have an input. I would like the Executive to consider what is done in the Basque country. The methods used to promote the minority language there have been very good. Comunn na Gàidhlig's framework was drawn up four years ago. Why has there been no formal response to it by the Executive? That framework should now be updated to help produce a national policy for Gaelic. There is a great urgency for plans to be put in place now if there is to be any significant increase in the number of Gaelic speakers in the future.

In light of the fact that the fish farming industry is regulated by nine bodies, will the Scottish Executive, in the interests of fish farming and the environment, follow the advice of the Scottish salmon strategy task force report of 1996 and set up a single regulatory body for the aquaculture industry and include paving legislation for that in the forthcoming water environment bill?

Will the minister examine the impact caused by the removal of the subsidy for spreading limestone on fields, as a result of which limestone quarries closed all over rural Scotland? The same will happen to local quarries if the aggregates tax is levied.

I congratulate Annabel Goldie on securing a debate on a subject that is of huge concern to rural Scotland. I agree with everything that Alasdair Morgan said. The Scottish Conservative party is totally against the imposition of an aggregates tax. There is no need for the tax and, as has been pointed out, it will not be effective in improving the environment. That is better achieved by locating small quarries near to points of delivery and not by having a few large units, as that will only increase the number of lorries on the roads. The tax is liable to affect 1,500 jobs in Scotland, take £48 million out of the Scottish economy and produce increases in council tax. The Executive has stated that no additional funding will be made available to councils to compensate for the extra costs that will be incurred due to the introduction of the tax. My main worry is for the small quarries and especially for those on islands, which keep islands  self-sufficient in materials that are needed for local projects. It is incredibly important for local people to be able to go to a quarry and pick up a load of aggregate. I should point out that, on islands, there is usually one quarry. If that goes, everything has to be imported by ship. I recently visited one such quarry, Ballygrant, on the isle of Islay. At the moment, some of the people there have jobs that relate to the Dunlossit estate. The quarry is run with old machinery and produces materials that are probably not up to mainland standards. Nevertheless, the quarry meets the urgent requirements of the islanders. The quarry also supplies council projects, but its main client base is composed of farmers, the tourist trade, eight distilleries and other small industries. Much of the client base would go if an increase of £1.60 per tonne were levied. Things are difficult enough at the moment in the rural economy. Potholes will not be filled in and will be driven round with subsequent damage to car and tractor suspensions. The Ballygrant quarry might close with a loss of local jobs. There will be an impact on the other facets of the business. Quite apart from the quarry products, the tax will produce a bookkeeping nightmare that will be comparable to VAT. That will decrease any possible profitability. Sand, gravel and rock quarries are highly regulated. They do not impact much on the public. Because the sale price of products is much lower in Scotland than elsewhere in the UK, the tax represents a huge 35 per cent increase in prices. The tax will mean that less will be spent on roads in the Highlands, which are already falling apart. If local quarries close, more pressure will be put on those same roads by lorries importing the aggregates from elsewhere. There is no sense in the tax, which will only increase the burden on those who live in the countryside. As there is no environmental benefit to be derived from it, I urge the minister to ensure that it is not imposed in Scotland.

In the light of recent events that have opened more slots at Heathrow airport, will the Scottish Executive use its influence to press for landing slots for Inverness traffic at both Heathrow and Gatwick?

I associate my party with Rhona Brankin's opening remarks. However, while I welcome the Executive's desire to protect and promote Scotland's wildlife I must, as a representative of the Highlands and Islands, voice the concerns of the people who live in the area where a great deal of that wildlife is present. I cannot fail to voice their disappointment about the lack of consultation between bodies such as SNH and the local population when it comes to making designations of SACs and SSSIs. The agitation came to light recently in a meeting in Perth called "People: the Forgotten Species". The title adequately sums up many people's frustrations. The main aim must surely be to protect and promote rural communities and the people who will maintain the environment and the natural heritage, who will continue to live in the glens and islands of the north and west of Scotland despite the present difficulties and who will act as stewards of the landscape and wildlife as has happened for centuries. There is a strong impression that proper consultation is not taking place with the very people whose lives will be affected by the measures that will be introduced. For example, those affected by the Loch Sunart SSSI, the Sound of Barra SAC and the proposed Islay seal sanctuary include farmers, crofters, fish farmers, shellfish farmers, clam divers and winkle pickers—to name but a few—but none of those people have any idea of how the designations will affect their daily lives. No wonder they are upset. This is happening because different people interpret "consultation" differently. Ordinary people believe that consultation means substantial discussion and debate on the pros and cons of an issue before that issue becomes a reality that affects places and, above all, the people who live in them. The feeling is that SNH's so-called consultations amount to explanations of designations that, in some cases, have been made without prior consultation on the pros and cons of the measures. That, not surprisingly, infuriates many people, who feel that they are being trodden on and forgotten in a mad race to fulfil a Europe-driven agenda on time. They are not necessarily against the agenda, which might bring benefits, but they are astonished and aghast that their views, which—after all—benefit from local knowledge and practical experience, are not being listened to in the first instance. For example, I recently received a copy of a letter from a constituent from Ardnamurchan to John Markland, the chairman of SNH. I quote:  "one of the major problems which needs to be overcome prior to any joint understanding is the lack of confidence which a significant majority of the people in this area have for SNH staff. It is universally perceived that SNH staff will say one thing at a meeting in order to reach agreement, and will then not abide by that which was understood to have been agreed." That does not bode well for the future of our heritage, which depends on the co-operation and enthusiasm of local people to make it work. Although some of SNH's incentives are successful, such as the excellent Lewis peatland management scheme, others are perceived to be against the interests of local people, who must be able to earn a dignified living unhindered by the whims of any great improvers with a distant intellectual agenda. For instance, the people of south Knapdale in Argyll are about to be subjected to an introduction of European beavers to an area of Forestry Commission land. The idea was originally turned down by the west areas board of SNH, which covered Argyll, but for some reason that decision was overruled by SNH's main board. There is irrefutable evidence from Norway that beavers do a lot of damage to young woodlands and to fisheries. Many farmers in Scotland receive payments of public money for countryside premium schemes, one of the main priorities of which is the encouragement of water margins to allow trees to grow on the banks of rivers and streams to improve the spawning grounds for fisheries. The introduction of beavers means that those trees will be munched up. That seems to me to be a case of the right hand not knowing what the left hand is doing—or certainly not knowing what the beaver is doing.

What happens if the beavers escape from their so-called enclosed area? Will they create the havoc that escaped mink have already caused after being introduced to Scotland, or that the coypu caused after being introduced to East Anglia? I have met and listened to several local residents who are against the trial. I have yet to meet anyone who wants beavers in Knapdale.

I beg your pardon?

I beg your pardon. Why persist with an unpopular idea when the £500,000 that it will cost could be equally well spent facilitating the watching of the local otter  population or the local wild red deer and roe deer populations or improving the local fisheries, which are already major assets of Scotland's heritage? I make a plea to the Scottish Executive to follow the words of John Scott's amendment and build on the expertise of the past to bring about an improved future environment in which people and nature can live in harmony and sustainable co-existence.

I draw members' attention to my entry in the register of members' interests regarding my ownership of a sheep and cattle farm in Argyll. As a farmer and a representative of the Highlands and Islands area, I was uncomfortably close to the effects of foot-and-mouth. Although the region did not suffer the horrors that were experienced by our  friends in Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders, it has nonetheless been affected detrimentally in almost every aspect. We need a full public inquiry to discover the cause of the outbreak and to plan ahead for any future outbreak to ensure that Scotland is not once again held to ransom in the way that it has been for the past nine months. The European Parliament has recognised that need, which is why it has voted for such an inquiry. It is vital that the rumours that abound in the farming world about the cause of the outbreak and any accusation of incompetence in its handling should be fully investigated without prejudice or bias. All options and practices must be considered to improve both our defences against the disease and our response to any fresh outbreak. The UK Government owes that much to our people; if it is frightened by the prospect of such an inquiry, the Scottish Executive certainly should not be. I hope that all MSPs are trying to work towards a fireproof scheme to ensure that our people never again experience the biblical hell of plague and pestilence. The issue is not just financial loss. What will not go away are the traumatic mental scars and misery experienced by those who, as George Lyon said, watched hundreds of years of breeding stock literally go up in smoke. Not just current farmers' efforts, but all the expertise and knowledge that over generations had given this country the world's best reputation for livestock have gone and will be difficult to replace. The question is whether the general public would ever again accept the cull policy that has horrified so many. I respect the decision not to vaccinate and the steadfastness of the National Farmers Union of Scotland on the issue. However, if one considers European stocks of vaccine—especially the stock that is held for the UK—one must wonder whether vaccination was a possibility at all. European Union stocks of vaccine are grossly inadequate, because an outbreak on the scale of the recent one in the UK was never expected. The stocks are supposed to contain mainly small outbreaks in individual countries by means of ring vaccination within a 3km radius of an infected herd. Furthermore, vaccine stocks are held at minus 120 deg C in liquid nitrogen at half-product stage. Four further processes are required to make the vaccine ready for use, which would take a week, and to make more vaccine would take at least three weeks. However, to do so in such a short time would require us to bypass the usual safety checks. The vaccine is stored at Pirbright on behalf of a consortium of countries, of which the UK is simply a member. The consortium committee must meet before any country can access the doses of  vaccine, which means that the potential for political in-fighting is enormous. To cut a long story short, the UK has direct access to only 200,000 doses in its own country. Although I do not want to take a stance on the pros and cons of vaccination, any inquiry should consider the issue in relation not just to this country, but to the whole of Europe, in an unprejudiced and unbiased light. As members know, vaccination was carried out in parts of Europe including Holland up to 1991. The practice was stopped after the publication of results of modules that were carried out in the 1980s into the financial implications and effectiveness of the system. However, as times have changed, especially with regard to animal movements across Europe, those modules would need to be updated. I would like an EU-wide policy on reaction to foot-and-mouth that all members subscribe to and sympathise with; the EU should help us with the problem instead of hindering us. I welcome Ross Finnie's announcement on the opening of exports of lamb and beef and look forward to the date of commencement. Unfortunately, that will not help most farmers of store lambs in the Highlands and Islands, who have already sold their lambs for very little. The selling-and-buying window for those farmers and crofters is only 10 weeks between mid-August and October, and the 21-day rule is making their lives impossible. I ask the Executive to help those farmers in every possible way. The irony is that, because French and Irish farmers have made £70 a lamb as a result of the crisis, there has been a huge drop in the sheep annual premium, which is meant to act as a safety valve for farmers in bad times. I therefore ask for a full public inquiry that will also examine the effects on farmers and tourist operators in the wake of the outbreak and the measures that can be taken to save their businesses and restore their faith in the future.

The fact that passenger numbers are not what they were for the Heathrow route is surely because Heathrow is a much better airport for getting to other places.

I congratulate Margaret Ewing on securing the debate. I am happy to add my weight to the call for the restoration of protection for the Inverness to London air links, which form a vital link between the Highlands and the rest of the world. At the same time as exporting our products and services, they bring in large numbers of  tourists. Without the links, the Highlands would be isolated. That would have severe knock-on implications for employment and the economy. The Highlands and Islands relies heavily on the tourist trade. The loss of air transport links between Inverness and London would be one more nail in the coffin for Highland tourism and would have a large impact on our export trade. A cheap air travel infrastructure would greatly encourage tourism. Between 1986 and 2001, 20 regional airports across the UK lost their air services to and from London. A Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions consultation on the future of aviation referred to the vital role of regional lifeline services in the economic life of remote areas of the UK. A report in 1998 by the Environment, Transport and Regional Affairs Select Committee of the House of Commons called for guaranteed slots for regional air services at London hub airports. Both acknowledged the importance of regional flights, but as yet nothing has been done to guarantee their existence. Now is the time for the Executive to act and work with its UK and European counterparts to ensure that those flights are protected for the future. With low-cost airlines offering more and more flights that depart from London airports to destinations in Europe, it would be wrong if Inverness lost its Gatwick slots simply to allow more people in the south-east to fly from Gatwick instead of enduring the hardship of travelling to Stansted or Luton. The threat to the Highland economy from the loss of air services is huge. I have heard from many constituents who are alarmed at the loss of those vital lifelines, which provide a key economic catalyst to Highland trade and industry. Many people, especially in tourism and trade, are worried about what will happen if they are lost. We must consider the role that Inverness airport plays in Highlands and Islands life. It is the key business and leisure airport for the Highlands and Islands. It supports links with London, Edinburgh and Glasgow as well as the regional services within the Highlands and Islands. It acts as an important centre for travel throughout northern Scotland and we have to ensure that the reduction and possible withdrawal of air services to London do not have an adverse impact on the airport and the role it plays in linking Highlands and Islands communities. On reflection on the present world situation, it is important that we have faith in and support our airline providers. With so many job losses in the industry and threats to airline routes, we must all fight to ensure that we preserve the London to Inverness route against any further cuts.  British Airways has had to drop its Belfast to Heathrow flights—among others. Rather than those empty landing and take-off slots being held on to, could they now be used for Heathrow to Inverness flights? The Highlands have already lost the link to Heathrow. We need to act now to ensure that landing slots at other airports in and around London are not lost. We call on the Executive to act to protect those important links for Scotland. By working with London and Europe, the Executive must ensure that Scotland does not lose this vital transport artery.

Does the member agree that fish that are put back are dead anyway? Stopping black landings will not conserve fish stocks.

Does the member agree that at the moment, because of draconian European measures, some people in the fishing industry are losing their livelihoods? I am thinking of the scallop industry.

rose—

I commend Tavish Scott for lodging the motion and I commend WWF for its ocean recovery campaign summit, which I attended on Tuesday to support the WWF declaration. I will consider Tavish Scott's motion first from the viewpoint of the Scottish fishing industry, particularly as the talks on the cod recovery plan are due to begin on 29 October. A key area on which to focus is found in the recent communication from the European Commission that states that all the measures employed so far under the banner of the cod recovery plan will constitute no more than 20 per cent of a solution to the cod problem. The remaining 80 per cent is being sought from a combination of decommissioning and effort restraint or limitation. Many in the fishing industry believe that the only real method of conservation is effort limitation, but at the moment the Executive will not accept that, because it would have to pay money for a tie-up scheme for fishing boats for periods of the year. However, the decommissioning scheme closes to applications on 31 October. I ask the Executive to tell Parliament what proportion of the £25 million specifically set aside for decommissioning has been taken up. If significant money is left over, will the Executive ensure that that money stays within the fishing industry? Will it reconsider the possibility of a funded tie-up, which has found favour in Parliament in the past? I agree with Tavish Scott's comment that conservation of fishermen and their families is as important as  conservation of fish stocks. A closed season on the cod spawning grounds is an essential element in the recovery of that important fish stock, but if fishermen simply diversify into areas where they catch too many young haddock, the whole exercise becomes self-defeating. I urge the Executive to take a fresh look at the idea of including a subsidised tie-up as part of the conservation plan. It is good that we are beginning at last to look at our oceans in the same way as we look at our landmass. It is also good that there is a realisation that many diverse incomes could be brought into our coastal areas under intelligent and imaginative management. I recently attended two other fisheries conferences, one in Edinburgh and the other in Oban in Argyll. On both occasions I listened to Doug McLeod of the Association of Scottish Shellfish Growers put forward a paper on an interpretation of integrated coastal zonal management. ICZM is a concept that puts great value on our estuarine waters and sea lochs and gives a vision of great varieties of fish and shellfish being farmed sustainably with different types of sea plants and weeds. Mussels, scallops, oysters, lobsters and crabs, as well as fin fish, all have their place. The concept of combining different species in a polyculture originated 1,000 years ago in ancient China. Aquaculture production in China reached a staggering 18.6 million tonnes in 1996. That was 31 per cent higher than China's wild catch and accounted for more than 63 per cent of global aquaculture production. Lately, our Scottish salmon farming industry, which provides vital jobs in outlying areas and a large percentage of Scottish food exports, has been severely attacked. The wheel grinds slow, but it is coming down too hard on the sector now. If the industry were accepted in the same way as terrestrial agriculture is, it would receive the necessary encouragement to allow it to deal of its own accord with many of the perceived problems. The industry has the answers and the scientific knowledge. In a healthy and successful industry, conservation falls into place, but that will never happen in an industry that is forced to hang on by its fingertips. In the words of Jamie Lindsay of Scottish Quality Salmon, the industry wishes to live in sustainable co-existence with other sea loch users. Proper scientific advice coupled with imaginative practices would lead to a system with far more diverse sea farming than the monocultures that exist. I agree that our sea lochs and coastline hold enormous potential value. I urge the Executive to use all means in its power to harvest that value to  sustain local coastal populations, while maintaining the reputation for clean and pollution-free waters for which Scotland is famous. I urge the Executive to maximise economic, social and ecological benefits from our coastal waters for the Scottish people.

rose—

On 25 May 2000, we debated "Rural Scotland: A New Approach". During the debate, Ross Finnie said that the Scottish Executive wanted "to put rural Scotland at the heart of Scotland's future." Later in the speech, he said: "we want to create a rural Scotland that is 'integral to Scotland's success, dynamic in harnessing its traditional strengths'."—[ Official Report , 25 May 2000;  Vol 6, c 1079.] I agree with the minister's aims. The traditional strength of rural Scotland lies in its agriculture. Scotch beef and lamb are famous worldwide. The quality of our product is recognised and the importance of regaining entry to export markets must be Scotland's No 1 priority. Much of the future of agriculture depends on that alone. As a sheep farmer myself, I have seen the  depression and dismay etched in the faces of those whose livelihoods depend on the sheep sector. Only last week, I met some of those people, delivering light lambs to a collection centre at Dalmally market. Normally at this time of year, the place would be a hub of noise and a focal point for social interchange and for business; now, an eerie silence inhabits the place and speculation abounds over whether many auction markets will ever open again. Although hill farmers and crofters are grateful for the welfare disposal scheme, in that it provides a bottom price, they are making every effort to sell their lambs using the auction companies as brokers. Their main worry is how they will find a market for cast ewes. I implore the minister to extend the disposal scheme to ewes as well, otherwise I fear that we will have a similar situation to that of two years ago, when owners were forced to shoot and bury their sheep. The minister has previously talked of the importance of bringing value to the producer. It is vital that any forward strategy includes strategies for marketing not only Scottish lamb but Scottish mutton, which is a delicious and quality meat but which is practically unobtainable in United Kingdom butchers. As I have said, store lamb producers are struggling to sell lambs to finishers and the new tagging scheme is too complex and is putting off potential buyers. The only number required for traceability should be the flock number and not individual numbers for each lamb. One can only assume that the scheme was introduced by someone with little knowledge of the sheep farming industry. I agree with John Farquhar Munro: in this year of devastation, a 90 per cent safety net for LFAs is essential. There should also be a national top-up of the sheep annual premium. The premium was designed to bolster low prices in bad years. Well, we have never had lower prices, yet the projected SAP level of £6.62 is one third of what it was a few years ago. That seems absurd. A few days ago, I heard Jim Walker of the National Farmers Union of Scotland saying that he was appalled by Margaret Beckett's lack of support on the SAP issue and on other agricultural issues. It is important that a forward strategy considers standardising the SAP. Scottish farmers are bleeding to death while Irish farmers make fortunes exporting lambs to Europe and filling the gap left by the absence of Scottish lamb. There is a good future market for Scottish farmers so long as our Government removes the blocks to entering it. The motion talks of integrating farming "into the economic and social development of rural communities".  However, in most of rural Scotland, and certainly in the Highlands and Islands, agriculture is already a keystone. As Rory Dutton of the Scottish Crofters Union has said, the Executive's strategy document "does not consider the core role that is played by agriculture in sustaining fragile economies ... nor does it fully examine and integrate its role in providing environmental services."—[ Official Report, Rural Development Committee, 18 September 2001; c 2137.] That must be rectified in forthcoming deliberations. The Executive motion also seeks to "protect and enhance the environment in partnership with farmers, and ... other agencies." That is a laudable aim. I would very much like to see agencies such as the enterprise companies getting more involved in agri-environmental advancement. However, I respectfully remind the Scottish Executive that modulation of farmers' subsidies already contributes to environmental schemes and that there is a strong feeling that farmers and crofters who live in rural Scotland are not being properly consulted before things are done by some of the agencies. Those people have practical knowledge of the area in which they and their families live. That knowledge tends to be more relevant than theory-driven policies from Government or other agencies, which are often perceived to be imposing solutions on communities without first seeking their views. I recommend the submission to the Rural Development Committee from the Scottish Wildlife Trust. It says: "Scotland should focus on quality and not quantity in order to be competitive. Let us use the skills of rural people to provide public goods—breathtaking scenery, biodiversity, and access—in addition to high quality food." If the Scottish Executive is serious in promoting rural integration and policies that are beneficial to the environment, it is surely essential first to secure the good will of the people and families who make their livings in the areas concerned, and for those people to gain the confidence that such policies will be beneficial to their local communities. Otherwise, conflicts will spawn and suspicion will reign. As I said, marketing Scottish products and making them competitive must be at the forefront of any strategy. For example, it is ludicrous that Scotland is importing meat—especially beef over 30 months old, which is not subject to our own rigorous standards. People from other countries, such as New Zealand, that value their agricultural reputation look on in horror at that policy. Foot-and-mouth disease very probably came from contaminated meat that was imported and yet, seven months later, controls on the imports of illegal animal and plant products have still not  been tightened. I hope that the Scottish Executive will support the petition—signed by 7,000 Scots—to stop illegal imports and will put pressure on the Westminster Government to do something about them. Any forward strategy must take into account the fact that the move to make LFA money a hectarage payment rather than a headage payment should produce a greater diversity of quality products in the Scottish meat sector. It should also take into account the fact that a policy of encouraging local abattoirs would greatly increase the potential for such products to be branded and marketed. I recommend that the minister take note of the recommendations in the report on the way forward for the sheep industry by Mr Dewar-Durie, which the minister commissioned in November 1999. Although I welcome the strategy and am interested in the concept of land management contracts, discussions will continue for a further two years. During that time, the keystone of agriculture must not be allowed to disintegrate. That is why I support Alex Fergusson's amendment, which emphasises that agriculture "is fundamental to a successful rural economy."

I congratulate Margaret Smith on securing the debate, which I welcome. Well motivated, happy nurses are key members of our Scottish health team. Two weeks ago, I visited Lorne and Islands district general hospital in Oban. I am grateful to the nurses there, who took the time and trouble, despite being busy, to spend so much time with me. The stress of working in the NHS is overwhelming. The nursing sector is at the sharp end and bearing a heavy load. It was put to me that nurses are practitioners who deliver 80 per cent of the care for patients. The undeniable facts that four out of 10 nurses wish to leave the professions in the next five years and that one in three would leave now if they could, show the state of morale and the grave danger that the NHS would face if those figures were to turn into reality.  Nursing is a vocational profession. It is a profession of extreme worth and value. That it be recognised as such is essential. Nurses are the people on whom patients rely when they are terrified and in pain. Because of chronic short-staffing, many nurses are working excess hours without recompense. It is their natural reaction to give help where it is needed and always to answer the call, but it is obscene for such efforts to be taken for granted. That said, the nurses' low morale is only symptomatic of a declining NHS. The fact is that patients are waiting far too long for admissions. Because they are more ill than they should be by the time they receive any treatment, the treatment has to be more intensive. The nurses' job becomes much more difficult and much less rewarding as they see too many people needlessly suffering and dying. It is no good producing small parcels of money that everyone is chasing. Such a sticking plaster will not cover the deep wound. The whole NHS system needs to be better funded and organised. In Germany, for example, nurses are happy. They work in clean hospitals and see patients being admitted and treated immediately—and getting well as a result of good nursing. That contrasts with the situation in the NHS, where all too often nurses bear the brunt of patients' complaints from delays, denied treatment and a rationing of resources. Germany puts only a small percentage more public funding into its health service than we do. The gap is filled by private funding and the result is a clean, efficient and happy work force providing patient-oriented, flexible care that covers the needs of a grateful public. Does not Scotland deserve the same?

I regret to say that the Conservative health spokesperson is currently recovering from a very bad car crash, and I am sorry that she is not here today. I do not have the time to answer that question. Finally, when will the Executive implement the proposals outlined in "Agenda for Change: Modernising the NHS Pay System"? If serious steps are to be taken to tackle the recruitment and retention issues that face us, nurses in Scotland will need to be aware of their career prospects and opportunities, and know that they will be matched by appropriate financial rewards.

Je suis l'heureux père de deux jeunes filles, qui ont été élevées dans un environnement bilingue depuis leur plus jeune âge. J'ai pu ainsi constater moi-même les immenses avantages que cela représente. Cela leur a permis une plus grande ouverture d'esprit aux cultures différentes  de la leur. Cela leur donne aussi une confiance en elles, ce qui est bien nécessaire chez les adolescentes, lorsqu'elles rencontrent les gens d'autres pays. I start by declaring an interest in that I am the proud father of two teenage daughters who have been brought up in a bilingual climate from the earliest possible age. I have seen the enormous benefits at first hand. They possess a tremendous advantage in appreciating other cultures and in having extra confidence when meeting and making friends with people from other countries. That is why I congratulate Irene Oldfather on lodging this motion for debate and why I thoroughly agree with most of the aims set out in "Citizens of a Multilingual World". I have always found it embarrassing that people visiting Scotland seldom receive the courtesy of being addressed in their native language, whereas when we go abroad we gaily expect those from other nations to understand English and are surprised and even indignant if they do not. That must often convey an impression of arrogance and bad manners to non-English speakers. The only way to stop that and to enable our citizens to comprehend a new range of cultures and histories is to start at the education level, where it matters. One of our key industries is tourism. If we want to please customers from other countries, it would be a good start for future generations of Scottish tourism operators to have a basic command of the main European languages. This summer, I was asked to open the great glen raid at Corpach near Fort William. It was a regatta from west to east through the Caledonian canal and organised by a French company. The event was an enormous success and especially helpful to tourism in this year of foot-and-mouth. For the event, I put on my most beautiful kilt and made a welcoming speech to 150 competitors, most of whom were French. I therefore spoke in French and told them that the Caledonian canal had been constructed to protect British shipping from French privateers. That seemed to amuse them. Afterwards, I received a letter from the company's director, telling me how delighted and surprised the assembled company had been to be addressed in its native tongue. The gesture was small, but valuable. We should make Scots better linguists. We Conservatives think that the £50 million that the Labour party saved by scrapping the assisted places scheme should be used to bring in specialists to teach foreign languages in primary schools. Labour's record is not good. It has used money that it said it would spend on cutting class sizes to help such bodies as Scottish Opera. I agree that  Scottish Opera deserves support, but ministers should please bear it in mind that most operas are sung in foreign languages. Therefore, will the Scottish Executive please provide future Scottish generations with the ability to understand those languages better? Further, the Executive should fulfil its declared commitment to Gaelic by giving more encouragement to Gaelic-medium education.

To ask the Scottish Executive what it is doing to alleviate problems in the scallop industry. (S1O-3780)

Is the minister aware that the recent proposal from the Food Standards Agency to substitute the action level of 20 micrograms for a trigger level of 4.6 micrograms will make matters much worse for scallop fishermen and growers and could easily result in the closing of the industry? Is she also aware that the other FSA proposal to move from a gonad test to a whole-animal test might easily reduce the scallop fishery to three months a year?

I support both recycling and Irene McGugan's motion, but I would like to add one or two caveats. The minister might be aware that it was recently proposed that the town of Lochgilphead in Argyll and Bute should have a new compostor. The original plan was that rubbish would come from Oban, which is 30 miles away, from Campbeltown,  which is 50 miles away, and possibly also from Dunoon. That would make Lochgilphead the dump town of the west. Obviously, there was a lot of ill-feeling about that, especially when it was shown that that idea was in opposition to Executive guidelines, which say that rubbish should be dealt with where it is created and that it should not be transported too far. That is a notion that was particularly resonant in that case, because a decision had recently been made to cease transportation of timber by lorry, which had done a lot of damage to roads in the area, and to start to transport timber by boat. The previous reform reduced the number of lorries, but the new proposal would increase the number of lorries coming to the site.

I agree entirely. Some of the problems of Lochgilphead have been solved by the fact that there will now also be a compostor in Oban. The only problem that the residents now perceive is that the compostor will be situated in a beautiful area on the coast and will be seen by residents and tourists. I ask the minister to reconsider the siting of Lingerton waste disposal site. In future, will the minister ensure that new compostors are not put bang in the middle of beauty spots outside conurbations?

Will the minister assure us that moving responsibility for fish farm leases from the Crown Estate to local councils will not simply result in a heaven-sent opportunity for those bodies to levy excessive rents on the fish farm industry?

To ask the Scottish Executive what contingency plans it has made for the fishing industry in the event of the cod quota being taken up before the end of 2001. (S1O-3688)

It is estimated that because of the low quota, between 60 per cent and 70 per cent of the quota has already been taken up, and we are approaching a busy catching season. The North sea is a mixed fishery, so the European Commission could insist on a complete closure on fishing for haddock and whiting. Will the minister plan ahead for such a scenario—which would be devastating to Scottish fishing communities—rather than react to events after they have happened? Will she tell the Parliament when, according to her scientific advice, we can expect to see the benefits of the cod recovery plan?

rose—

I take on board what George Lyon says, but too often he goes on about 18 years of Tory misrule. He has sat there for four years and done absolutely nothing.

I congratulate the European Committee on producing the report.  The issue is simple: fewer fish mean fewer jobs. One job at sea creates five jobs on land. The recently announced further cuts to our long-suffering fishing industry will seriously jeopardise the future of that industry and of the people who depend on the income generated from fishing. Will the Executive follow the stated will of the Parliament, and the advice of Franz Fischler, to draw down the money that is available for a limited tie-up scheme or will it ignore the most obvious way of conserving fish stocks and retaining a sustainable Scottish fishing industry?  The Press and Journal today highlights Franz Fischler's warning that fishermen face a great deal more pain before North sea cod stocks begin to recover. Apparently, more measures to cut fishing effort are vital, but EU funds would be available to help fishermen weather the storm. Franz Fischler stated: "EU funds to cushion negative effects are available under the Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance. It is therefore up to individual member states to review their priorities in the light of the cod and hake recovery plans". Further cuts will have huge implications for Scotland. Scotland's fishing industry employs 7,000 people and up to 40,000 people are employed in the wider industry. In Shetland, in 1998, the total turnover of the fisheries industry accounted for one third of the Shetland economy. The fisheries industry employs 20 per cent of Shetland's work force and can employ as much as 31 per cent of the active local population in Banff and Buchan. Its value to Scotland must not be underestimated. The fishermen of the Western Isles rely so heavily on shellfish that there must be a case for local management not only of the six and 12-mile limits but further out as well, to ensure consistency of conservation policy. Now that Belgium, with its numerous regional Parliaments, has taken over the EU presidency and its regional ministers will be able to lead European meetings and debates on fisheries, perhaps we might see the Scottish Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development leading on fisheries matters in Europe—rather than relying on Elliot Morley to do it for her. That is what happened during the Conservative Administration and it is a measure of true and honest devolution. Scotland should lead the way on fishing in Europe. The Scottish fishing industry has suffered enormously over the past few years. In line with what successive politicians have required them to do, they have dutifully trimmed their catches, lowered their incomes and even stayed at home in attempts to allow fish stocks to replenish. The threat of the possible introduction of  individual transferable quotas is another problem because 20 per cent of our quota is already in foreign hands and ITQs would undoubtedly lead to a further substantial loss of British quota. They would destroy relative stability. They have been tried in Iceland, to the detriment of Icelandic fishermen. It is little wonder that fewer young men want to go into an industry whose future looks so bleak and so uncertain. That is why it is so important that the woefully inadequate CFP is reformed coherently and comprehensively to provide a sustainable future for Scottish fishing. Continuing to implement short-term measures that achieve little if anything is completely unacceptable. We need long-term policy that will balance the competing interests of conservation and commercialism. We need our coastal limits, we need zonal management and we need retention of the Hague preference. The European Committee's report is absolutely right to call the present system "untenable". The CFP cannot be defended. If a lunatic had been asked to design an EU-wide fisheries policy, they would have come up with the CFP. In terms of employment and environment, it is the Titanic of all EU initiatives. I think that we can all agree on that point. The EU can hardly advise the rest of the world on fish conservation unless it puts its own house in order first. The report recommends a complete overhaul of the current CFP. That is absolutely right. Radical reform is the only way forward, but will the Scottish Executive do anything about the report? Will it listen to Franz Fischler's comments and draw down money for a compensated tie-up scheme, or will it continue to wave two fish fingers at this Parliament and the Scottish fishing industry? Instead, why does it not wave two fish fingers at industrial fishing, which is taking 700,000 tonnes of fish biomass a year? That really would help conservation. While panic measures have undoubtedly been necessary in the past, there is absolutely no reason for fisheries managers, whether at a national or at a community level, not to arrange for the investment of funds in technical conservation measures trials to establish their level of performance. Fishermen require to be closely involved in such trials, not only in the obvious sense of carrying them out, but in monitoring and evaluating them. I ask the Executive to arrange such trials. In the end, technical measures can go only so far. Curtailment of effort in biologically correct TACs is likely to be the only sensible way of achieving proper stock conservation. The only definable answer to the problem is restriction in effort. Fisheries managers are usually unwilling to  examine a reasonable scheme because while the cost of technical conservation measures require to be met by the industry, it is the duty of Government to fund effort control measures. Scotland's fishing industry is vital to the social and economic fabric of our rural communities, so relative stability is more important to us than to anyone else. We did not join the CFP to see our fishing industry decimated and our fishermen impoverished, but that is exactly what has happened. That has to change. We need to endorse the policy set out in the committee's report and we need the Scottish Executive to support that policy. I have talked to many fishermen. I find that there is still great optimism and a belief that this bad cycle will end and good times will return. It is therefore all the more necessary that we show loyalty to the fishing industry by safeguarding fish quotas for the Scottish fishermen of the future so that they can sustain their families in our coastal areas.

I declare an interest in sheep farming and cattle farming. All my questions relate to the Highlands and Islands. My first question is to do with a rumour that is circulating from Argyll to Orkney and Shetland that there will be no autumn store lamb and calf sales—the sales usually start in August. Will the minister confirm whether that is likely to be the case? If not, can he say when the auction markets might open? My second question is related to my first. The minister will remember his failed attempt to introduce a cast ewe cull scheme, which was denied by Europe two years ago. Will he ensure that the livestock welfare disposal scheme remains open for the foreseeable future? Unfortunately, that scheme may be required and it might be difficult to reopen it once it has been closed. Thirdly, provided that the area north of the Forth and the Clyde remains disease free, will the minister attempt to gain export access to Europe for that region? Fourthly, every farm in the Highlands and Islands has disinfectant mats and spray guns for visiting lorries. Does the minister want those removed? Have they been pointless?

I promise that this is the final question. Does the minister accept that the 20-day rule is aimed at wheeler-dealers and will make life impossible for average hill farmers?

Does the member agree that the small class sizes in some primary schools in the remoter areas of Scotland should be regarded as a good thing rather than a reason for closing the schools, as some councils have proposed?

Will Mr Stone give way?

I congratulate Tavish Scott, the member for Shetland, on securing the debate. As a Highlands and Islands MSP, I know the problems only too well. The aptly titled "Crisis in Care: A GP Dossier", which was produced recently by the British Medical Association, paints a sad picture of the morale of GPs in the UK. It says that many doctors are leaving the profession or retiring early due to the intolerable burden of red tape that is imposed on them by the Government. Our doctors are losing heart because many of them know full well that the increasing burden of paperwork, red tape and targets means that they are failing their patients, which goes directly against the Hippocratic oath, which every doctor must swear. The problem is exacerbated in rural and island areas, where doctors have to cope with the extra strains that are caused by extremity of location and blanket regulations that are often too broad to deal with specific situations. To put it in medical terms, general remedies do not generally cure specific ailments. I have been closely connected with the recent problems that were faced by the doctor in the Dalmally practice. Sadly, the fact that she was refused an associate partner to cover her enormous work load led to her leaving the practice, much to the dismay of those who relied on her and had confidence in her as an excellent doctor. For some time, the area was served by four different locums, which led to a great deal of confusion and extra expense. Now Dalmally has an excellent new doctor, who has a locum for one week per month, but the problems have not changed. Surgery times have been shortened significantly, which has led to many people wanting to register in the nearby practice of Taynuilt. That is a sad and unsatisfactory situation. As the debate is also about islands, I offer the example of people who are members of the Appin practice in Argyll who live on the island of Lismore. Four years ago, Sam Galbraith—then minister with responsibility for health—generously allowed them a 15-year-old Renault Espace to transport patients along the bumpy roads of Lismore to the point where they could be transferred to a passenger ferry to Port Appin, where they could be picked up by an ambulance. Surely, in 2001, those people should be served better, or are they simply to be forgotten? I admit that a helicopter could be used, but experience has shown that the average waiting time for a helicopter is two and a half hours—a patient can easily die within that time. Often, a Land Rover must be used if the Espace has broken down, which is not good enough. A proper ambulance with a retained ambulance man  should be available, in a similar way to a retained fireman. Those of us who are old enough to remember the excellent television series "Dr Finlay's Casebook" will remember the high esteem in which rural doctors were held. I know that times change, but surely rural practices should improve for rural patients, rather than decline? One cannot base people's needs purely on statistics, because the geographical spread in rural areas dilutes all the effort. No consideration is given to the size of the area. As a result of the lack of public transport in rural areas, doctors are called out more often than they are in urban areas. Dalmally has a single manned ambulance that cannot attend a road traffic accident, so the doctor must attend, which means extra work for the doctor. The ambulance can be used only as a taxi between homes and hospitals. Another example is that of the midwives who are based in Oban, which is 30 miles from Dalmally. Given the distance, the doctor often attends instead of a midwife—again, more work for the doctor. There is a tourist hotel that, over the year, produces 6,000 pensioner bed nights. Because the hotel's guests are frail, they often need a doctor—at any time of the day or night—which is also extra work for the local doctor. No account is taken of those extra pressures. Is it any wonder that we are told that doctors no longer want to practice in single-doctor practices? It is heartbreaking for those who find it impossible to produce a reasonable service for patients in the present conditions. However, I was glad to hear that in February, the Minister for Health and Community Care, Susan Deacon, promised 50 new doctors and 50 new nurses for rural practices. I urge her to make certain that some of those doctors go to single-doctor practices, so that the work load drops from the present 112-hour week to only 84 hours a week. That is still a fairly onerous work load by anybody's standards, but it would at least be an improvement. More medical services are being offered, but we must have the personnel to dispense those services. I cannot express strongly enough how important it is to country people to know their doctor personally and to have faith in him or her.

I am just finishing, Presiding Officer. After all, confidence is half of what it takes to recover from illness. People in rural areas deserve health cover that is equal to that which is provided in urban areas. There should be no second-class patients and no two-tier system. It is necessary for  us to reverse the decline in rural practices and to make them attractive enough so that those whose vocation is the medical profession will work in, make their homes in, and become pillars of rural communities, as they were in the past.

While I agree with the minister that Scotland should be promoted as being open for business, it would have helped if the Scottish Executive or its rural affairs department had sent letters to farmers and landowners to tell them that it is now safe for them to remove their signs. Initially, the only letters that farmers and landowners received told them that they could put up signs on their own land at their own expense, if they so wished. They have received nothing in writing to tell them that it is safe to remove them.

I congratulate Kenny MacAskill on bringing this important debate to the chamber. Although the estimated total economic value of youth hostels to the Scottish economy is some £20 million a year, that is not the most important benefit they bring to Scotland. It is highly significant that around 70 per cent of youth hostel visitors are from outwith Scotland. Many of those young travellers would not be able to see Scotland in reasonable comfort were it not for youth hostels. Let us not forget that they will fall in love with Scotland's scenery and history and will return in later years—it is to be hoped with fatter wallets—to the benefit of Scotland's tourism industry. They are also important flag carriers who spread the word about the excellence of Scotland as a holiday destination. Scottish youth hostels fulfil a significant function by accommodating schools and youth groups. It is important that children from urban backgrounds get the chance to sample the Scottish Highlands and are made aware of the alternative rural  existence. It is equally important for children from rural areas to be able to stay in city hostels such as those in Edinburgh and Glasgow. SYHA bookings in the year up to February 2001 were higher than they have ever been in a comparable period and advance bookings for the season ahead were also higher—but then came the foot-and-mouth disease crisis. Hostels in Armadale and Uig are still closed, as are the ones in Durness, in the far north, and in Helmsdale. Kyleakin hostel, one of the most popular hostels on Skye, saw a fall in its March trade of 32 per cent and Broadford hostel's trade is down by 25 per cent. Popular hostels such as that at Inverary in Argyll reflect the same picture. The SYHA is a not-for-profit organisation. Any available surpluses are ploughed back, so the unforeseen losses, which may amount to £1 million, will be a great drain on resources and very difficult to claw back. The professional permanent staff of 225 need to be paid, and training and customer care, quality management and safety need to continue. Some 1.5 per cent of the SYHA's income goes on training programmes. Capital improvements and new investment are constantly needed, such as improvements at the new hostel in Inverness—which cost £2 million—and the extension to the hostel in Oban, which cost £350,000. Investment in hostels is in place only because of their popularity and because they provide a service to people from around the world. It is vital that they continue to function, improve and expand. A further 250 seasonal staff would, under normal circumstances, be employed, but much of the benefit to rural areas that that would bring will probably be lost this year. Two weeks ago, the SYHA hosted an international tourism conference at Carbisdale Castle in Sutherland, at which 25 countries were represented. That demonstrates the part the organisation plays in promoting Scotland's tourism. In the aftermath of foot-and-mouth disease, when, I hope, help is given to those who have suffered the worst losses, the SYHA should be placed high on the Scottish Executive's list of priorities. Other bodies that are promoting tourism in Scotland should provide marketing help by promoting a joint project in the form of a partnership with visitscotland. It should reach out to backpackers, other outdoor enthusiasts and educational bodies to bring people back to the youth hostels and to encourage the concept of hostelling in the future. The SYHA is the original green tourism organisation and it deserves our universal support.

Today's debate on the future of McDermott pensions is both worth while and justified, although it is a matter of considerable regret that we need to have it at all. Indeed, it is very unfortunate that what is essentially a matter between employee and employer has had to come this far and that the situation has not been rectified earlier. It is bad enough for people to lose their jobs, but the extra distress that this episode is  adding to the lives of individuals and their families is utterly disgraceful. There are many people to congratulate on bringing the matter to the attention of the chamber. All of us will have received a letter from Councillor Jimmy Gray highlighting the problems and plight faced by all those involved in the scheme. Margaret Ewing also deserves great praise for lodging this evening's motion, and I congratulate her on securing the debate. People who have invested in an occupational pension scheme have a right to expect fair treatment and a decent income. They should not feel that they are losing out to any other source. Insult is being added to injury. Indeed, the sole purpose of the pension plan was to provide retiral benefits for the plan members and their dependants. Surpluses should go to the employees who have lost their jobs. Those who contributed to the fund did not intend that McDermott shareholders should benefit. They are understandably frustrated and furious that that may ultimately be what happens. This Parliament must send out a strong message to all concerned that we find the situation unacceptable. I am sure that the local community will do the same. It is simply not right that such a loyal and skilled work force, some of whom are nearing retirement, should be treated in such a contemptible fashion. We should be doing everything in our power to reward those who save, instead of punishing them for their desire to be prudent. As the average proportion of savings has fallen from more than 10 per cent of earnings in 1997 to just 3 per cent this year, that desire should be given even more credence. McDermott and the Ardersier yard have made a big contribution to the Highland economy and the wider community and it would be somewhat disappointing if the company left on such rotten terms. It seems absurd that those who have paid in the past should be treated in such a way, and I encourage McDermott to take the necessary steps to appease its pension fund holders.

It should not take a tragedy for us to take an issue seriously. It should not take an accident for us to realise that something is unsafe. The inquiry into rural communities was being conducted before the foot-and-mouth crisis began, but in the wake of that crisis, it seems much more important to address the issues that the committee's report highlights and to allow our rural communities to play a full part in Scotland's economic and social structures. I represent the Highlands and Islands; I welcome the opportunity to participate in the debate because, contrary to the Executive's opinion, people in the Highlands and Islands are suffering greatly and were suffering before the foot-and-mouth crisis began. We all knew that, but now we have more evidence of it. In recent weeks, the plight of people in rural communities has been highlighted repeatedly. We have all seen the news, heard from those who have been affected and read the papers. Members who represent rural constituencies have seen at first hand the devastation that the foot-and-mouth outbreak has caused throughout already precarious regions. Everyone's awareness of rural communities has been raised. We can just switch off the television, but rural communities must somehow pick up the pieces and keep going on increasingly lower incomes. Now that the somewhat alarming reports are calming down a bit, it is easy to forget that people in rural areas are still suffering under the burdens that they had before—only now those burdens are much heavier. Mr Finnie's insinuation that the Rural Development Committee was overreacting was deeply patronising and betrayed his inability to grasp the situation in our rural areas. Some hope we have of improving the situation, when we have a Minister for Environment and Rural  Development who dismisses fact and concern as conjecture and overreaction. It is interesting that the much heralded values of social justice and social inclusion are applied only to housing or drug abuse. Perhaps we have missed the point. Perhaps the Executive has, secretly and without anyone realising, helped our rural communities to overcome their difficulties. It is not like the Executive to keep anything quiet, but perhaps we have overlooked the great work that it has done and we are being unfair. Nonetheless, farm incomes this year are at their lowest for 60 years. In the past three years, farm incomes have halved and halved again. After the present crisis, agricultural businesses may not survive. Employment in most rural sectors is in decline, as are agriculture, forestry and fishing. Manufacturing employment has also declined—the latest example is Jaeger's closure in Campbeltown, which George Lyon talked about. Instead of taking action to improve matters, the Executive has started consultation on a bill on land reform, which will solve none of the problems that rural areas face and will introduce new problems that will cause conflict and even more hardship. Transport costs are not only the biggest barrier to economic prosperity, but the factor that rural people worry about most. Access to training and education involves difficulties. The range of employment opportunities is limited and there are mismatches between jobs and skills. A lack of affordable housing hinders labour mobility. Why trap single parents and families on low incomes in rural housing that is miles away from the centres where they might find jobs? The high cost of transport is making it increasingly difficult for those who live in rural communities to remain there and for those who want to visit to get there. Tourism is vital in such communities. If people cannot get there, they cannot spend money. If there is no economic base, the communities will collapse. The bedrock of rural communities is traditional rural industry—agriculture, fishing and forestry. Yet the Executive has failed to provide a level playing field on which those sectors can thrive. If we do nothing else, we must destroy the barriers that hinder rural prosperity. If EU directives are making matters worse, surely we have the right to expect our Government to stand up and say so. The Executive may have listened to the concerns of our rural communities, but it has singularly failed to act on the advice that it has received. In every instance, it has resolutely refused to alter its own previously decided course of action. The report proves that there is much to be done and much that can be done to help rural communities. The key must be to help rural communities to help themselves. We must not put  more hurdles in their path. The Scottish Executive believes that the way to get over those hurdles is by financial support. That is fine, but let us destroy the hurdles and let the rural communities thrive.

I agree with what Mr Lyon has said about the closure of the Jaeger factory in Campbeltown. Would he agree that it is now all the more important to make progress on the possibility of establishing a wind turbine manufacturing plant in Machrihanish?

rose—

When we debated the Scottish berry project, the SNP gave me some delicious raspberries. I am therefore extremely disappointed that John Swinney is not here tonight to hand out large drams. I understand why the European directive may make sense in countries where water is scarce, but in Scotland the problem tends to be an excess of rainfall rather than drought. There is plenty of water in the Highlands. Unfortunately, the Executive seems to think that EU abstraction controls are a fait accompli. I hope that the minister will make it clear that that is not the case. I am sure that she will want to help the Scotch whisky industry by ensuring that it is not hampered by unnecessary and costly European blanket controls that are totally inappropriate for Scotland, where the industry takes only a tiny proportion of the water and has an excellent environmental record that is constantly checked by SEPA. I invite members to consider how lucky we are to have the Scotch whisky industry. It generates huge revenues for the Exchequer and does a fantastic public relations job for Scotland, abroad and in the tourism industry here. In a country that does not have an over-supply of wealth-generating businesses, especially with the electronics industry looking distinctly wobbly, we should be wholeheartedly helping this age-old part of our heritage to go from strength to strength. Many distilleries are in marginal rural areas of low employment and many of the bottle companies are in urban areas such as Clydebank, where jobs are at a premium. It infuriates me when people say that Scotch whisky is pollutive. That is rubbish. It is not pollutive. Many distilleries discharge into the River Spey, which is world famous for its salmon, and there is no problem there. Many Aberdeen Angus cattle, which produce the best beef in the world, are fed on draff, a distillery by-product. Brian Monteith is right—the fishermen in Islay have complained to me that the removal of the potale syrup discharge has badly affected fishing areas  where it used to be discharged. In 1909, Lloyd George tried to stop people drinking by increasing tax by 35 per cent. With respect, the question must be asked: why should the Scotch whisky industry continue to be disadvantaged by the personal agenda of a teetotal Welsh Liberal Prime Minister 90 years ago? Only the Conservative party has reduced the duty on Scotch whisky in recent times. In bars, 27.4 per cent of a measure of whisky is tax, whereas a glass of wine incurs only 19.3 per cent tax and a half pint of beer only 16.6 per cent. What must an Italian or a Spaniard think when he has to pay £12 for a bottle of whisky in Edinburgh although it costs only £5 in Milan or Barcelona? Considering the importance of whisky to Scotland, the Scottish Executive should, at the very least, press for parity of taxation between Scotch whisky and beer. Tax is no longer used to stop people drinking. Prohibition has never worked. Let us therefore provide some true support for this excellent industry. Let us politely inform the EU that Scotland has no need of its water directive and that, in any event, the Scotch whisky industry should receive a derogation from it. Let all parties say a big slàinte mhòr to the Scotch whisky industry for playing such a major role in Scotland's identity and heritage. Let us remove obstructions from its path and encourage it to prosper.

As a member with an interest in crofting, what would Mr Macintosh say to the crofters on the island of Harris who are paying 90p a litre for diesel and 87p a litre for unleaded petrol?

When the First Minister addresses the short-term needs of the fishing industry, will he follow the advice of the EU director general of fisheries: compensation money for west coast  scallop fishers who have often been unable to fish during the past two years due to biological factors is available through article 16, paragraph 1(a) of council regulation 1792/1999, which deals with the financial instrument for fisheries guidance?

I am as keen on the promotion of tourism in the Highlands as Mr Rumbles is, but is he suggesting that we should encourage people from infected areas to come into non-infected areas?

My heart goes out to the farmers and their families in Dumfries and Galloway; they are in a state of shellshock as a result of foot-and-mouth disease. I have cousins at Lockerbie who have already lost 180 dairy cattle and 900 sheep. As a farmer, I share their pain. The Executive motion asks the Parliament to welcome its commitment "during and after the foot-and-mouth crisis". Although I do not doubt the Executive's commitment, I do not believe that we can talk about after the crisis yet. On the news this morning, a vet said that he believed that the epidemic would peak in early May, which is six weeks from now. It will not be until the number of cases begins to drop that we will be able to talk about after the crisis. It is essential that the Government puts out clear and consistent guidelines. The No 1 priority must be to stop the outbreak spreading to other areas of Scotland; the No 2 priority must be to give tourist operators and businesses clear advice on the first priority. As a representative of the Highlands and Islands, I call for a clear and consistent line, because the worst news that we could possibly get in that area is of an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease there. Tourism faces a rotten season, but confusion will cause only further misery and financial loss. The public have been wonderful and have shown great responsibility. Local businesses have shown great stoicism and have made a huge sacrifice for the benefit of the agricultural sector. I congratulate them, but they must be supported by clear messages. At the weekend, I spoke to two owners of small, family-run hotels in Argyll about the crisis. One owner said to me, "I have no bookings for the spring and summer. People come here to walk, fish and use the countryside. What can I tell them when they ring me? I am surrounded by Forestry Commission land, which is  closed, and farming land, which is also closed. I cannot even take my dogs for a walk, so I tell inquirers not to come until it is safe to do so. The Government must tell us what to do." We must not be dishonest. There must not be confusion over whether the countryside is open or closed. A non-infected area, such as the Highlands and Islands, must take every precaution against infection being brought in from infected areas. The guidelines must be clear and unambiguous on the best way to achieve that. There must be no confusion among ministers representing different interests. The main priority is to stop the disease spreading; ministers must emphasise that. Tourism in Scotland will not recover until we are clear of foot-and-mouth disease. The first priority is the riddance of the disease, whatever it takes. There are questions to be answered, such as: is the Executive encouraging angling authorities to sell permits? Will the Caledonian canal be open for Easter? On 10 February, Wendy Alexander met Highland tourist operators and agreed that Highland tourism would top the agenda at her first meeting with the new chief executive of visitscotland. I am sure that she will keep her word and meet the commitments that she made at that meeting, but I remind her of them now. Tourism in the Highlands needs a return of special funds for niche marketing of different areas; specialist branding for Highlands and Islands destinations; and, above all, a big reduction in the cost of petrol and diesel. Above all, we must get Scotland clear of foot-and-mouth disease or we will not have enough visitors. There must be a rescue package for local businesses, hotels and people who run bed-and-breakfast outlets. They are making a huge sacrifice so that we can rid our country of this appalling menace. Once the outbreak is over, our Government must trace the source and seriously consider banning the import of meat from countries where the disease is endemic. If we must import meat, we should get it—and encourage the rest of Europe to get it—from our Commonwealth allies in Australia and New Zealand, which have never had a trace of the disease.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether council employees transferring from Argyll and Bute and Highland Councils to BEAR Scotland Ltd will receive pension benefits comparable to those that they held with the councils. (S1O-3171)

I thank the minister for her reply but ask why she has refused to reply to the numerous letters on this subject that she has received from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities transport spokesman and the convener of the Highland Council. Why did the Scottish Executive not follow the UK Cabinet Office guidelines, which state that when contracts are transferred pensions should be "broadly comparable"? Why did the Executive not place an obligation on BEAR to provide comparable pensions for loyal council workers who have spent their lives making our roads safe?

It is very nice to be given a raspberry by SNP members rather than have them blow a raspberry, which is what they quite often do when I stand up to speak. I want to make a short, impromptu contribution to the debate, which is especially important to the inhabitants of the Blairgowrie area, which I know well. Recently, I have been taking evidence on behalf of the Equal Opportunities Committee on the sites occupied by gypsies and travellers. I have spoken to many gypsies and travellers, many of whom have referred to the work that they used to do, berry picking—it is work that they wish they still did. Berry picking was incredibly important to them, and they were equally important to the berry farmers. Although mechanisation has taken over to some extent, one hopes that an increase in the number of berry fields might once again bring back the important link between the berry farmers and the gypsies and travellers, which profited both parties for so long. I very much liked Mary Scanlon's artistic contribution. There are many songs and legends about the berry pickers and when the work was done, then there were the parties. Not only would an increase in berry production help the Scottish agricultural community and the health of our nation, it would re-establish an important and rich  part of our Scottish cultural heritage.

Will the minister tell us the position regarding red deer and roe deer—especially roe deer, which will be on farms in Dumfries and Galloway? Will he also tell us the position regarding carrion such as foxes and badgers that live in the woods around the fields where the infected animals are? Will the minister assure us that stock will not be left lying in fields where carrion feeders can get at them after they have been slaughtered?

Will Lewis Macdonald take on board the fact that we are delighted with decommissioning, but that we want a short-term tie-up as well? It is not a choice between the two.

rose—

Normally, I would be delighted to be back in the chamber debating fisheries. However, when the public—the people who pay for us to be here—examine the history of this episode, two things will astound them. First, that last Thursday the Scottish Parliament made a decision that the Scottish Executive has ignored. Secondly, that we are back in the chamber to debate the same topic. I doubt whether hearing more words spoken on the issue will be of any comfort to the fishermen  who depend on the industry for their livelihoods. They want and deserve action. A decision was made to take action and fishermen want that decision acted on now. Last Thursday, fishermen saw a decision being made in the Scottish Parliament that was a victory for common sense and for the fishing industry. This morning, a week later, they are witnessing a cynical attempt by an embarrassed and smarting Executive to overturn that victory, not in the interests of the fishermen or people's livelihoods but in the interests of propping up the shabby, discredited Lib-Lab coalition that masquerades as the Government in this country. Should the debate be about the conservation of fish stocks? [MEMBERS: "Yes."] Should it be about the conservation of our fishing communities? [MEMBERS: "Yes."] Should it be about the conservation of the disgraced coalition? [MEMBERS: "No."] I call on the Executive to recognise last week's democratic decision to implement a funded short-term tie-up scheme as an essential part of the cod recovery plan in order to stop the slaughter of immature haddock in the North sea. [Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Fishermen and scientists recognise that preventing the decimation of the young stock will hold the key for the future prosperity of the industry. I ask members of the Executive not to attach themselves to an agenda that might wipe out the seed corn of the North sea fishing industry. Who among us will vote for the destruction of young fish? The Deputy Minister for Rural Development has said repeatedly that she follows the advice of the fishing industry and works with it. However, although the fishing industry has been telling her what it needs and the Scottish Parliament has voted for what the industry says it needs, the minister has ignored the fishermen and the Parliament. Who is she listening to? She is listening to Tony Blair. The First Minister says that meetings are good. Big deal. They are good only if people are listened to and something is achieved as a result of them. In case he, Ross Finnie and Rhona Brankin want to know the latest advice from the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, here it is, sent by e-mail this morning: "The federation maintains its view that a funded effort limitation scheme between now and the end of the cod closure period would yield a substantial conservation gain for the haddock stock ... If the Government rules out, as a  matter of principle, the introduction of funded effort limitation, it will be unable to meet its obligations under the EU-Norway five year cod recovery programme ... technical measures to conserve cod are ineffective in a mixed fishery and the welcome decommissioning programme will not be sufficient in itself to deliver the target already set for the cod recovery programme". Rhona Brankin tells us that advanced technical measures will solve the discard problem. It is quite obvious, however, that the technical conservation measures were not working. That is why the fishermen stopped fishing and tied up in the first place. The advanced technical measures that the minister has talked about would not be in place for another month and even the best estimate is that they might reduce the discards by only 60 per cent. The recommended tie-up scheme, by comparison, would yield a 100 per cent reduction of discards at once. The minister tells us that the west coast fishermen are not behind that plan. She is cynically dividing the fishing industry to suit her interests. Divide and rule is her motto, which is rich, given that the Clyde fishermen and others on the west coast have been affected by the Irish sea cod recovery programme for some time. The minister has done nothing for west coast scallop fishermen whose boats have been tied up because of amnesic shellfish poisoning. She has refused to draw down compensation for them, despite repeated calls, including from me and other members. The result of her current policy will be that white fish boats will divert their activity and fish for prawns, thus causing a glut in prawns and a subsequent fall in the price of a product that provides the livelihood of west coast fishermen. The west coast fishermen need a share of the action, but the minister will not give it to them. What has the minister achieved? A revolt by fishermen, an armada up the Firth of Forth, a huge protest in Edinburgh, numerous angry demonstrations on the east coast and a democratic defeat in the Scottish Parliament. She should recognise the situation that we are in and she should respect the wishes of the Parliament as expressed last Thursday.

Is the minister aware that the trout fishing season opens on 15 March? That would normally mean the movement of thousands of people to inland Scottish fishing waters. Has any advice gone out to angling clubs and authorities concerning access to Scottish lochs and rivers during the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak?

If Spanish and Portuguese vessels can be compensated for tying up, why cannot Scottish vessels?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Before speaking to the motion, I should like to say that we find the Scottish National Party amendment to be acceptable as it adds to the motion. Yesterday afternoon, I listened to Gordon Brown, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, praising his Labour party for having achieved low rates of inflation and low interest rates, but I must point out that that party has caused the lowest morale among people in rural communities, especially those in the fishing industry, that has ever been experienced. Scottish fishermen take great risks to bring in their valuable harvest, which contributes much to our economy. That deserves recognition and our party recognises the importance of the fishing industry in Scotland to the lives and incomes of those who live in fishing communities. That is why this party is using, for the second time in succession, valuable debating time on this issue. The Executive has so far refused to make any statement on the new crisis facing fishing and we hope that this debate will give it the opportunity to produce some good news for those people making an enormous sacrifice to protect fishing for Scotland's future generations. Of course, unless the Executive supports the industry through this vital period, it may have no future. Will the Government now put its money where its mouth is and bring in the essential ingredient that the cod recovery plan lacks—emergency financial compensation—which, as we have said before, is essential if the plan is to have any hope of success? Last week, Edinburgh saw a massive protest not just by fishing boat owners or fishermen's representatives, but by the rank and file of the industry, whose jobs, lives and future depend on the Executive's actions. On Tuesday, a flotilla of  fishing boats sailed up the Firth of Forth, emphasising that protest. Yesterday, fishermen's representatives met with the Minister for Rural Development and his deputy to put their case again. There has been no result so far. The fishermen ask for emergency help in this crisis. They do not ask for a long-term solution because, without short-term help, there may well be no long term. Fishing as we know it in Scotland may be destroyed; fish and chips, the staple diet of many, might become the luxury of those who can afford it or find it. Yesterday, after the fishing meeting, the Deputy Minister for Rural Development issued a press release in which she said: "I had another helpful meeting with the industry ... I underlined that the Executive is fully committed to the industry. Ministers are now working with officials as a matter of urgency on what we discussed. I will be in a position to make an announcement in the Scottish Parliament tomorrow, Thursday." Here we are, in the Scottish Parliament, waiting for an announcement confirming the Executive's commitment to Scotland's fishing industry. I hope that we hear more than toujours les platitudes all over again but, after Elliot Morley's performance in the House of Commons yesterday, I do not hold out much hope of that happening. However, fishing is more important to Scotland than it is to England, and perhaps the minister will recognise that by confirming emergency financial support for those in the fishing sector.

As I have said before, our policy is spelled out in our manifesto. I am proud of this Government's record— [Laughter.] I beg your pardon, Presiding Officer, I mean that I am proud of my party's record. We spent a lot of money in 1993-94 on decommissioning. Had it not been for the determination and the united front shown by the fishermen, the crisis would have been overshadowed by the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak. Let me assure the minister that the loss of income to fishing communities from the fishing crisis is every bit as bad as the loss of income to farmers from the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak. The farmers are being supported to some extent but our fishermen, who have taken a responsible stance, deserve  support in their aim to conserve stocks. The Executive was warned time and again that the closure of cod spawning grounds would result in a displacement of fishing effort elsewhere. What is the point of protecting one stock—cod—if the 1999 class of haddock is to be decimated as a direct result? That is what has been happening. There is filmed evidence of fishermen throwing back nine out of 10 fish dead. That is not conservation; it is destruction. Surely it is not beyond the Executive to realise that some money invested now might save far greater expenditure at a later date. In yesterday's press release, the minister also said that "the Scottish Executive is committed to securing a long-term sustainable future for the fishing industry". In that case, will the minister tell us her plan for annual tie-up payments during the minimum five-year period that the cod recovery plan is set to last? Will she explain to the Scottish Parliament the commitment, if there is one, to the decommissioning of vessels to allow the fishing industry to match the fleet to future catch expectancy? Only by coupling that initiative with a sensible effort limitation policy and capacity reduction can fishermen hope that fishing will become and remain sustainable once again. The Scottish Fishermen's Federation has spelled out what will happen if restrictions on effort and capacity do not run alongside the cod recovery plan. Stocks of haddock, whiting and prawns will come under great pressure and there will continue to be wasteful and damaging discards. Although the cod recovery programme might regenerate the cod species in a few years, without corresponding restrictions on effort and capacity, too many boats will be chasing too few fish. Boats that used to fish for white fish will start to fish for prawns, which will cause severe difficulties for the small prawn boats off the west coast, which rely on a good price and good catches of nephrops to sustain their livelihoods. Scallop fishermen on the west coast have been deprived of their livelihoods for the past two years without any compensation. We want to have a united fishing industry of which Scotland can be proud and a sustainable fishing industry that supports rural communities and gives a lead to the rest of Europe. I hope that the Scottish Executive agrees with that and I hope that the minister will tell us her plans for the short-term sustainability and the long-term future of the Scottish fishing industry. I move, That the Parliament supports the aims of the cod recovery plan; acknowledges the financial sacrifices made by the Scottish fishing fleet towards that end, and calls  upon the Scottish Executive to utilise Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance funding to provide financial support to our fishermen during the twelve week closure period and to outline its plans for the protection of other stocks such as haddock and programme for vessel decommissioning at the earliest opportunity.

I welcome the debate and begin my speech by highlighting the problems that are faced by gypsy traveller children. On 13 February, the Scottish Travellers Consortium launched a report on educational issues for gypsy traveller children throughout Scotland. Social justice is described as the Scottish Parliament's greatest aim, but gypsy traveller children have yet to feel the benefit of that, as they still experience a high level of social exclusion. We can and should help those children. Research by Save the Children in 1996 showed that only 40 per cent of gypsy traveller children of primary school age and 20 per cent of those of secondary school age attended school regularly. The average length of time that they spent in school was four years. Many children spoke of being put at the back of the class and not being properly attended to by the teachers, as they had not been through the whole curriculum. One child said: "How much does it cost to take 15 minutes extra just to work with the traveller kids when they are new?" Another child said: "I think every school should have some kind of teacher that the traveller kids or the black kids could talk to if they were getting bullied." In England and Wales, funding has been granted to provide traveller education services. That funding is not available in Scotland; therefore, the few specialised education services for gypsy travellers rely on a small number of committed individuals. I would like something to be done to alleviate those problems. For example, to prevent gypsy traveller children from feeling excluded, a local authority site at Collin, near Dumfries, has acquired a large portakabin in which a primary teacher works for three afternoons a week and a nursery nurse for two. The teachers assess the children and introduce them to school in an environment that  has pictures from the children's social background on the walls, such as horses, trailers and fairgrounds. That welcoming environment allays the fears of children and parents. The experiment is working and should be tried elsewhere. Information technology can be used to allow gypsy traveller children greater access to education; however, it costs money. Over the next few weeks, the Equal Opportunities Committee, of which I am a member, will visit gypsy traveller sites to collect information. I welcome that. A little understanding and a more welcoming attitude could do much to help the children of that group.

They could be provided through a little thought and the use of specialist teachers. I think that the most shocking news that I have seen recently—apart from the Indian earthquake—is the Wonderland Club child pornography case. As it followed revelations of abuse in children's homes, it is all the more serious. Sam Galbraith said that we must protect our children, and that point has been reiterated by the new minister with responsibility for education, Jack McConnell. I agree with them both, but point out that the new menace that is emanating from the internet is out of control and is deadly dangerous to children. Child pornography must be contained and stamped out. While the Government has some control over written material, what is the point when horrific material concerning the revolting exploitation of young children can be downloaded from computers by people with even a limited knowledge? What is worse is that those revelations are merely the tip of the iceberg. We must congratulate the police on their involvement in Operation Cathedral, which was spread across 12 countries and led to arrests and the seizure of three quarters of a million images of children suffering sexual abuse. However, The Independent yesterday stated: "Operation Cathedral was hailed as a success, but as a wake up call to law enforcement agencies and children's charities, it has been deafening. The paedophiles are using technology to get the upper hand. The police have won the latest battle, but the paedophiles are winning the war." We are dealing with a new menace and new measures are required to fight it. All the leading children's charities have condemned the leniency of the sentences, which vary between one year  and two years. As the director of the child protection agency, Kidscape, said: "You would get a longer sentence for accumulating masses of parking tickets or for burglary." A Conservative amendment to the Criminal Justice and Court Services Bill has changed the maximum sentence for such offences to 10 years—it would have remained at three years otherwise—but another Conservative amendment that would outlaw internet chatrooms that are used to lure children to abuse was rejected by the Westminster Government, which claimed that the law was adequate. Childhood comes only once. It is all too precious, and innocence lost can never be given back. I believe that those offences might come under the obscenity legislation in Scotland, which carries a life sentence. Can the minister confirm that? Is he happy about the situation regarding the law concerning internet chatrooms? Will he put pressure on internet service providers to be responsible for material that they are indirectly providing? Will he give the Parliament and parents in Scotland an assurance that the menace of internet child pornography is a high priority for the Scottish Executive?

As Scottish Opera was recently given £1.2 million to promote mainly Italian, German and French works, does not the Executive agree that shinty—which is more popular than opera in the Highlands, and which is essentially an ethnic Scottish game that is played by many Scots—should qualify for at least £50,000 of support?

Charles Dickens would have been proud of the length of Robin Harper's motion. However, as it does not mention wind energy, there is certainly no hot air or wind-baggery about it. To many distressed farmers in the Highlands and Islands, small hydro schemes and wind farms have supplied a lifeline that has greatly benefited the local economy; I commend such schemes. However, many of those pioneer projects face problems—their incomes from electricity have dropped enormously because the initial seven-year guaranteed payments have run out and the price has fallen from 7p per unit to 1.5p per unit. It is vital that the money from the climate change levy exemption—small though it is—reaches those operators soon and that the introduction of green tickets, which should be worth 3p per unit, is not deferred but starts in October as was originally planned. I presume that the price of those tickets will be determined by the new electricity trading arrangements. Because they are a UK obligation to Kyoto rather than a European one, those tickets should be traded only within the UK, to protect the price and to encourage the UK to meet the green targets to which Scotland will make a significant contribution. Scotland desperately needs new and improved electricity infrastructures for transmission and distribution. The existing infrastructures were designed in the 1950s and are now woefully inadequate; they are dominated by east coast generation, although most of the renewable resources lie to the west. If we make electricity, we must have the means to transport it. The Conservative party is committed to creating an environment strategy that balances a clean environment with economic development. We want a clean, efficient environment in which the needs of business are met not just by our words in the Parliament, but by an atmosphere for the right legislation. Conservatives want to promote not only the generation of renewable forms of energy, but the manufacture of equipment to harness such energy, and we support the proposal for a wind farm turbine manufacturing unit in Campbeltown. I know that commercial sensitivities surround that proposal, but, as a representative of the Highlands and Islands, I feel that the development must be encouraged. It would provide a wonderful opportunity actively to promote renewable energy  for national and local benefit. It would also supply a lifeline to Campbeltown and create much-needed jobs in the area. I agree with Nora Radcliffe, who said that the Danes are 20 years ahead of us in wind farm technology. However, she must acknowledge that the transfer of the technology to Scotland would be of great benefit to our country. The manufacturing of wind farm turbines would improve employment prospects in rural industry. I ask the Executive also to consider projects for the creation of energy from waste—especially from forestry waste, as that would help to tidy up felled forestry areas. It is interesting to note that the Knoydart peninsula is upgrading its hydro system, as that is a cheaper option than bringing centrally generated electricity to the area. Self-sufficiency from renewable energy is to be encouraged; small renewable energy projects will have an increasing value to the Scottish economy. Many schemes, such as the Arnish Moor wind generation project in Lewis, the Shieldaig and Slattadale hydro project and the Islay wave energy project offer exciting prospects. The Parliament should encourage clean energy.

I do not usually jump to Fergus Ewing's defence, but his motion to annul at the Rural Development Committee concerned a miswording in the statutory instrument that made it impossible under the rules for anyone who had applied to the scheme to reapply. I believe that his motion is intended to clear up that matter rather than to stop farmers receiving grants.

Does Mr Lyon think that "abolish" and "defer" mean the same thing? If the students of Argyll and Bute had £5 for every time that George Lyon promised to abolish tuition fees before he was elected, they would probably have enough money to pay for the graduate endowment that his party has introduced.

Does not the member agree that it would have been better to have had a cod recovery programme in place, rather than waiting to discuss one now, when it is too late?

Does the member agree that the Danes have done very well in the negotiations? They do much of the industrial fishing and there has been absolutely no reduction in the industrial fishing quota. Why has the Scottish Executive brought about that situation?

Mr Rumbles must agree that the Scottish position could hardly be weaker. That has been brought about by the failure of the Liberal-Labour Executive to produce any form of plan in advance of the discussions.

Will the member give way?

This party believes in sensible devolution. We know perfectly well that the hub of the UK fishing industry is in Scotland, which is why we are saying that the Scottish Executive—and that includes the Liberal party—ought to stand up for it.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

This morning, Scotland's fishing industry stands on the brink of a crisis unlike anything that it has seen in living memory and possibly ever. This is a grave week for Scotland—a week when the future of hundreds of our fishermen, and thousands of others who work in the industry, is bleak indeed. Today's debate may seem to be about fish, but it is actually about the plight of people who are reliant on the fishing industry. Fishermen, fish processors and their families are the ones who will suffer. I highlight the fact that the present situation could spell disaster for people in fishing communities the length and breadth of Scotland, from Fraserburgh to Mallaig. A bleak future awaits them, with devastation for their communities—a bleak future that can be lessened only if the Scottish Executive, for once, will stand up and fight for Scottish fishermen. Why has this situation been allowed to develop? Why should Scotland not have the clout that it deserves as the biggest player in the North sea? It is because the fishermen are not properly supported by Labour in London and—worse—are not supported by Liberals and new Labour on the Mound. In December, MEPs from different countries were putting forward their ideas for a cod recovery plan. Everyone in fishing circles has known for at least a year that the cod stock was in a parlous state and that a cod recovery plan would almost certainly be necessary. So where was the Scottish Executive's plan? Why did the Executive not lead with a well thought out plan, which could have been submitted by the United Kingdom? By taking the lead, the Executive would have pre-empted any plan such as the current one from Franz Fischler, which will be disastrous for Scottish interests. The Executive should be leading the way and fighting Scotland's corner. The fact that it  has done nothing except dawdle and procrastinate makes a mockery of devolution. This should have been the Executive's moment to shine, showing that the Scottish Parliament really represented the interests of Scottish people. However, yet again it has let down the Parliament and the people of Scotland. No wonder there is disillusionment with our political process.

I defer to Winnie Ewing's knowledge of what happened in the past. I will say only that, today, we are talking about the present. Why should Scotland bear all the pain when the Scottish fleet's record on conservation is the best in Europe? It is scandalous that our representatives in the Scottish Executive did not say or do anything in advance. That would have put us on the front foot instead of having to defend. The best method of defence is toujours l'attaque, but this bunch's motto is toujours les platitudes. Policies of attrition have a history of not working in Europe. It is especially galling that Scotland's fishing fleet, the only one in Europe to have adopted conservation measures—such as square-mesh panels aimed at protecting the 1999 class of fish—should pay the biggest penalty for the failure of other Governments to persuade their fishing fleets to do the same. Has the Scottish Executive thought of making that point?

No, I am sorry. As usual, the Executive showed blinding arrogance in not consulting Scottish fishermen and their representatives—the people at the sharp end, who are capable of giving well-informed advice. As a result, we are faced with mass devastation of the Scottish fishing fleet and the communities that it sustains. The worst element of Franz Fischler's plan is the proposed use of the 140mm mesh size in vast areas of the North sea. That would be catastrophic for fishermen who depend on haddock and other species that would not be caught in such a net. The only fish that would be caught is the cod. The plan would end up targeting the very species that  it is meant to protect. We need a cod recovery plan that has a chance of working quickly. A far better plan than the one proposed would be, first, to close all the key cod spawning areas throughout the North sea between February and April. That would maximise egg production. Secondly, juvenile fish must be protected. That could be done by making the square-mesh panel and accompanying twine size reductions mandatory in all national fleets operating bottom trawls. In addition, the current Norwegian practice known as "moving on" should be adopted, whereby vessels finding areas with heavy concentrations of juvenile fish stop fishing, move on and alert other boats to avoid the area. Thirdly, the food chain for cod and other species must be protected. That would mean a drastic cut in industrial fishing, which currently takes 1.2 million tonnes, greatly exceeding the catch required for human consumption. At a time when conservation is so important, it seems ridiculous that the only bottom trawl fishery not to have quota cuts was the industrial fishing sector, which has the worst by-catch of juveniles of species such as haddock and cod. That fishery uses a 20mm mesh and indiscriminately catches everything in its path. The main industrial fishers are the Danes, who use gill nets and who fish 24 hours a day, catching adult fish off the Danish coast and the shelf edge. It is ludicrous that industrial fishing does not contribute more towards conservation. That is one of the first issues that must be addressed. It is absolutely essential that every country makes sacrifices and plays its part in conservation. Other speakers today will mention decommissioning, which is obviously a vital part of any cod recovery plan. The core of the Scottish fleet and dependent fishing communities must be protected. As we speak, the unelected bureaucrats in the European Commission are threatening to reduce our fishing fleet to a shadow of its former self. Worse, I have just received news from one of our MEPs, Struan Stevenson—who continually fights for Scottish fishing interests—that, in a debate yesterday on the future of the common fisheries policy, the southern European states united to vote against the continuation of six-mile and 12-mile limits when derogation ends in 2002. They also voted to allow equal access to the North sea, the west coast and—even worse—the conservation areas of the Shetland and Irish boxes. I put it to the Scottish minister that such a situation cannot be allowed. We have talked about the North sea, but we must not forget the west coast fishery, part of which already comes under the Irish sea cod recovery programme. What plan does the  Executive have for that area? How will it deal with pressure on the west coast if vessels divert to that area? Has it done anything to bring back the full prawn quota? Where is the solution to the scallop problem that the minister said she would give to the chairman of the Clyde Fishermen's Association before Christmas? It is now mid-January and nothing has happened. Any future plan must cover the conservation of other stocks, which will be important to fishermen in the future, especially if they cannot fish for cod. I refer to the deep water species that are exploited by other fleets. Some of those species take 10 years to reach spawning maturity, but reach catchable size long before that. Obviously, if the fishery is to be sustainable, conservation measures must be implemented soon, so that those species do not go the same way as the cod. My message is simple. By not proposing its own plan, the Scottish Executive has left the Scottish fishery in jeopardy. It got us into this mess and now it will have to get us out of it. Thousands of people will suffer if this plan goes ahead. The Executive must think of the people who will suffer, and make constructive arguments to help them. Any solution to the problems that face the Scottish fishing industry relies on the Scottish Executive taking the lead for once and leading the United Kingdom in European Union talks at a ministerial level. A big battle looms for the Scottish fishing industry and I ask our minister for once to stand up and fight for Scotland. I move, That the Parliament notes the failure of the Scottish Executive to take the lead in producing an appropriate cod recovery plan for presentation as a United Kingdom submission to the European Commission; believes that this failure has led to European proposals for the North Sea which would seriously disadvantage the Scottish fishing fleet; notes that the plan, unless altered, will cause tremendous economic damage to Scotland's fishing communities, and calls for an alternative plan, devised in co-operation with the Scottish fishing industry, to be promoted immediately, which will lead to the revival of fish stocks and ensure a long-term future for Scotland's fishing industry.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I want to put it on record that my vote against the passing of the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill was not recorded.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have in my hand an unembargoed press release from the Scottish Executive, which says that "the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill passed its third stage after a Scottish Parliament debate." Is not that misleading, as we do not have the vote until 5 o'clock? Is it not also pre-emptive and, dare I say, rather arrogant?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

No.

The position of tourist operators is particularly drastic in the Highlands and Islands and, although the reorganisation of the STB may help the industry in two years' time, it is unlikely to help it next year. Will the Executive ring-fence the £2 million that Highlands and Islands Enterprise used to have for niche marketing the Highlands and Islands as a special destination, to try to help the situation in 2001?

How much consultation was there on this bill?

Does the minister deny that the two purposes of the bill are to give the Executive power and to stop salmon being killed?

Will the member give way?

The bill seeks to give the Executive unlimited power to control fishing. As far as we are aware, such power to control fishing—or any other privately owned activity—has never before been given to an Executive in the UK. There is no proposal to introduce any form of public ownership of fishing, so the Executive is seeking to exercise total control over it without assuming any of the responsibilities or costs of ownership.  Parliament should not be misled by the minister's statements on how she would exercise the power and the extent of consultation that would precede its exercise. If the bill is passed, no further recourse to the Parliament will be required, except to the extent of considering whether any regulations fall within the unlimited power that the Executive had been granted. The bill must be judged on the basis of what it says, not by the use that the minister proposes to make of it. The decline in the salmon population was the subject of intensive research by the salmon strategy task force that was set up in 1995 and reported four years ago. As is now generally accepted, it found that the decline was due mainly to mortality at sea, not to anything that was happening on rivers and affecting spawning. It found no evidence of a deficiency of smolts leaving individual rivers, but recommended that that should be monitored. The report did not recommend or even suggest that the Executive, except in cases of emergency, should be given any additional powers to act other than on an application by a board, let alone the unlimited power that the Executive is seeking. It is utter nonsense to suggest, as Rhona Brankin said in introducing the bill, that it "will secure the long-term future of . . . fisheries."— [ Official Report , 23 November 2000; Vol 9, c 337.]  That future depends on effective measures being taken to arrest the causes of the decline, not on restrictions on the current activities of fishermen and the inevitable effect on tourism and local economies. The Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill is concerned with the management of fisheries and not directly with conservation, in spite of its title. It seeks to amend an act that relates to administration, not conservation. Of course good river fishery management includes the adoption of methods of fishing that are consistent with the river's requirements and those of the locality it serves, but that is only part of good management. Equally—if not more—important is the protection of spawning grounds and juvenile stock from the effects of agricultural and forestry practices, pollution, predation, erosion and flooding. The Executive raised the better general management of fisheries in its "Protecting and Promoting" document, but the bill does nothing to secure that. The bill prejudices consideration of issues that were expressly raised in that document and the minister's letter that accompanied it. Any restrictions of fishing should be introduced in the overall context of general management, not in piecemeal legislation such as the bill. The minister stated her intention to exercise the power largely on the application of boards, which  the bill allows to apply for regulations, but the bill makes no provision that restricts the ability of future Executives to confine exercise of the power in that way. The minister has said that boards asked for more powers and that the bill delivers what they need. That is misleading. What boards asked for is in the document that was issued in June 2000 and was the only basis on which any prior consultation took place. That document proposed legislation to give additional powers to boards to apply for regulations that would restrict fishing in some respects. The document proposed no power for the Executive to introduce restrictions other than on the application of boards, except in an emergency. The bill gives the Executive unlimited power to prohibit or restrict fishing, whether or not the boards make an application. Boards and others have made unsuccessful attempts to persuade the Executive to restrict that unlimited power to what was proposed in the consultation document. The Salmon and Trout Association represents all angling interests—unlike the Association of Salmon Fishery Boards—and has now sent a circular to its members to say that the bill could be extremely damaging for Scotland's micro-fisheries and that there is a danger that it will not receive the popular support of anglers. The Conservatives agree with that view and therefore oppose the bill. If it is passed, it will do nothing for conservation.

The Conservatives are quite sympathetic towards Fergus Ewing's amendment, but we think that the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill is the wrong place for it. The points contained in Mr Ewing's amendment must be debated with all the issues of fisheries management at a later date, in the context of protecting and promoting fisheries. Has anyone read the Scottish salmon strategy task force report? That report contained a lot of recommendations, and, to be honest, I am quite surprised that the Executive does not appear to be following those recommendations. There seems to be little point in having a further commission, which would be extremely expensive, when such a report is before the Executive. The task force report, which was completed in 1995, made a lot of excellent recommendations and cost a lot of money. There is absolutely no point in paying for another report. Why does not the Executive act on the recommendations in that report? I do not say that that report is excellent simply because I know that Lord Nickson is sitting in the VIP gallery—I say so because the then Scottish Office accepted at the time that it was an excellent report. I do not understand why its recommendations were not acted on much more positively.

I want to reiterate Fergus Ewing's comments. The minister's amendment 12 will give the Scottish ministers total control over who would be consulted on proposed regulations. That gives too much power to the Scottish Executive and  does not restrict it in any way whatever. The amendment does not force the Executive to consult anyone it does not wish to, which could lead to an extremely biased consultation process. On the contrary, Alex Fergusson's amendment 13 requires the Scottish ministers to consult any district salmon fishery board affected by the regulations as well as anyone else considered appropriate. That would ensure that the Scottish ministers actually consulted the board involved. That is very important as that particular board will be the most affected; as it will know its own area and will have a broad base of membership, it will be able to ensure a reasoned response.

My reason for suggesting that regulations should not remain in force for more than five years is that a period of five years covers the life-cycle of the salmon from egg to adult. Experiments can therefore be completed within that time scale. However, I have much sympathy with my colleague Alex Fergusson's amendment 7, which requires that the regulations be reviewed every year. Indefinite regulations would be enormously damaging to the management of  salmon and sea trout fishing and to those whose livelihoods depend on income from angling tourism. In the salmon world, things can change rapidly, as shown by the dramatic increase of runs of salmon in some Scottish rivers last year. Local variations in salmon runs mean that blanket measures, such as those in England, would not be appropriate. Every fishing body that I know of has asked for time limitation. It is incredibly important that it be included in the bill.

rose—

A great deal has already been done by the seven west coast fishery trusts to connect their work on this matter with that done by the boards. The Tweed Foundation has also done a lot of work on it. The Conservatives agree with this amendment; it is proactive and an obvious conservation measure. It must be remembered that the financial aspect could be onerous for the smaller boards, but if they exist they should carry out such measures. The Executive should consider boards in conjunction with grants that are given to farmers for water margin improvements under the countryside premium scheme, as those tie in with a great deal of what boards would like to do for habitat improvement. That could be examined in a more holistic way—if I dare use that phrase.

Yes.

Yes. It is a very good amendment.

All the amendments in this group are designed to improve the bill and I would be disappointed if any of them was withdrawn or not moved.  The Conservatives like amendment 3, because it clarifies what the purpose of the regulations made by Scottish ministers would be. We need practical proposals that marry conservation and sustainability and we do not want fisheries to be closed down unnecessarily. Euan Robson's stage 2 amendment was good because it explained what Mike Rumbles's stage 2 amendment, which most people did not understand, meant.

I am not suggesting that. I am saying that most people said afterwards that they did not understand what his amendment meant. Mr Robson's amendments clarify matters, which is a good thing.

I accept that the Association of Salmon Fishery Boards is keen on that, and I agree with it, but members preferred Mr Robson's amendment to Mr Rumbles's because they thought it was clearer. That is the point that I am making.

Members of the committee.

The committee that was called the Rural Affairs Committee and which is now called the Rural Development Committee.

The committee did not agree to Euan Robson's amendment at stage 2 because it  had already agreed to Mike Rumbles's amendment.

Members could not agree to Euan Robson's amendment because he withdrew it. I think that we are getting on to a red herring here— [Interruption.]

The purpose of amendments 2 and 11 is to ensure that there are local controls rather than what Fergus Ewing referred to as unfettered power, which is what the bill is about. It is not about conservation, but about management. It gives the Scottish Executive unfettered power, which is not required anywhere else in the UK, to do exactly what it likes. That is what amendments 2 and 11 are intended to curb.

As no one in fisheries management would want fishing to be prohibited, except in dire emergencies, we would like the regulations from the Scottish ministers to be unable to stop fishing at any time, except during the close season. District fishery boards already have powers to alter close seasons, which are perfectly sufficient for a local board to control the season in its catchment area. Amendment 11 would minimise the impact on the fisheries and ensure that they were not closed indefinitely, which would greatly harm the areas that depend on them and the local angling tourism.

Before I start, I will make a declaration of interest. I am part-owner of a fishing syndicate on the River Awe, a member of the Atlantic Salmon Trust, a trustee of the Awe Fisheries Trust and a member of the Awe Fishery Board. Amendment 2 qualifies the vague and ambiguous word "otherwise" in section 10A(3)(b). It will restrict Scottish ministers' powers to make regulations, and ensure that they will not be hasty and ill thought out. In the bill as it stands, Scottish ministers can make regulations when a person or body applies to them or if they think that it is necessary. That gives Scottish ministers far too much autonomy.  Amendment 2 restricts ministers to making regulations only when a person applies to them, or in a case of extreme emergency. The amendment is vital to ensure that fisheries are not unnecessarily overburdened. The best people to manage fisheries are district salmon fishery boards—local people for local areas—and we do not want to see ministers interfering when they know little about an area, and when they may be under the influence of a pressure group, the interests of which run contrary to those of fisheries. I would rather that other members spoke to their own amendments. I move amendment 2.

On a point of order. I thought that members were supposed to be asking questions, not making speeches.

I thank the minister for her statement but regret that I have to say that the Conservative party is desperately disappointed for Scottish fishermen. Can she explain why every bottom-trawl fishery has had to take cuts except for the industrial fisheries? Why did not she insist on a cut of at least 25 per cent in the catch of the industrial fishing industry, which is the one that is the most harmful to the conservation of stocks, especially the stocks of the Norway pout fish?  Surely the minister agrees that it would have been better for our desperate processors to have had the whiting to process rather than having it end up as fish meal for pigs in Denmark. What part did the French presidency of the EU play in reaching a settlement on whiting? How many jobs will the industry lose as a result of the cuts? Why is there any cut in the prawn quota when the scientific evidence on the stock has remained unchanged? Why did the minister not push other countries to use conservation measures to address the long-term problem? Why does she not mention any decommissioning programme or any socio-economic help for fishermen and their families to protect the core of the Scottish fishing fleet? Will she plan for a subsidised lay-off for new vessels and plan a set-aside scheme for fishermen similar to that which operates in relation to Scotland's farmers? Will she address those issues immediately?

I am a native of Argyll and I am delighted to contribute to this debate on shinty, which is certainly the most important game to the people who live there and in other parts of the Highlands and Islands, particularly in and around Fort William, Newtonmore and Kingussie. My local team is Glen Orchy and there is another team nearby, in Inveraray. Many years ago, Inveraray was considered to be the best team in Scotland. The tradition of shinty is strong in that part of Scotland and is part of the social network. Many followers of the game turn up to support the local teams. Shinty can be played in all weathers, which is essential in an area of Scotland where the rainfall is more than 100in. The game epitomises hard fighting spirit and sportsmanship. Sportscotland should review the criteria by which it judges sports and should give shinty more recognition. I believe that it should consider a significant increase on the rather paltry £15,000 of funding that the sport receives at present. Shinty has endured for a long time without much Government help. I feel that the Scottish Parliament must show its support for this uniquely Scottish game. If it does, it will convey to people in the Highlands and Islands the fact that they are receiving attention; any other action would have the reverse effect. I take my hat off to the current sponsors, including Glenmorangie and Marine Harvest. Their help is invaluable. Sportscotland's budget is increasing by £6 million. I agree with Fergus Ewing, who said that £50,000 a year for shinty is a modest request. Shinty does a great deal for young people—at a time when we are all trying to find ways to give our youngsters hope—and provides an escape from  the drug culture. Why does sportscotland recognise hockey as a key sport, but not shinty, which is a similar but better game, simply because it is insular? At least the big-name players and teams in shinty tend to be Scottish, which is more than can be said for some of Scotland's top football teams, whose top players are more likely to be from Croatia than from Scotland. I agree with John Farquhar Munro that the teams struggle because of a lack of funding. The price of fuel in the Highlands has made things much worse—I am surprised that Fergus Ewing did not mention that. I thank the Camanachd Association for its excellent briefing and ask the Scottish Executive to give shinty, this wonderful Scottish game, much more recognition and more funding. That would be greatly welcomed in the Highlands and Islands.

Is the Executive aware that the proposed waste disposal site at Lingerton appears to be in contravention of the Executive's guidelines on proximity of waste and the transport of waste by road?

Does Bill Aitken agree that funding for alcohol counselling groups is woefully inadequate, especially in rural areas? For example, the Islay and Jura council on alcohol has to rely on funding  of £1,200 a year for all its counselling.

In the event of fishing boats being tied up due to cuts in quotas, will the minister consider the idea of using and paying fishermen to test the technical conservation measures needed for the cod recovery plan? Will he push for European compensation to allay the hardship and poverty that fishermen and their families will undoubtedly suffer?

rose—

Alex?

Alex.

rose—

I congratulate the minister on her first speech on fisheries. I welcome the thrust of the motion, which is to seek the best available settlement for the Scottish fishery. The situation that confronts the Scottish fishing industry is more serious than any other that it has faced in its history. The most recent proposed  quotas have added fuel to the fire that has been destroying the industry ever since the common fisheries policy was established. There is no doubt that the core objectives of the CFP have failed. Declining fleet numbers, lost jobs and rapidly dwindling stocks—especially of cod—show that the system has been a disaster for our fishermen. The quota system, which was designed to conserve fish stocks, has led to the dumping at sea of huge numbers of dead fish. Twenty-five per cent of all the fish that are caught in the EU annually are thrown back over the side, dead. That represents more than 2 million tonnes. Surely that statistic alone shows the need for drastic reform of the CFP. Since we joined the EU, the British fleet has lost 3,000 vessels and the European Commission is calling now for a further cut of 800 boats—10 per cent of the UK fleet. Why should we make such a cut when the Spanish fleet, which is much larger, is being asked to make only a 4 per cent cut? We Scottish Conservatives are saying that reform of the CFP is vital and that conservation measures to help stocks and other measures to bring immediate help to our beleaguered fishermen are necessary.

We have a flexible policy, which includes zonal management. Richard Lochhead knows very well what our policy is—it is in our manifesto. An embryonic zonal management plan for the North sea already exists. Sixty regions from the UK, France, Germany, Belgium, Holland, Norway, Denmark and Sweden have formed the North Sea Commission, which is a model of how a zonal management structure could operate. It is chaired by Lord Mackay of Ardbrecknish, a Conservative who has a great deal of fisheries experience. That organisation could show the way forward for future true devolution of the CFP. The organisation is popular with the industry because ideas come from it and scientists and politicians take the back seats for once. By bringing together fishermen and scientists and all the partners that take fish from the North sea, an effective conservation plan and cod recovery programme can be achieved. Any cod recovery plan would have to last for at least five years. It must introduce conservation measures such as square-mesh panels that use thin twine. Is a 3 m square-mesh panel long enough? Perhaps it should be 6 m or even 9 m. Why is the Scottish fleet the only one to have fitted the panels? Every fleet should adopt them.  Conservation methods should negate the need for the proposed swingeing cuts in haddock and nephrops quotas. Our fishermen say that there is an abundance of haddock and that they can be caught in areas where hardly any damage would be done to cod stocks. The Conservatives support a 12-week closure of the cod spawning ground in the Norwegian deep, but it is vital that our fisheries minister does not give way to demands from the Norwegians for extra quota on mackerel and blue whiting in return for that act of conservation. Norway must admit that it requires the conservation measures as well. Net mesh sizes are very important. It may be that to an increase to 120 mm would help to bring about a really rapid revival of stocks. The Scottish fishing fleet is important enough to take the lead on conservation, but doing that will be of no use unless all member countries agree to and adopt the same measures. However, the industry needs help now. The Conservatives strongly support a decommissioning programme, but not only for old vessels—some new vessels and licenses should be taken out of the North sea fleet. That would be a good conservation measure, but it should be funded by the European Commission and not be a drain on the FIFG. New money must be made available. The European Commission must finance socio-economic measures to alleviate hardship and poverty in the fishing industry. To do otherwise would be socially unjust. Why should our fleet be victims of the CFP? We should take a leaf out of the Spanish book and use the CFP for gain and the betterment of our fishermen. The International Council for the Exploration of the Sea's zones would correspond to the zonal areas that would have to be chaired by commission officials from the fisheries directorate-general. That would stop the dislocation of zonal management from the CFP and hopefully negate the need for treaty changes. Our fleet must be aware of other opportunities during these difficult times. Could not it make more use of the rich fishing grounds of the Falklands, which our country fought so hard to protect? The west coast grounds and the Irish sea need protection and management as well. Prawn stocks are vital to remote island communities and the smaller west coast boats. The proposed 20 per cent cut in prawn quotas is unnecessary, especially on the west coast. There is very little bycatch of cod and scientific advice on the stock is unaltered. I have been continually pressing the Executive for compensation for our scallop fishermen and for measures that would allow them to continue to sell only white meat during an amnesic shellfish poisoning ban. Other EU fleets receive  compensation—ours should as well, especially when there has been a complete loss of fishermen's livelihoods. I asked the Deputy Minister for Rural Development recently about a new testing method and her reply was that a statement would be made in January. I urge her not to forget about that. As we move towards 2002, when the derogation that protects our six and twelve-mile limits ends, the Executive must fight to maintain the limits. The strong likelihood is that the limits will be retained, as almost every EU member state seems to want to protect their inshore fishermen and local fishing communities. We go further and call for an extension to 24 miles; that position must be emphasised in the council. Enlargement of the EU exacerbates the need for urgent CFP reform. It is likely that Poland and Estonia will both be full members within five years and both have large fishing fleets. The Polish fishing industry employs 40,000 people, but the fleet is very old. The Poles will not hang about—they will take full advantage of the EU scrap and build programme and, although that would reduce the size of their fleet, the replacements would be modern vessels that are capable of going anywhere and hoovering up huge catches. The fact that stocks of cod, herring and sprat have diminished in the Baltic is likely to push central and east European fishermen back to the North sea. Many fishermen in the northern isles remember Lerwick being used as base by Polish fishing boats 30 years ago. Extra fishermen are hardly going to help conservation, so zonal policy must include only nations that have traditionally fished in those zones. Effort limitation must be a consideration, but only if it is equitable. In any effort limitation or days-at-sea scheme, it should be possible to employ the fishermen to test technical conservation measures. Conservation zones such as the Shetland and Irish boxes must continue to be protected and we must stop the immoral dumping of dead fish. A way of doing that might be for fishermen to log each haul they bring in. If they have landed many undersized fish or a species for which they have no quota they should immediately stop fishing in that area and give notice of their findings so that others can also avoid the area. At the end of the day, he who throws the net controls conservation. Zonal management offers a positive alternative to the current over-centralised management by the CFP. The self-interest of countries in a zonal management group is the key to successful conservation if measures are applied equally by all.

A complete fishing ban does not necessarily conserve or revive stocks, because an over-abundant stock of some species will prey on the young of a dwindling stock and also on the available food resource. Conservation is about balance; that is why fishermen are often sceptical about scientific advice. Fishermen see an abundance of stock such as haddock and many think there are too many saith, which eat a lot of sand eels. That is why fishermen must be included at every level when conservation measures that affect them are discussed.

I am just winding up. The next Conservative Government will fight to evolve a policy that sustains our fishing industry and secures its future. The CFP must be reformed. We must be pragmatic and sensible and lead our European partners to a better arrangement.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has for the future of the scallop industry. (S1O-2587)

First, generous compensation is being paid by the European Commission to Spanish and Portuguese fishermen whose boats have been tied up because they cannot get access to Moroccan fishing grounds. Why, in that case, does not the minister demand similar help for our scallop fishermen who have been tied up—or, rather, whose boats have been tied up [Laughter] —off and on for two years without any income whatever? Secondly, considering that 97 per cent of scallops in the UK are processed—which removes the toxic organs effectively—and only 3 per cent are sold in their shells, why should the whole Scottish scallop industry be destroyed when only a tiny percentage of scallops could pose a threat? Why does the Executive not approve a scheme that would enable only the white muscle of scallops to be marketed in Scotland, in the event of a ban?

I am concerned that the bill refers throughout to the conservation of salmon, rather than to the conservation of fisheries. My point is that the two things go together.

On the issue of inland habitat, is the minister aware of Scottish Natural Heritage's reintroduction of European beavers in south Argyll? Surely that militates against the restoration of fisheries habitats, as beavers tend to eat the young trees that, as Mr Robson said, would be fenced off at the edge of water courses.

Will Mr Ewing give way?

Will the member give way?

Does Mr Rumbles agree that, although our salmon stocks have been in decline for some years, this year's figures show that numbers are well up on previous years?

I begin by making a declaration of interests. I am a minority shareholder in salmon fishings on a river in Argyll. I am a member of the Awe district salmon fishery board, a member of the council of the Atlantic Salmon Trust and chairman of the Loch Awe Improvement Association.

The bill's title is something of a misnomer. It is called the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill, but it is more about management than conservation. Much more will need to be done in the context of the review "Protecting and Promoting Scotland's Freshwater Fish and Fisheries" to remedy the problems that face wild salmon and sea trout—I am informed that the word "salmon" in the bill includes sea trout. Although we welcome the bill's general intention to give flexible and responsive powers to salmon and sea trout fishery management, some elements of the bill might detract from that aim. The Salmon Act 1986 that the bill seeks to amend deals with the management of salmon fisheries. Obviously, effective fishery management improves conservation of stocks, but the word "conservation" on its own could easily distort the application of the measures for which the bill is intended to make provision. I ask the minister to provide clarification on that issue to the Rural Affairs Committee and Parliament. It is vital that we consider the conservation of Scottish fisheries in conjunction with the conservation of stocks. For some 200 years, rod fishing for migratory salmon and sea trout has been a focal point and a pillar of many of Scotland's rural areas. Netting goes back even further. Rod fishing not only gives great amenity value to enormous numbers of people, but brings considerable income into areas of Scotland where such income is increasingly important in these troubled times. It is estimated that the economic contribution of salmon fishing to Scotland could be as high as £470 million. A recent survey that was carried out for the Western Isles Fisheries Trust concluded that, in that small area alone, during the fishing season the income that was generated from fishing was some £5.6 million, and that 260 full-time-equivalent jobs were dependent on the industry. Figures for the Dee and Tweed river systems show that they bring in many millions of pounds. Different problems exist in different localities.  That is why it is extremely important that local management should be pursued. Blanket approaches are useless in Scotland, where different rivers have different runs of salmon at different times of the year. In Scotland we have a distinct advantage because of our system of district salmon fishery boards. I have not mentioned the role of Scotland's netsmen, who are now few in number. However, I believe that this traditional industry is still an important part of the picture in Scotland, and that netsmen can play an important role in the conservation of both stocks and fisheries. Later, my colleague Alex Fergusson will elaborate on that point. I have said that local management is the key to good conservation. In most cases management is carried out by proprietors, whose elected representatives sit on local district fishery boards. The excellent report of the Scottish salmon strategy task force, under the guidance of Lord Nickson, recommended that ministers should have "emergency powers to limit fishing when salmon populations or fisheries are severely threatened". I take it that the minister would use those powers only in extremis or in real emergencies. In such situations, the minister must have the power to make immediate decisions and must not be obliged to go through normal consultation procedures. However, the Conservatives think that, in normal situations, management should be left to local bodies, which will have a finger on the pulse of what is happening. I ask the minister why there is no provision for an emergency procedure in the bill—it is most important that one is included. Equally, we believe that, if a body applies for a measure of conservation, regulations that are made under the powers of the bill should be time- limited, so that they can be modified or relaxed if circumstances no longer required them to be kept in force. We suggest a period of three years. Fish stocks can change very quickly, as is evident from the considerable improvement this year in salmon stocks in many rivers after several years of decline. A fishery survives by harvesting a surplus. As long as there are plenty of fish to cover the spawning redds, rod and net fisheries can and should take a crop. Section 10A(4) of the bill requires ministers to "have regard to any representations made to them by any person having an interest in fishing for or taking salmon, or in the environment." That wording might exclude some people who are economically affected by fisheries, such as hoteliers and, in particular, ghillies, who are at the sharp end of fishing management and who should be consulted much more than they are. Therefore,  the reference to "interest in fishing for or taking salmon" should be widened. When ministers are minded to act on their own account under section 10A(3)(b), it is essential that they consult either the relevant district salmon fishery board or other appropriate persons before taking any action. I want the minister to give a reassurance that she will consider those points. In section 10A(6)(a), the powers that are available to district salmon fishery boards are surprisingly wide. All that the district salmon fishery boards have asked for and need are statistics that relate to fishing for and taking salmon. The wideness of that section would give district fishery boards the power to obtain irrelevant information at the expense of privacy. We must never forget that income from the fisheries finances their management and, therefore, conservation. Without the fisheries there would be no river boards, no fishery trusts and very little conservation. That income also finances the bailiffs who do the policing. It is important that provision is made in the bill to attract the basic bailiffing power of section 27 of the Salmon Fisheries (Scotland) Act 1868, which gives a bailiff power to enter and remain on land, in relation to any suspected offences under the new regulations. The fisheries also help to finance the seven west coast trusts that have been set up recently. I commend highly the work of those bodies and other individuals who are too numerous to name. However, the trusts' remit has been mainly related to the inland habitat of salmon and sea trout, mainly because the funds do not permit marine research. A river system or catchment area will export to the sea only the number of salmon or sea trout smolts that the area can support. The main factors that affect numbers are availability of natural feed and predation by marauding birds and larger fish. There is general agreement among fisheries bodies that the main problems exist at sea, so we ask the Executive to undertake further research into all other causes of salmon mortality. We ask the Executive to put pressure on its Westminster colleagues to bring about the speedy phasing out of the English east coast drift net fishery—its indiscriminate capture of fish that are heading for east coast Scottish rivers is making management policy on those rivers difficult. We ask the Executive to examine the problem of monofilament drift netting, especially in the area between Barra head and Malin head in Ireland. We ask the Executive to establish a seal commission to take into account the effect of the  seal population on all fisheries. It is perceived that aquaculture might be a problem. I applaud the work of the tripartite working group. The wishes of salmon farmers to live in sustainable co-existence with wild fisheries must be aided by the Executive. The salmon farming industry is important. It is worth about £500 million and employs 6,500 people. We want it to prosper. We need both industries—salmon farming exports high-quality farmed fish and the wild fish industry is the great importer of angling tourists, who are notably high spenders. The industry has made Scotland famous; it is surrounded by tales, myths and legends. We ask the Executive to help to sustain and improve it. I am sorry to notice that my friend John Farquhar Munro is absent today. I know that he would have made a valuable contribution to the debate and I know that he prefers his salmon poached.

Will the minister take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to promote the welfare of children. (S1O-2550)

I am glad to hear that. If the Executive is so committed to the welfare of Scotland's children, can it explain why it has removed the designation of minister for children from the list of portfolios? Does it consider Europe and external affairs to be more pressing matters? Does not that show a disregard for young people's interests?

I will be very brief. I congratulate Sandra White on securing this debate and agree that a rail link from Glasgow airport would be enormously valuable to most of Scotland, and would open up the Highlands. As usual, I want to introduce a Highlands and Islands perspective. Although there is a good railway from Oban on the west coast to Glasgow, it is quite impossible to travel from west to east. At Crianlarich, the line veers to the right, whereas before the time of Dr Beeching, a line extended through Glenogle to Callander and on to Stirling. The reinstatement of that line would be very advantageous to residents and tourists alike. I also want to mention Taynuilt railway station, which was the last wooden station on the Oban line and was due to be turned into a museum. Railtrack had promised money to a local trust to achieve that aim, but unfortunately the station was burned to the ground a month ago through arson. I ask the minister to encourage the rebuilding of a replica Taynuilt station, which would be a great tourist attraction in that area. Will the Executive also give more thought to creating independent loading bays for loading forestry timber on to trains on railway lines in the west of Scotland, to reduce the amount of timber lorries on the roads? That would complement the excellent initiative of carrying timber by sea.

If the minister wants to achieve equality for all, why was education spending down by £219 million and local authority spending down by £118 million in Labour's first year in power?

Labour claims that it is committed to changing people's lives. Indeed, it has changed the lives of many people, but unfortunately not always for the better. Labour has intervened in the lives of Scots and, although I agree with the stated commitment to creating a fairer society where everyone matters, that has not been achieved in the region that I represent. Since Labour has been in power, the difficulties experienced by farmers, crofters, fishermen and the tourist industry in the Highlands and Islands have meant that families are trying to survive on greatly reduced incomes. The unfair fuel prices coupled with the huge increases in water charges exacerbate the climate of despair that many people experience. Where is social justice for those people? Why does rural Scotland suffer social exclusion under a Liberal Democrat-Labour alliance? It is because the Executive refuses to concentrate on the basics of the economy. It refuses to cut red tape and tax and to create job opportunities. In the annual report, Labour claims to be committed to reducing crime rates in disadvantaged areas. Crime rates should be reduced all over Scotland.

It seemed to happen immediately after the Liberal Democrats and the Labour party came to power. The Executive is happy to tell people that crime fell by 9 per cent in Glasgow in 1999. However, it may not be happy to tell people that crime in Scotland overall has risen and that in some regions the crime rate has doubled. In Argyll and Bute, the number of crimes against the person and the number of crimes against property both rose. In the Highlands, drug-related crime increased by more than 200 incidents—an astonishing 23 per cent increase—and crime overall rose by 10 per cent. If the Executive is uninterested in matters north of the Highland line, it may be more interested in Edinburgh statistics. In Edinburgh, the number of reported crimes rose by almost 10,000, or 21 per cent, and the number of drugs crimes increased by more than 50 per cent. Unfortunately, those trends persist across Scotland. In the Scottish Borders, drugs crimes have risen by an astronomical 110 per cent. Crime has risen in 15 out of the 32 local authorities in Scotland. The Executive can speak about crime reduction all it likes, but its strategy has not worked. Not only has Executive strategy failed to combat crime, it has failed the young people of Scotland. In 1998-99, the proportion of 16 to 19-year-olds who were not in education, training or employment actually rose, rather than being halved as the Executive had promised. That is hardly a good start. The education strategy has also failed. Where is the social justice for the children whose exam results were messed up? Here is another fact: far from there being a reduction in the number of unauthorised absences, the number of primary school absences has increased by 130,000. The Executive's target of reducing exclusions—more commonly known as expulsion—from school is misplaced. We should reduce exclusions by changing the culture of behaviour in schools; we should give head teachers and parents the freedom and power to decide what is in the best interests of each pupil in the school on a case-by-case basis. If there is no threat of expulsion, setting blanket targets encourages disruptive children to interrupt the education process. The Executive seems to think that social justice is to be achieved by pumping more money into programmes that are not working. Instead, it should be focusing on real devolution of power: devolution to individuals and local communities rather than power to politicians; devolution to head teachers and school boards; devolution to local,  smaller housing associations to rid Scotland of bad housing—the legacy of Labour councils; devolution to health care professionals rather than bureaucrats; free personal care for those who need it; and increased pensions and devolution to pensioners to allow them to spend their money on what matters to them. Those measures would increase social justice by empowering people to control their own destinies and by empowering communities to be inclusive, instead of being coerced by a Government that thinks that it has all the answers but clearly does not. The annual report makes it clear that the Executive has not achieved much so far. Some of its goals are admirable, but many are misplaced. The Executive's motion is self-congratulatory and ignores the real facts—that many of the areas that the Executive focuses on are now worse off than before. The main positive trends shown in the report, such as the move to community care, were started by the Conservatives. There is a long way to go to achieve social justice and equality of opportunity across Scotland.

Although I welcome the fact that the Chancellor of the Exchequer has seen fit to remove road tax from tractors, is the Minister for Transport aware that most tractors in the Highlands and Islands are not road licensed  anyway? [Laughter.] Is the Executive suggesting that people ought to use tractors rather than private cars to get rid of the enormous fuel imbalance that exists between urban and rural areas in Scotland?

Will the member give way?

I did say—

I welcome the first part of Jackie Baillie's motion, which states that the Scottish Executive is committed to "ensuring that people are treated as equal individuals regardless of, for example, their background, gender, ethnicity, sexuality, any disability, age or religious belief". Unfortunately, the very next line goes on to commend the strategy set out in "Working together for equality", which promotes what we used to call positive discrimination. Jackie Baillie is right to say that positive discrimination has been deemed unlawful by UK anti-discrimination law, which pleased our party, as we have always argued against it. The Executive has simply changed the name to positive action. European Union law still allows positive discrimination on gender and I am sure that some members of this Parliament are quite relieved about that. I am not referring to members of my own party. The Conservative group is disappointed that at the heart and soul of the Executive strategy there are simply statistics that are used to show that it is filling the quotas that it has set itself. The Executive admits:  "The main immediate focus of the strategy is to increase the numbers of employees from previously under-represented groups". However, with the exception of disabled people, if the Executive was truly committed to treating people as equal individuals, it would allow employment and positions to be gained on merit alone, rather than because of the applicants' gender or ethnicity. The Executive has set percentage targets for key under-represented groups in the senior civil service. Although I and my party colleagues would like to see more disadvantaged groups gain representation in high-level government and professional positions, we cannot fool ourselves or the nation into believing that the artificial filling of percentage targets will help to facilitate the equality of opportunity that we should all be concerned with. The whole idea of quotas and percentage targets is in direct contradiction to the pledge of treating people equally. As a Parliament, we should concern ourselves with and strive for equality of opportunity. I quote from the Executive's publication when I define equality of opportunity as the removal of "prejudice, bias, or irrelevant criteria that treat some groups of people less favourably than others." Although that is most often taken to mean under-represented groups, we cannot overlook the plain language of the statement. Anyone, even the so-called status quo or white male, can be the victim of inequality of opportunity. When employment targets are the primary concern, as with the Executive's strategy, people may be selected for jobs based not on their merit but on factors over which they have no control. For far too long, Labour Governments have promoted and practised patronising legislation and procedures, presumably because they felt that minorities cannot necessarily make it on their own. However, people are proud of their talents and want to use them. They want to succeed because of their talents, not because of their culture, gender or background. The Executive claims that positive action levels the playing field by enabling disadvantaged groups, but that is not the case. Except with disability, positive action can create an unbalanced playing field where some from under-represented groups in society may gain a less-than-fair advantage over others. I therefore have the gravest doubts that that qualifies as equality of opportunity. We should be focusing on the equal treatment of people irrespective of their background. We cannot pretend that treating everyone equally will raise everyone to the same level. The simple fact remains that all people are not created equal.  Some are taller, some run faster and some have skills that other simply do not possess. To my certain knowledge, and sometimes to my fury, brains have always been rationed, and it disappoints me that I do not possess the same intellect as Adam Smith or David Hume, or the same IQ as Albert Einstein. There are inequalities, even among people from the same race or gender. Rather than living in an idealised dream, we must live in reality, recognising differences and embracing them. Works as early as the Bible tell of the dangers of stifling people's talents. Talent, wherever spotted, should be nurtured and encouraged so that individuals may reach the stars. With the information technologies revolution, groups that were previously limited in the professional world, such as the disabled, can now compete with the most brilliant personnel. That is very welcome. What equal treatment of people ensures is what we are working for: equality of opportunity. By giving people the same access to resources, we ensure that people will excel in their strengths. I fully stand by what I said in this chamber last year: "Let us have a society that treats people on the basis of merit, not background. Let us have a society where access is universal and there are no special rules or status for any group."— [ Official Report , 2 December 1999; Vol 3, c 1208.]  That is what we should be striving for in this Parliament. Oscar Wilde once said: "We are all in the gutter, but some of us are looking at the stars." He saw the value of personal initiative and individual ambition. We should adhere to his words, and encourage people to cultivate their talents so that they may reach the stars and take many others with them.

The Executive will be aware of the negotiations in Campbeltown in Argyll on the proposal by a Danish company, which is the foremost wind farm manufacturer in the world, to build a wind farm manufacturing plant at Campbeltown. Will the Executive give its full support to wind farms in Scotland, and especially to that proposal, which would provide hundreds of jobs in Campbeltown and revitalise that economically depressed area? The area is an ideal location for such a project, which would be of great export value to Scotland and would utilise the new Campbeltown-Ballycastle ferry when it comes into existence.

In view of the fact that the Executive has frozen the tolls, is it not time to stop date-stamping the books of concessionary tickets?

Despite the failure of the amendment, I thoroughly support the bill and congratulate Tavish Scott on introducing it. I hope that it will put an end to the disputes between the shellfish growers industry and the creel fishing industry.

When a boat puts out creels it does not sit around and wait to pick them up; it leaves them there overnight and goes back the following day to retrieve them. If a storm got up in that time it is possible that the fisherman would not be able to bring out the boat to retrieve the creels and the damage would be done.

I have listened to what has been said and I take on board members' feelings. However, I have not changed my view that the amendment would clarify the bill. The word "knowingly" is not enough. It must be shown that people intended to cause damage. A person may knowingly use a piece of equipment without intending to injure or damage.

The point that I am trying to clarify—

That is a good pun. The amendment is intended to protect fishermen and to redress the situation. The bill is intended to help fishermen. The amendment is not intended to protect shellfish growers. While I think that shellfish growers should be protected, the amendment would clarify the position—I stick to it on principle.

I was a co-signatory to Tavish Scott's amendment bill. I congratulate him on the bill; I support it, as does the Scottish Conservative party. My intention is only to improve the bill. Tavish Scott's bill seeks to address a problem that has existed since shellfish aquaculture became popular. The Parliament should actively encourage shellfish growing off the west coast of Scotland. It is an extremely clean and environmentally friendly industry, the product of which is very similar to shellfish that are found in the wild. The product is excellent, and a valuable export, bringing much-needed money and employment to remote areas off the west coast. So far, although around 30 applications for several orders have been made in Scotland, only eight have been granted. That is due mainly to opposition from fishermen who would not be able to continue fishing in their traditional areas. Tavish Scott's amendment bill would decriminalise creel fishing in several order areas. That would resolve a great deal of the opposition to several orders, and it is therefore vital that we get that decriminalisation right. That is the point of my tiny amendment. Oysters, king scallops, queenies and mussels can all be grown in west coast bays and sea lochs. They do not require intensive feeding. I do not have to remind the chamber of the problems that scallop growers are having with amnesic shellfish poisoning. It is imperative that the causes of the toxic algal blooms that have been plaguing the west coast of late are discovered.  To grow shellfish, it helps greatly to have a several order for a specific area which prevents types of fishing—such as trawling or dredging—that damage growing shellfish. At the moment, only mid-water fishing with line or net is allowed. However, Tavish Scott's amendment bill will allow the use of static gear, such as lobster, prawn and crab creels, for fishing in those areas. Many years ago, I fished for lobsters in a small way on Coll, and I know the irritation that creel fishers experience when they are excluded, because of the granting of a several order, from waters that they had previously fished. Some friction has therefore grown up between the shellfish growers and the creel fishers. Tavish Scott's amendment bill will, I hope, bring peace and harmony to the different parties. That is why it is so commendable.  I come now to my reason for wishing to amend slightly the wording of the amendment bill. If the bill goes ahead as it is, creel fishermen must be aware that they will face criminal prosecution if their creels damage the shellfish. It refers to "an implement of a type specified in the order and so used as not to disturb or injure in any manner shellfish of the description in question." However, that provision would not protect creel fishermen from the repercussions of accidental damage. Marker buoys mark mussels, which hang on ropes; other shellfish sit on the bottom and it may be difficult to know their exact location. One cannot see the sea bed from a boat. I know that the Scottish Executive rural affairs department says that the phrase "knowingly does any of the following things" in the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Act 1967, would protect creel fishermen, but I have taken legal advice which disagrees with that view. Members should bear in mind the fact that shellfish growers want creel fishers in the several order areas, because they catch many of the crabs that predate on the young shellfish. The last thing anyone would want is for fishermen to be prosecuted for events that are beyond their control. A fisherman knowingly—that is the key word—puts a creel over the side of his boat. He has no intention of damaging what is on the sea bed, but he cannot see the sea bed. Accidents could happen for a variety of reasons. For example, if a storm rose and the creels dragged, damage could be caused even if the fisherman was using the equipment in a manner intended not to disturb or injure. He has, however, knowingly used the equipment that has caused the damage. No matter what precautions fishermen take,  some matters are outwith their control. That is why intent must be brought into the question, which is what the amendment seeks to do. Fishermen doing everything in their power to ensure that they did not disturb or injure shellfish might none the less do so for reasons beyond their control. If it were not the fishermen's intention to disturb or injure in any manner a shellfish grower's product, they should not be punished. The amendment would help the very people whom the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Amendment (Scotland) Bill is trying to help by showing that fishermen, given that they do not intend to disturb or injure shellfish, are not committing a criminal act. I repeat that the purpose of Tavish Scott's bill is to decriminalise the activity of creel fishing in several order areas. The amendment intends to aid the decriminalisation of that activity. I hope that members will recognise the importance of changing the wording of the bill and vote for the amendment, which cannot do any harm, and can only improve an excellent bill. The amendment simply clarifies the point; it ensures that those fishermen who knowingly and intentionally disturb or injure shellfish in any way will be prosecuted and that those who do not have such intentions are not punished unnecessarily. I move amendment 1.

On the subject of good, clean Scottish air and food, does Mr Stone agree that we should advertise some of the dangers that are involved in going abroad for holidays, such as packed airports, dodgy hotels and Delhi belly?

I am glad that we are having this debate, because tourism is now Scotland's most important industry and is especially important to my constituency. The industry pays more people's wages than the oil, gas and whisky industries combined and acts as a stimulus for other sectors of the economy, attracting inward investment. Tourism should promote a positive image of Scotland throughout  the world, promoting the beauty of our landscape and the historical importance of Scottish buildings. It was thoughtful of the Scottish National Party to send us its brief; the SNP's prediction that the Conservatives would use today's debate to emphasise that tourism did well when we were in power, but has declined under Labour, was spot on. Never was a truer word spoken. Popular destinations such as Loch Lomond, the Trossachs, and Argyll and its islands have experienced a fall in visitor numbers of almost 20 per cent. In some places in the Highlands, such as Helmsdale, numbers are down by 60 per cent. That follows a bad drop in last year's figures. If it were not for Edinburgh and Glasgow, which seem to be holding up, Scotland's tourism industry would be in freefall. Why should that be? Scotland's exceptional beauty will always sell itself and its history is the stuff of legend. Fundamental questions must be asked. First, how can it be that the Scottish Tourist Board booking site, Ossian, which cost £6 million, has had only 30 bookings since its launch? When Henry McLeish launched the project in July, he forecast that internet bookings would increase revenue by £360 million within three years. Ossian has not had a very good start. Secondly, a rise of 26p per litre of petrol, or £1.17 per gallon, was bound to make Scotland an expensive destination. Why has the Executive not planned for that and why has the Government not cut fuel tax? Thirdly, by insisting on high interest rates, which have inflated the value of the pound against the euro, the Government has been destroying foreign tourism. On that point, how can the Lake District boast 12 million visitors per year, while the whole of Scotland gets a maximum of 10 million? If the currency is such a problem, why does the Executive not concentrate on selling Scotland to tourists from other parts of the UK? Tradition says that one normally does business with one's neighbours. Scotland's neighbours are those who live in the north and the midlands of England, and there are plenty of them. The main criticism that I have heard from those at the coalface of the tourism industry is of a lack of investment and professionalism from tourist authorities. The accommodation sector is the most vital because all other facets of tourism service it, but in the Highlands a huge number of hotels are for sale; as a result of lack of investment, they do not live up to what the modern tourist wants. Unless they are completely refurbished they have had their day, but 90 per cent of grant money is wasted because it is going into old properties and simply pasting up cracks. We need a rebuilding scheme in Scotland. Our  infrastructure in the Highlands was greatly improved under the Conservatives, but trunk road building has been cut tenfold since then. People judge a country by its roads system, which is one of the oldest marks of a civilised society. Many Highland roads have a hardcore base of around 8 in, which is inadequate and easily pulled to pieces by heavy lorries. The other area in which we fall down is staff training. Staff are being trained the wrong way, with no ethic. In France, being a chef or a waiter is something in which people take pride. Here, it is seen as a dead end and a last resort. Tourism is Scotland's biggest industry. Those who work in it should be proud of their jobs and careers. Hotel-keeping is a hands-on trade. Success is achieved in the kitchen, the reception and the dining room. We may laugh at Americans for saying, "Have a nice day" or, "Missing you already" before one has left the room, but they know that he who pays the piper calls the tune. Scotland's tourist trade must attract high-quality applicants who can be trained to give excellent service.

I start by commenting on Jamie Stone's reference to the Earl of Selkirk and the Selkirk settlers. The Red River settlement founded Winnipeg, which is today larger than Edinburgh. I am delighted to support Jamie Stone in this debate. The Highland clearances were a matter of great regret to the people of Scotland. We must never forget the suffering caused to so many innocents. We must learn from history. In the latter half of the 18 th century, there was an enormous population explosion, which reached its peak in the 1830s. It was caused mainly by the virtual eradication of smallpox through injection and the introduction of potatoes, which grew easily in poor soil and provided a basic diet. A social revolution was created in the Highlands and Islands by Government legislation that ended heritable jurisdiction. Formerly, the Scottish kings, without a standing army, had found it necessary to delegate authority to subjects who in return were granted large areas of land. Consequently, the power of a chief lay in the number of men whom he could call to arms. The Heritable Jurisdictions (Scotland) Act 1746 ended that prerogative and landlords, as real money replaced barter, began to make their land commercial through improvement and charging higher rent. The old system of township farming, in which rent was paid mostly in kind, became increasingly uneconomic. Ever-expanding families tried to scrape a living from the land, but they failed. The little island of Inch Kenneth, off Mull, was ploughed from shore to shore, but still there was not enough food to keep the inhabitants alive. The problem was exacerbated when the Highland regiments raised to fight in Europe were disbanded and all the men came home. The Government tried to help by giving grants towards employment. Many dry-stone dykes remain as evidence of that work. The failure in 1820 of the kelp industry, in which seaweed was burned to make fertiliser, was another blow to the Highland economy. Worst of all, in the 1840s the potato crop failed. John Ramsay at Kildalton in Islay, where people were on the verge of starvation, paid for a steamer to take some of them to Canada. Later, when he  went to visit them, he found them in a prosperous condition. At the time, there was no form of national assistance other than parish relief. There was a huge difference, which still exists, between the native Gael culture and its English equivalent. I quote John Robertson, a southern journalist, who wrote in Glasgow's The National : "A Highlander's soul lives in the clan and family traditions of the past. The legends of the Ingle, the songs of the Bards. The master idea of the English mind, the idea of business, has not dawned on his soul, has not developed its peculiar virtues in his character. He is loyal, but not punctual, honest but not systematic. The iron genius of economical improvements he knows not and he heeds not." Those are wonderful virtues, which still exist in the Highlands and Islands and which Scotland would lose at its peril. I urge the Scottish Executive to promote and protect the Highland culture and to prevent another Highland clearance by aiding the inhabitants, who now face tremendous difficulties in a UK, which, we are told, is prosperous. Many people emigrated of their own accord. Flora MacDonald, saviour of Bonnie Prince Charlie, is a case in point. Some landlords forced whole communities to go. The poor Rosses of Strathcarron at Easter Ross were bloodily evicted, and Strathnaver and the lands of the Countess of Sutherland were cleared by her husband, the notorious Marquess of Stafford. He, incidentally, has one thing in common with Jamie Stone, in that he too was a Liberal MP for Caithness and Sutherland. His two agents—James Loch, another Liberal MP, and Patrick Sellar—cruelly and savagely carried out evictions. When confronted by an old lady of 90 who refused to leave her dwelling, Patrick Sellar is reputed to have said, "Burn it down, the old witch has lived too long." It is worth noting that the so-called progressive policy of the liberal Whig party in those days actively encouraged the clearances, while Conservatives at the time were fighting to keep people in the glens to preserve the rural population and to maintain a source of remarkable foot soldiers who had always served the British Army with extraordinary valour. While we are rightly horrified by the clearances, and while honouring the courage of the men and women who opposed them—such as the Skye people in the battle of the braes—we must pay tribute to the enterprise and initiative of those who emigrated of their own free will and improved the lot of their families. They have since strengthened Scotland's links overseas to the benefit of us all. It is in that positive spirit that we should encourage a visitor centre in the Highlands, which will welcome people to renew contacts with their ancestors' homeland. I support Mr MacLeod and wish his venture every success.

This morning I drove down from Argyll. People in the Dalmally area are still angry and saddened at the departure of their fine doctor, who resigned recently because, despite total support, she was not allowed a part-time partner in one of the largest and most demanding areas for any doctor in Scotland. Until now there has always been a resident doctor in the Dalmally area. For the first time, with a new Scottish Parliament, under a Lib-Lab Administration, the people in that area do not have a doctor. They are now served by various locums. Although I am sure that those doctors are very good, does not the minister realise how important a resident local doctor is to rural communities? Is she not aware of the enormous importance of the close doctor-patient relationship, especially to sick people?

I am very happy to work with this Parliament now that it is here to try to make it a success.

I do not have time for that. The problem that I have just described is one of  many examples of the Executive's mismanagement and its obsession with central control. People do not understand why they are being short-changed on health, especially after the most recent underspend. Waiting lists are rising, and people are waiting longer to get on the lists. There are fewer nurses and hospital beds but there is more red tape in hospitals. Labour has taken decision making away from rural GPs. People all over Scotland feel let down and are fed up with the time that they have to wait for operations. The Conservative party believes that the time that people have to wait is the most important indicator for the NHS, not the length of the waiting list. Despite £50 million of extra spending, the number of people waiting to get on to the waiting list has increased. We should not have to wait for decent health care in Scotland. We should reduce unnecessary bureaucracy, invest in local health care and give health service professionals greater freedom to deliver health care. They are the people who know best what patients need and how to deliver it. We believe in saving money on bureaucracy and spending it on patient care. Scotland needs a fair formula, which takes into account the different health needs of different areas. Funds should be devolved to a local level, so that local GPs have greater influence in providing the health services that they have identified as being the most important to their patients. I agree with Irene Oldfather. It is ironic that this year €1,000 million in subsidies will be handed to Europe's tobacco growers to produce a product, which is known to kill people. That at a time when Scottish scallop fishermen are tied up, unable to fish and without compensation because small amounts of toxin have been found in the shellfish. I urge the minister to consider the plight of those fishermen and to come up with an end product test that would protect public health while allowing innocent people to make a living. I also ask the minister to be aware of the way in which press releases and television exposure—often based on rumour—about possible dangers to health from food can damage our farming and fishing industries, which are usually blameless. The protection of public health is paramount, but we do not require a witch hunt by the new Food Standards Agency into excellent Scottish food products, which people in Scotland and all over the world have eaten happily for centuries.

rose—

Transport is a key issue for people in the Highlands and Islands and one that has been at boiling point for the past three years, during which  time fuel prices have risen to extraordinary levels, earning the Government not only a bad reputation, but extremely large tax revenues. People in the remote areas that I represent have had to pay higher bills than anybody and more tax each time they fill up the car or take a bus or ferry. Why, they ask, is more of the money not being put back into the roads and infrastructure in the Highlands? Instead, people are left with minimum maintenance, temporary bridges and potholes, which lead to further high repair bills. I urge the Scottish Executive to review road infrastructure in the Highlands and to spend more of the oil revenues on roads in Scotland. Only 10 per cent of the £3.6 billion that Scotland's motorists pay in tax is spent on roads. That is a travesty. In 1995, £142 million was spent on trunk roads. Under this Government, equivalent spending in 1999 was £35 million. In 2000, it will be only £18 million. The only person who will be happy is Robin Harper, who should be dancing up and down. Spending on roads in Scotland is £34 a head, while in England it is £94 a head. I will try to be positive. In the policy memorandum and consultation document, mention is made of a statutory integrated transport authority for the Highlands and Islands. I note that the Scottish Executive has now appointed Deloitte & Touche to examine the feasibility of such a body. It is a good idea. It would devolve power and responsibility to local areas, where local problems could be solved by local solutions. It fits perfectly with the spirit of devolution and will create jobs in Highland areas, where they are much needed. Such a body would take responsibility for transport functions now managed by the Scottish Executive. The authority's area would match that of Highlands and Islands Enterprise, therefore including the Isle of Arran and the Cumbraes. I am sure that a more locally based body, enlightened by being more aware of the local environment, would greatly improve and bring innovative ideas to Highland transport, which is the subject of so much complaint at the moment. I am glad that consultations will be held soon, which will allow local organisations to have input into the proposals.

Such a body would need more than one centre, but a town such as Oban, with its substantial ferry links and railhead, would seem an excellent candidate to play a big part in any Highlands and Islands transport authority.

Yes.

I certainly agree. I was using Oban as an example of somewhere that could benefit.

Yes, I will. It is disappointing that no provision has been made for such an authority in the bill, but I hope that the Deloitte & Touche study will be favourable and that further primary legislation will be enacted to create a new transport authority for the Highlands and Islands.

I welcome the debate and the opportunity once again to pledge Scottish Conservatives' support for Gaelic and to urge the Scottish Executive to do all that it can to ensure that the Gaelic and Scots languages really benefit from the  extra funding from Europe. That funding must be seen as a bonus to existing funding. We must take advantage of the European year of languages. I have never doubted Alasdair Morrison's commitment to Gaelic. Indeed, the Scottish Parliament information centre's research note of 2 March states that, shortly after his appointment, the Deputy Minister for Highlands and Islands and Gaelic said that secure status for Gaelic was the Executive's main priority. I was a little surprised, therefore, to read in The Scotsman yesterday that our First Minister refutes that statement and does not appear to want that status at all. Perhaps the minister can clear up the confusion for the benefit of the chamber and the 70,000 Scottish Gaelic speakers, many of whom live in his constituency. I am sure that he will be asked to clear up the matter when he attends tomorrow's Gaelic conference in Nairn. Recently, I visited Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, the excellent Gaelic college in Skye whose extension was opened by our party's chief whip, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton. That establishment offers teacher training to Gaelic teachers. Along with Lews Castle College in Lewis, it forms the nucleus of higher Gaelic education. Both establishments are essential parts of the new University of the Highlands and Islands, which was started by Michael Forsyth. On 7 February, the Deputy Minister for Children and Education acknowledged the need to increase the number of Gaelic-medium teachers by 150 in the next seven years. I ask Alasdair Morrison to reaffirm that commitment and to give as much support as possible to giving parents the choice to educate their children in the Gaelic medium if they so wish. Education is the key to sustaining the impetus that has been on-going for nearly 20 years. In the Basque country, teachers are taken out of schools and coached in the Basque language until they become fluent. That could be done in Scotland with Gaelic. We are still awaiting an announcement on a fast-track teaching solution for Gaelic. That is in the pipeline and I urge the Executive to back it up when the Gaelic playgroups association eventually produces it. I urge the Executive to increase funding for local authorities to enable them to employ more nursery nurses and pre-school staff who can run Gaelic nurseries, thus ensuring that children can enter school fluent in the language. I urge the Executive also to continue to support Gaelic broadcasting and the much-mentioned Gaelic unit in Tollcross Primary School. That would be a sign of the confidence of our capital city in our Highland heritage.

Is the First Minister aware of the scale of the collapse of hill-farming and crofting incomes since his party came to power? What comfort can he give to crofters and farmers in the Highlands and Islands that the less favoured areas scheme will be enough to sustain agriculture in the hills in future?

Any situation in which there are 13 principals is bound to give rise to some disagreements, but I do not think that we should allow disagreements to cloud the final goal in this case. The university of the Highlands and Islands is a bold and distinctive educational initiative. I am proud of the fact that it was Michael Forsyth, the former Secretary of State for Scotland, who got the project going. The benefits of UHI are clear to see. The UHI development—based on a collaboration of communities, individuals and organisations operating locally—has grown over the past five years, creating employment and new prospects for all who live in the region. In an area that is a fifth of the size of the UK, UHI supports lifelong learning opportunities through the development of personal and professional skills. UHI is unique in drawing on and supporting the region's cultural and environmental heritage, serving as a major catalyst for economic and social regeneration. UHI brings enhanced educational opportunities to 500,000 people throughout the region, as well as serving the wider needs of local communities. The UHI concept has captured the imaginations of many people, both in the region it is to serve  and well beyond its bounds. It is being talked about by people on the far side of the world. The mission of UHI—to establish for the Highlands and Islands of Scotland a collegiate university that will reach the highest standards—is an achievable goal. However, that goal is being placed at risk. If the people of the Highlands and Islands are to get a university of the highest standards, comparable to the world's best, higher education status must be conferred on the institution. It would not be an underestimation to suggest that the credibility of the whole operation is at stake over that decision. UHI has passed with flying colours all the tests to which it was put by the Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education. Indeed, the UHI network has been shown to possess the appropriate qualities systems and the necessary standards to be granted full university status. Therefore, I call on Henry McLeish and his famous deputy, Alasdair Morrison, to grant UHI full university status in the higher education structure.

In the light of the £135 million underspend, does the minister understand the anger and frustration felt by members of the rural communities surrounding Dalmally in Argyll and Bute, whose doctor resigned because she could not get a part-time partner, which would have cost  about £20,000? Will he give a reason as to why that happened?

Understanding is going to—

Will the Executive make the point to the Treasury that areas of the Highlands and Islands  are paying not only the highest fuel prices in the world, but extra in VAT on their fuel bills? That means higher taxation in areas where people can least afford it.

On local markets, does Rhoda Grant agree that a lot of hill farms produce store lambs and store cattle, which are not finished products? That  is an argument against organic production, because unless one can find certified organic farms to buy them, they might as well not be organic in the first place. What would she do about stock sold as stores? How would she get it into the food chain?

Will the Executive give some assurance that the six and 12-mile limits will not fall when the derogation comes to an end in 2002?

It must be obvious to anyone who has sat for hours in a traffic tailback on the outskirts of London, as I did recently, that discrimination against the private motorist by continual hikes in fuel tax is not working even in urban areas. In rural areas such as Argyll, the western islands and elsewhere in rural Scotland, the option of a viable public transport system to replace the private car is simply not available at a reasonable cost. When Labour came to power, the situation was bad enough as petrol cost 58p a litre, but within three years it has risen to more than 80p a litre and, in some remote areas, to 90p a litre. That is a rise of 40 per cent. It has compounded difficulties in the rural economy, all sectors of which are under severe threat. It has loaded the dice even further and has caused distress by imposing the highest fuel charges in areas that can afford them least. The average Scots driver has been paying the  equivalent of 21/2p more in basic income tax since Labour came to power. There is a double whammy, as the roads are getting worse, which causes extra damage to cars and therefore higher garage bills. We pay higher taxes for a poorer service. Out of the £2 billion that is paid in tax by Scotland's motorists, only £244 million—14 per cent of the total—is spent on roads and public transport. Scotland's road hauliers pay a vehicle excise tax that is 11 times as much as is paid in France. Where is the harmonisation in that? The average price of diesel in Scotland is 72p, compared to an EU average of 42p. The economic impact on rural fuel stations is obvious and devastating. People cannot find stations at which to buy their fuel. At the present rate of closures, up to half of Scotland's fuel stations could close within five years. The main tourism competitor of the Highlands and Islands is Ireland, but every time a tourist fills up his tank in the Highlands, he pays on average between £16 and £18 more than he would in Ireland. How are we meant to compete? Argyll alone loses £10 million per annum—5 per cent—because of the failure of tourists to return, a failure that is caused by the price of fuel. In the Highlands and Islands, motorists pay £88 million more in driving costs than do motorists in the central belt. On average, 15p more a litre is paid up there than is paid in Edinburgh. Highlanders are thereby paying a great deal more in VAT, which proves that there are already different tax areas in the UK. Surely it is time to find a simple method of giving a fuel discount in rural areas. That could be done by carefully studying the map of Scotland and ascribing a different tax code to rural petrol stations, to reduce the current unavoidable tax penalty on users in rural areas. Tourism all over Scotland would be given a boost. The number of private car tourists has dropped considerably due to high fuel costs. Those high-spending tourists pass through urban areas on their way to rural areas. In particular, foreign users must be encouraged, as driving a private car in the Highlands remains a great pleasure, which should be promoted. Most small rural businesses, which are being crippled by the unavoidable overheads of travel costs and transportation, would be boosted by such a measure and would create more employment. I am interested in Alasdair Morrison's good idea about LPG, which would be helpful to local residents, as long as changing to such a system was affordable. However, we must also get rid of the rural disparity of which Murray Tosh spoke. Why does the Government not use joined-up thinking to give rural areas a fuel advantage? Such measures have been successful in America and Canada. I say to the Executive: please take  note and please stop the paradox of the poorest areas of Scotland making the largest fuel tax contributions.

I would like to speak about child care and early learning from the Gaelic angle, which was mentioned by Jamie Stone. Many of the 6,000 languages that are spoken worldwide are in danger of disappearing. Incredibly, we are losing one every two weeks, on average. Gaelic, our historic Scottish tongue, is also under threat. The problem is that, although the language is taught in schools, most children revert to English in the playground, and not many homes now converse in Gaelic. The television is also mainly in English so, not surprisingly, English is predominant. Latin, a dead language, is a gateway to western European literature, history, art and culture. In the same way, Gaelic is a key to a glorious Scottish heritage of history, literature, poetry and song, which is priceless. The best way in which to teach children is from as early an age as possible. Parents should be able to choose such education  for their children, and the Government must give its support to that. It is reckoned that to bring a child to fluency in Gaelic takes an average of some 2,000 hours of learning from the ages of two to five. A new fast-track method is being developed by the Gaelic playgroups association. That method is undergoing sea trials at the moment and could bring the time needed to achieve fluency down to 1,000 or even 500 hours. The details of the scheme will be announced soon. I urge the Executive to put its weight behind such an exciting development. Funding is desperately needed to develop the fast-track system, which will have a big social inclusion aspect. The time taken to become fluent in Gaelic could be cut to perhaps even a quarter of the time now taken and the method could be used by children to learn other languages as well. Importantly, it will enable Scotland to become a leader in the field and to export the system to other countries, but funding is the key. The lack of teaching and nursery staff holds everything back. There is a shortage of nursery nurses and pre-school staff and too few development staff to cater for groups that want to set up in Scotland. In some local authorities such as Argyll and Bute, funding is very low and existing primary schools are already under threat of closure. The fast-track system would enable children to enter school already fluent in Gaelic at the age of five, whereas at the moment their first year at school is often spent learning the language. In New Zealand, where the Maori population is under 10 per cent of the total population, all children learn Maori at school. In the Basque country, 500 new teachers a year are being trained in the language and teachers are being taken out of school to learn Basque, for 40 hours a week for one or two years, until they are fluent in it. That allows the new system to develop more quickly. The Basque Government provides a lot of funding for that. The benefits to children of becoming bilingual at a very early age are well known. They are far more able to learn other languages. An announcement will be made later this year on the fast-track solution for Gaelic. I urge the Executive to back it to the hilt. If the scheme is successful, it will lead to a generation of children being proud of and confident in Gaelic. They will never lose it and will ensure an expansion of the Gaelic language and culture that will greatly enrich our Scottish heritage worldwide.

As a member of the party with the best history of support for Gaelic, I reaffirm the Conservatives' support for Gaelic language and culture, now and in the future. Although we entirely support the sentiments that are expressed in amendment 34, we have considerable difficulty with some of the points that it contains. We wish that we had been consulted at an earlier stage on something so important that required our support. We are particularly worried by the wording in subsection (3) of the proposed new section, which states: "Where education in Gaelic is provided under subsection (1) or (2) above, the education authority shall provide adequate resources, support and advisory services in Gaelic to a standard comparable to those available for education in English." Because more is spent per capita on Gaelic-medium education, that provision might allow a local authority to reduce the amount spent on Gaelic, which would be worse for Gaelic provision rather than better. That would be self-defeating and disastrous. Furthermore, there is a risk that the wording in subsection (5)—on ascertaining what "reasonable demand" is—would take it for granted that a reasonable demand must exist, which might leave an authority under pressure to take finance from English-medium education. Already many small primary schools are under threat of closure, and the bias in the amendment might worsen that situation. We are well aware of the advantages of children being bilingual, thanks to Gaelic-medium education. We want to promote Gaelic education and culture further. What has happened to the development of the Gaelic school at Tollcross, here in the capital? Where is the dedicated Gaelic television channel? Both those things were promoted in Alasdair Morrison's speech on 2 March but, as far as I know, nothing has happened. Whatever happens today, this party has always been, and will always be, genuinely committed to helping Gaelic. We will consider the possibility of introducing a member's bill with cross-party support to achieve that end in the future.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to avert a strike by officers of Caledonian MacBrayne and what contingency plans it has to continue lifeline services to the Scottish west coast islands affected and to ensure that tourist traffic can reach these islands especially over the Whitsun weekend.

I am absolutely delighted to hear that news, which has averted a crisis. I congratulate those involved on reaching agreement. However, is the minister aware that my constituents in the Highlands and Islands are now extremely concerned that their lifeline services are under threat of disruption? Can she give an assurance that lifeline services will continue to operate should strike action take place in the future and that the Administration will continue to monitor the situation? Would she comment on the recent television news reports that airports in the Highlands and Islands may soon suffer strike action?

If he is so keen on rural schools, why is he so keen to close them?

rose—

Although the principles about child care and education on page 19 of the document are wonderful, six rural schools are being closed in Argyll and Bute. Does Rhoda Grant accept that primary schools underpin the rural communities that the document is striving to support?

I like the thistle on the front cover of "Rural Scotland: A New Approach", but I remind the minister that weeds and tares are normally a problem—especially to farmers in the Highlands. I have read this document from cover to cover. While I agree with its aims, it will have been a waste of time and money if actions are not taken immediately to stop another Highland clearance. Those who live in the country should have a quality of life that at least approaches that of their urban counterparts. As usual, I am speaking from a Highlands and Islands point of view. At a time when we are continually reminded of the UK's wealth and prosperity, the people in the Highlands and Islands must wonder whether they are on the same planet, let alone in the same nation. Agriculture, especially sheep and cattle farming, is the  cornerstone of the Highland economy. A recent survey by the National Farmers Union of Scotland found that two thirds of farmers' children do not want to carry on in farming as they can see no future in the industry. That is hardly surprising at the moment. Those aware of economics watch with a mixture of incredulity and polite sympathy the struggle that their parents face to put plates of food on the table. Given the chance, the majority would follow in their parents' footsteps, but with prices plummeting and costs spiralling they do not see the point. The special skills that are passed from parent to child will soon disappear, especially the skills of handling livestock that have been fostered by generations. We will also lose the dogs that are specially trained to make the job possible and whose handling is a special skill. We lose those practical skills at our peril. It is not the fault of farmers. This crisis has been brought about by continuing rafts of unnecessary regulations, which have resulted in a vast drop in farm incomes and reams of extra paperwork that greatly lengthens the farmer's day as he struggles to understand it. Diversification schemes such as renewable energy and tourism-related activities are good, but hill farmers mostly have huge overdrafts and cannot find the capital that is required. In some cases, they lose their money thanks to extraordinary governmental bungling, as in the recent agricultural business improvement scheme fiasco. There is nothing wrong with the product, and a way must be found of transferring a proportion of the added value from the supermarket shelf back to the producer. The Government must halt now the extra legislation that is not imposed elsewhere in Europe. The Government must either drop or pay for the meat hygiene inspection charges. It must call on the Brownies of Westminster to match accessible European aid and drop interest rates. The fishing industry, which is vital to jobs in rural Scotland, gets no help at all. The Scottish Fishermen's Federation said recently that the Government had contributed a great deal of rhetoric and a modest amount of financial incentive.

Hang on. Last May, even that modest contribution was withdrawn, apparently to relieve a funding crisis at the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. That money was for safety measures. While our taxpayers contribute to the modernisation of the French, Spanish, Portuguese and Irish fishing fleets, the Executive refuses to access available EU funding for our own rapidly aging fleet. Our valuable shellfish and white fish are at rock-bottom  prices while we are still importing £485 million of fish per annum. Although I am glad that the final restrictions banning scallop fishing in certain areas were lifted yesterday, the ban that we were originally told might last a month lasted a year and caused misery in rural areas, with no compensation of any sort. I am pleased that freshwater fishing is mentioned on page 48, as that sector would contribute greatly to the rural economy all over Scotland if it were helped. If the Executive really wants to help rural Scotland, it must lower fuel prices significantly—at least 20p a gallon. Liquefied petroleum gas may be an alternative in future, but at the moment high fuel prices are ruining everything. Last, I wish to talk about information technology. Rural populations do not become internet fluent overnight without help. If we want entrepreneurs to drive rural economies and act as capitalists, better infrastructure and incentives are needed.

Will the minister give way?

I welcome the minister's statement, and, in particular, what he said about the disposal of fish farm waste, fallowing and a code of practice. However, given that salmon farmers are required to match at least 50 per cent of the grants for which they apply and that the compulsory slaughter of healthy fish without compensation continues to undermine investor confidence, how does the minister suggest that the small independent salmon farmer who is already struggling because of the loss of his stock can convince his bank manager to advance him any funds? Furthermore, as the industry has suffered £37 million of losses and has been rendered uninsurable by Executive control measures, how does the minister justify £9 million of aid, which requires match funding by the salmon farmer, as a substitute for a meaningful compensation scheme, which would be eligible for support from the EU? Why has the Executive not already applied to the EU for funds that are available for support of the policy of eradicating the disease? Lastly, given that the European convention on human rights is enshrined in Scots law under the Scotland Act 1998, how does the minister justify the policy of compulsory slaughter of healthy fish without compensation, which seems to deny the right of citizens to the peaceful enjoyment of their possessions?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. If there is so much time left, why was I not allowed an extra minute to make an important point? My friend John Farquhar Munro—

To answer John Home Robertson's jibe, every party has a few landlocked MPs hidden in its cupboards. I congratulate Tavish Scott on introducing this extremely sensible amendment bill, which will go a long way to righting an old wrong and is a big step towards creating greater harmony between traditional fishermen and aquaculturists in Scotland. Quite naturally, there is always opposition when people are no longer allowed to practise what they have deemed to be their right for centuries. When  a new technology appears that is beneficial to the perpetrators and, in this case, also to stocks of wild shellfish in surrounding areas, sometimes it cuts across the traditional rights and practices that have been adhered to in the past. Recently, we have all been made aware of the importance of the scallop industry, because of the unfortunate occurrences of amnesic shellfish poisoning that have plagued the industry for more than a year. The losses to fishermen and fish farmers have been enormous and they have received no compensation whatsoever. Although the restrictions in many areas have now been lifted, there is the strong possibility that those toxic algal blooms will appear again as the water warms. I call again for a different testing regime that will allow processors to attempt to rid the shellfish of any toxins before they go on to the market and into the food chain. At least that would keep the industry alive and allow the boats to go on fishing. Regarding the explanation of and reasons for the amendment bill, I do not intend to repeat what has been said today and written in the excellent and concise research note produced by the Scottish Parliament information centre. I only wish to add that I myself was once a part-time lobster fisherman on the island of Coll, and I know how pleased the small coastal fishermen will be with the bill. I have one caveat. I do not consider it absolutely necessary that an implement requires to be specified in an order. Any implement that does not cause damage, or is used in such a way as not to cause damage, should be permitted, as that would allow for implements not yet invented to be permitted without the necessity of producing a new order. I am also slightly unhappy about the definition of use. The meaning of the words "not to" is unclear. In my view, that part of section 1 should read either "so used in a manner as to not", or "so used as shall be calculated not to". The first test is absolute, so that whatever the intention of the implement, if it causes damage, an offence is committed. The second gives a defence that there was no intention to cause damage. In the interests of justice, the second definition seems better, because the effects of the implement cannot be seen once it disappears towards the bottom of the sea, where it may cause damage when it lands. I will expand more on the need for greater harmony between aquaculturists of all descriptions and traditional fishermen, as undoubtedly there are other areas of conflict, which, in my view, could be at least lessened by more diplomatic approaches. Fishermen object to several orders in principle, as they do not like the idea of ownership of the sea bed being put into private hands, unless  for scientific, conservation or experimental purposes in the interests of the fishing industry. The argument that money could be generated from a cordoned-off area has always been countered by the claim that livelihoods had also been made from the same areas when they were open to traditional fishing methods, which is a difficult case to argue or prove. Another bone of contention is that the areas protected by several orders often block off large areas to traditional fishermen, who have to travel across those areas to reach fishing grounds in which they can fish legally. That means added expenditure of time and fuel for creel fishermen as well as for trawlers and dredgers. Public inquiries were held in Crinan and Portree, where it was stated that the applicant for the several order would have no objection to creel fishing, as the catching of predators such as lobsters and crabs would be beneficial to the scallop beds. Under the chairmanship of Lord MacKay of Ardbrecknish, the Seafish Industry Authority actively encouraged creel fishing on its site in Loch Ewe. Once this amending bill is passed, any future objections will have to be based on trawling and dredging methodology. It would be inappropriate to try to secure a several order on ground that was fished heavily by those methods, as that would meet with great opposition from fishermen. To avoid conflict between fishermen and growers, I believe that there should be a code of practice and a better consultation system, as the present system is distinctly inadequate and can prove expensive to objectors and applicants alike. At present, when objections are received and a public inquiry is mounted, if the recorder finds that the objections were frivolous, the objectors carry the costs. Objectors and applicants should be invited to try to resolve matters at meetings. Consultation between the interested parties is the key. The fishermen can suggest alternative sites, a solution that has been achieved quite often between fishermen and sea cage salmon farmers in recent years. I will give an example of good practice. A recent applicant for a several order in the summer isles consulted the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association for advice. The result of that diplomacy may have meant support for the applicant from the very people who would most certainly have objected under normal circumstances. Good sites for salmon growers can be found in ground that is unsuitable for trawlers. The inland sheltered sea lochs of Scotland's west coast will doubtless have more several orders granted without objection as a result of this amending bill, and other types of acquaculture, such as salmon farming, flourish in those sea  lochs. I will spend a moment on that point, as it is important. The Scottish farmed salmon industry is the third largest in the world. Not only does it support a large number of jobs in remote rural areas, but the salmon produced are noted worldwide as being of the highest quality. France has given that product the label rouge, which is the highest acclaim for a food product and is not given lightly. Unfortunately, conflict has arisen over suspected damage to the wild salmon and sea trout runs, which are of great importance to the angling fraternity and to the Scottish tourist industry.

I am sure that the Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs is aware of the recent impact survey of the western isles, which showed that sport fishing brought some £5 million a year into the local economy and supported 260 jobs in that area alone. In order to have a fishery, there must be a reliable surplus of the fish stock that is being exploited. Stocks of salmon and sea trout have dwindled and declined dangerously. It would be tragic if Scotland lost this wild sea trout and salmon fishery, which has been so valuable and important for centuries.

May I have one more minute, please?

I will wind up. The contentious matter seems to be that there could be large escapes of farm stock that is infected with the sea louse that harms wild migrating salmon and sea trout smolts. That would spread disease and harm the gene pool of wild stock if interbreeding occurred. The effluent that falls from sea cages could cause pollution. I have been made very aware of those problems in the Highlands and Islands and I am sure that the minister will acknowledge the problem. I would also like to know how near is the tripartite group to solving the problems between the interested parties.

I congratulate the minister on his statement. I welcome the level playing field, which puts local authority child care under the same regulation as for other providers. I am glad that there is to be only limited regulation of the care of older children, because more regulation would discourage provision in an area in which more and more diverse provision is required. I ask the minister to clarify the roles of HMI and the proposed commission for the regulation of  care. Some providers are already concerned about inspection by multiple agencies. It is not clear from the minister's statement how he will prevent that overlap from becoming excessively bureaucratic. I am pleased that the minister has not given in to demands to nanny the nannying profession. Parental choice and judgment are surely most important in that respect and should never be undermined.

Anyone who has sped like a bird on the wing over the bridge to Skye will tell you that there is nothing quite like the Cuillins. They epitomise the jagged history of the Highlands in timeless fashion, and short of there being a superquarry, as might happen over the water on the Isle of Harris, there is absolutely no chance of our losing them. They will remain the great guardians of Scotland's north-west approaches, links with man's prehistoric past, witnesses of countless  generations that have melted back into the earth, stoical, steadfast bastions that dwarf human vanity and delusion. "beyond hardship, wrong, tyranny, distress,  beyond misery, despair, hatred, treachery,  beyond guilt and defilement; watchful,  heroic, the Cuillin is seen rising on the other side of sorrow." That was what Sorley MacLean said about them. They were there before man's existence and they will be there long after man has gone. So why all the fuss about who owns these monoliths? The deeds should be investigated, but it is not the business of any individual or group of individuals in a free, democratic country to tell anyone what they should do with the land that they own and what they should do with the money once they have it and once the Treasury has taken its share. No one needs to prop up the Cuillins. What matters is that the public have reasonable access to them. Those who preach that the Cuillins should be bought for the nation should tell us whence the money will come to buy them.

I do not have time to give way. Presumably the money that would be needed would come from the same purse that provides for schools and hospitals. Is it really a good idea to use taxpayers' money to buy exotic mountain ranges? Perhaps those people believe that all property is theft, in which case they should stand up now and tell us their alternative plans to the property-owning democracy in which we live. Do they think that land should simply be confiscated, Mugabe-style and, if so, where does the appropriation stop?

I am not talking about planning permission. I am talking about title deeds of ownership. It would be a ridiculous waste of public funds if £10 million or even £1 million were spent buying for Scotland what is already Scotland's. It would not change the lives of the Sgitheanaichs, the tourists, the walkers or the climbers. Plenty of things need to be done in the Highlands for which funding is really needed. Jobs and livelihoods are what matter to the people who live there, not who nominally owns great tracts of rock, peat and heather. A European subsidy  based on hectarage, rather than the old livestock headage-based system, would bring new ideas and more employment back to islands such as Skye. Then we would fill village schools and rural post offices again. That is what matters most, and whoever owns the Cuillins is insignificant—as long as it is not a MacDonald, of course.

rose—

rose—

I thank the minister for his statement. Does he agree with the principles of the common agricultural policy? In particular, does he agree with article 39(b) of the Treaty of Rome, which states: "to ensure thereby a fair standard of living for the agricultural population, particularly by raising the individual earnings of persons engaged in agriculture"? Does the minister view £1,700 a year as a fair standard of living? Does he view Scottish agriculture as one of the dying communities that he has no intention of propping up?

Is the member aware of the tragic circumstances faced by the farmers of Islay, where the creamery has closed? They have no means of selling their milk other than by transporting it off the island. Is he also aware that Islay cheese is famous throughout the world—

—not only for being delicious, but for its Viagra-like qualities?

Will the member give way?

rose—

I just want to point out to Fergus  that Loch Mhor is the deepest loch.

Is it? Oh. I beg your pardon.

I look forward to the debate on national parks, but Scottish Conservatives would like more information on the effects of a national park on those living in the area and on their livelihoods and pursuits. We need to know about the schemes that are likely to be implemented and from where the funding will come before we commit ourselves to the idea. If the new Loch Lomond national park goes ahead, it is vital that it includes the Argyll forest park, which is undoubtedly the jewel in the crown of the area. Just the other morning, on a glorious, dead still spring day, I drove up the west side of Loch Eck. What I saw made me stop the car, leap out and reach for the camera. The steep mountains on the far side were reflected so perfectly in the mirror-calm water of this deep, narrow loch that it was impossible to tell the difference between the reality and the reflection. People can keep their Great Lakes and their Grand Canyon—as far as I am concerned, there is nowhere like Argyll. Argyll forest park was the first forest park in Great Britain; it was established in 1935 by Sir John Stirling-Maxwell. Loch Eck and Loch Lomond have the same ecosystem, which is unique in Britain. They are like peas in a pod—one bigger, one smaller—except, in my opinion, Loch Eck is the greater beauty. To leave that area out of the national park would lessen the impact of the combined area and would diminish the park as a whole. Argyll forest park and Queen Elizabeth forest park are owned by the state and are under the same management. It would be tragedy if the southern end of that coherent entity were to be sold off because it did not have park protection. The area will, I hope, benefit from £1 million of extra investment—what a boost that will give south Argyll, which is reeling from the effects of agricultural recession and dwindling tourism, mainly due to high fuel prices. New investment would be a shot in the arm for local industry. Some months ago, I spoke in the debate secured by Duncan Hamilton on Dunoon and the Cowal peninsula. The Argyll forest park would be accessed at the southern end, through Dunoon. As I have said before, Dunoon should be seen as one of the main gateways to the Highlands, reached by an efficient ferry service from Gourock. Imagine the value to Dunoon of so many extra visitors. Such a step would also relieve the traffic pressures on the A82 at Balloch and Loch Lomondside, and make a new, magical journey for the traveller who wants to smell the tangle of the isles.  We are talking about opening up a golden opportunity for this beautiful area of Scotland to become firmly established for centuries as one of Scotland's wonders. It would surely be blinkered thinking to allow that opportunity to slide because of short-sighted cost implications. We have a genuine chance to change the course of the region's history, to reverse decline, to combine environmental protection with economic growth and to bring an area that has become a backwater back into the main stream.

In light of the enormous war chest of some £30 billion, which the UK Treasury has built up through EU budget rebates as a result of the excellent Fontainebleau agreement, will the Executive ask Gordon Brown for a few million pounds, so that EU money for Scotland's hard-pressed agriculture sector can be accessed?

I welcome the opportunity to express my party's thanks and congratulations to the Executive on introducing the Census (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill. I wish to repeat how glad we are that Mr Wallace saw fit to agree to a question on religion—that is a good case of "Jim'll Fix It"—otherwise Scotland's reputation as a tolerant nation might have been questioned. It would have been the only country in the UK not to have a question on religion in the census. I am deeply grateful to the Commission for Racial Equality for its work towards that goal and for the legitimate request by representatives of the Muslim community for a question on religion. I am grateful to Brian Monteith for his motion and to members of other parties who signed that motion, which showed undoubted cross-party support. We are also grateful to all the individuals who wrote to their MSPs highlighting the need for such a question. Thankfully, they now have their reward. The question on religion is particularly important in Scotland. I hope that the consultation exercise provides for the inclusion of a question about the different denominations of Christianity, as a simple question on Christianity would not give us the information that is required so that we can care for the needs of our diverse population. The example of the western isles springs to mind—there are populations of Presbyterians, Free Presbyterians, Episcopalians and Roman Catholics. Some groups like ferries to sail on Sundays, while others do not; some wish fishing boats to be tied up at weekends, while others prefer to go to sea. All views must be respected, at least, and it is important to know which areas are populated by which denominations, so that decisions about service provision—particularly on the Sabbath—can be made that avoid offending people. As the spokesperson for the Commission for Racial Equality said, "It isn't simply a question of numbers. In order to ensure that service providers know the needs of ethnic minority people in Scotland we feel the question needs to be asked." As far as I know, the question proposed for England and Wales does not distinguish between different Christian denominations, whereas that proposed for Northern Ireland does. I believe that the latter would be the most sensible solution for Scotland. The question will supplement information gathered from the ethnic question and will assist in  the tailoring of public services to the needs of different communities. More specific statistics will help social research and therefore aid the prevention of discrimination, which is, after all, the aim of our Scottish Parliament, which actively promotes social inclusion and equality.

I commend Patricia Ferguson's motion, recognising International Women's Day. Despite its being only one day on which women are acknowledged, it is important to note that women are an integral component of society each and every day. International Women's Day represents an opportunity to draw attention to women's issues and to the progress being made towards women's equality. "International" means women in areas all over the world, especially those persecuted ladies in Afghanistan and Somalia. Today also provides the occasion to examine women's role in the workplace. The Scottish Parliament has dedicated itself to following the recommendations of the consultative steering group report, by endorsing equal opportunities for all. The Scottish Parliament has one of the highest proportions of women members in the world, has worked to become family friendly, and has established the Equal Opportunities Committee to scrutinise legislation. Nevertheless, it is equal opportunities that should be pursued, not positive discrimination. The Labour party has taken steps to guarantee gender balance. However, the only way in which it could accomplish that was by a system of quotas, subsequently known as the 50:50 option. The establishment of that policy assumes that there is an intrinsic difference between men and women, which can be solved only through contrived procedures, not through skill alone. While its goals are admirable, such a policy is inherently patronising towards women, insinuating that women need special privileges to achieve what men can achieve otherwise. We already have a qualified female work force capable of competing with their male counterparts for jobs.

I do not have time. Women want to earn positions based on merit, not on special privileges.

Attention is better focused on discrepancies between men and women in the workplace, such as pay inequality and inadequate child care provision. Quotas are not necessary, nor are they the answer. The Americans have taken a step in that  direction: they have done away with affirmative action in some states. In 1996, California voters chose to eliminate positive discrimination in employment, education and public contracting on the basis that it was reverse discrimination. The governor of Florida, Jeb Bush, announced plans to end affirmative action. Those state Governments no longer see personal characteristics such as gender, race, disability or religion as an integral factor in formulating policy, nor should the Scottish Parliament. Another issue facing women in the workplace is the glass ceiling. The phrase was coined in the media to describe the barriers against women gaining executive and upper-level positions. Margaret Thatcher, not noted for being held back, once said: "People think that at the top there isn't much room. They tend to think of it as an Everest. My message is that there is tons of room at the top." I believe that we should take note of that former Prime Minister's remarks. She achieved her post not through a handout, but through her own initiative and experience. Let us not perpetuate the myth that women cannot compete without special preferences. Let us embrace International Women's Day, not merely as an occasion to recognise women's achievements, but as a day when we can consider what can be done further to achieve equality. We cannot really honour International Women's Day until such a day is not needed.

Tapa leibh a Chinn Comhairle. Rinn ochd bliadhna deug de na Tòraidhean feum do-labhairt do Chànan nan Gàidheal. Presiding Officer, I was informing the Deputy Minister for Highlands and Islands and Gaelic that 18 years of Conservative Government were brilliant for Gaelic. I hope that, just for once, he will be good enough to acknowledge that, instead of lambasting the Tories as he normally does. As Brian Monteith has said, the situation that we inherited in 1979 was dire. He has given the figures—£12.5 million represented a 7,500 per cent increase on what had been invested before. We gave the original £8 million that kick-started a success story. An industry has developed in the Highlands and Islands, and along with many Gaelic television production companies has come an expansion into information technology provision. The Gaelic base, financed in many cases by work that has been generated by that £8 million, has allowed those companies to expand into editing, business, IT functions and technology jobs, many of which are based in homes throughout the islands. If those organisations have a firm base, they will feel more confident about undertaking new ventures. Protecting and promoting the great Gaelic language and culture means protecting and promoting the people from whom it comes. I was horrified to hear a prediction that the population of the western isles will decrease by 14 per cent over the next 10 years. That would be a disaster for Gaelic. The Government must do all that it can to support the fragile economy and reverse that worrying trend. Good investment in Gaelic is one way of doing that, but just to maintain the present number of Gaelic speakers, we need to increase the number of Gaelic students five times over. It is vital that we increase the level of investment in Gaelic education.  We need continued education in the Gaelic medium and a continuation of the grants that were started by the Conservative Administration for the making of Gaelic television programmes. I will go further and call for a dedicated Gaelic TV channel. Gaelic needs the chance to survive against the other strong cultures that enter our households through television. Far too many of today's Gaelic programmes do not begin until long after midnight. That is surely a waste of money, as so few people see them, especially the young people whom we are trying to encourage. We must never forget the wonderful work that is done by the Gaelic radio stations. We should ensure that BBC Gaelic radio can be picked up everywhere in Scotland. At the moment, there are some black spots where it cannot be heard very well. Encouragement of the young is vital. In Galway, Connemara, there are shops full of books written in Gaelic, which are bought and read in particular by the young. We should examine the success that the Irish have had in protecting their Gaelic and take note of their methods. We should also look to Wales, where Welsh was awarded equal validity with English in 1993. We should give Gaelic that kind of secure status in Scotland and give parents the right to have their children taught in Gaelic. In that way, we could establish a firm foundation for Gaelic within our society. There is a huge tradition of Gaelic poetry and song, which is history that we should be proud of and nurture. There are great poets from the past, such as Duncan Ban Macintyre of Argyll, whose eulogy to Ben Dorain will never be forgotten, and others, such as Alexander Macdonald from Dalallie in Moidart, who wrote the famous poem "The Birlinn of Clanranald". There was also William Ross from Skye, and the great Sorley Maclean, who sadly died in Taynuilt last year. We also have modern bands that do a great job for Gaelic, such as Capercaillie and that other wee band, Runrig, which is not doing too badly either, although heaven knows who buys its records. I cannot emphasise enough the importance of Gaelic. Gaelic is different and has bred different values. Things such as silent Sundays in Stornoway or guga hunting from Ness appear as peculiarities to us, but are quite normal to the inhabitants of those areas. The Parliament should respect local traditions. Traditions and traditional industries are vital and have helped to inspire our culture. The new industries will undoubtedly do so too, because culture stems from what a person hears, sees and does. At the beginning of this century, children were forbidden to speak Gaelic, their native language, in the school playground. Language is the basic fabric of our culture and we owe past generations  a debt. We can now repay that debt in part through our support for Gaelic. There are many Gaelic songs, for example, about waulking the tweed; I look forward to hearing a new Gaelic song on hacking the computer before too long. Let all parties in the Parliament work together for the benefit and future of Gaelic. Let us push for a dedicated Gaelic school at Tollcross, in our capital. If that school started with fewer than the 90 pupils who seem to be required, interest in the subject would soon increase that number. Such recognition of Gaelic in Edinburgh would further unite the highlands and lowlands of this fabulous country and give our young people a great sense of pride in their famous history.

I welcome the code, which is a good step in the right direction. When I asked my assistant for advice on a speech on the code of conduct, she said that I was probably the best example in the chamber of why a code of conduct is necessary. I do not know what she meant as I have always thought of myself as selfless, honest, open and highly accessible. But—

I thank Tommy Sheridan. I remember the horror after my maiden speech when a brown envelope was handed to me. That dread was tempered by finding no crisp notes other than a request for me to put my own notes inside it. Seriously, as one of the many here who are new to politics, I am very glad to have this parliamentary equivalent to "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" to dip into when I am worried about doing the right thing. I have discovered that we are not allowed to smoke in the chamber or offices, which is fine since it is bad for our health. I wonder whether the generous provision of a smoking room outside in the back courtyard is somebody's attempt to kill off smokers altogether. During winter if the cigarettes do not kill us, the cold probably will. I thought that inclusion meant being inside the throng, not being left out in the cold. This is a new Parliament and a new opportunity to show that the people's representatives are genuinely trying to improve things. It is also an opportunity to regain the trust of those who are disaffected with politicians. As I said last week in the census debate, the very low polls in recent elections, especially for the European Parliament, reflect the low esteem in which politicians are held, especially by young voters who are bombarded with stories of sleaze and corruption. To restore public confidence we believe the Parliament should have an independent commissioner who would report to the Standards Committee. MSPs would no longer be the only judge and jury of our conduct. We must have standards and we must avoid double standards.  I am all for openness and accountability, but confidential documents are often so for a reason. In order to have reasoned, informed debate MSPs should be in possession of the facts before the press and public are. As section 9.4 of the code states, "Early release of information about a Committee report could also result in unfair party political advantage." That is true. It is particularly annoying when the Sunday press carries details unknown to most MSPs. Perhaps the Executive's spin-doctors could advise us which Sunday papers to read so that we may be up to date with parliamentary reports and events in future. While basic standards of conduct are obviously a commendable ideal, we do not want to get too bogged down in the minutiae of politically correct dogma. I was amused by section 10.2.1, "How to Make a Complaint". First, "The complaint must include the name and contact details of the person complaining." I think that most people would know that. The complaint should also "name the member or members against whom the complaint is being made." That might be a case of stating the obvious. I apologise for my cynicism. I welcome the code, which is a genuine attempt to improve the conduct of our Scottish Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has for the future of the crofting industry in the Highlands and Islands. (S1O-1224)

Bearing in mind the fact that the price of sheepmeat remains low and is likely to fall to rock bottom next autumn, has the minister made any progress with the EU Commission on help with the cull ewe scheme, particularly with regard to transport assistance? Crofters in the Highlands and Islands need a way of disposing of their old sheep, rather than having to shoot those sheep themselves, which is distressing. Does the minister agree that that is a matter of great importance on the grounds of environmental concerns and animal welfare?

My first job, in 1971, was for a coastal shipping company based in Glasgow. I well remember unloading cargoes of grain at Meadowside and scrap at Rothesay dock, and I remember heavy lifts at Finnieston quay. In an article in The Independent magazine in February 1989, Ian Jack—one of the best-known Glaswegian journalists of that era—conceded that "civic chauvinism and great injections of public money have made the best of a bad job." However, he considered that "the result is little more than a brightly embroidered shroud . . . Today the river, which for 200 years gave Glasgow its purpose, lies dead and empty; an ornamental pond for the mortgageable classes whose semi-detached houses brighten up the landscaped banks in new English brick." He then commented that, although the same thing had happened in London's docklands, "at least one kind of international trade had replaced another, today's money for yesterday's commerce. Glasgow has had to fall back on self-advertisement and history". The word "international" strikes me as important when we consider this great river about which so many songs and so much poetry have been written. Glasgow's past was built on the foreign tobacco trade, then on the Hong Kong taipans who traded in tea and other more dubious goods. That was followed by the building of the mighty ships that were the envy of the world. The fact that the Clyde has no international deep-sea trade is blamed on peripherality, but we should turn peripherality into an advantage. The return journey between the Clyde and north America is 6,000 miles, compared to 9,000 miles from any other major port in the UK. Any export, including whisky, costs Scottish companies far more because it cannot be exported directly from a Scottish port and, therefore, carries a premium. There have been some experiments such as the Rostok Atlantic line, but not enough effort has been made to give the Clyde the deep-sea links that would revive the area's fortunes. Sarah Boyack's recent announcement of a £4.5 million freight facilities grant for Ayr harbour to encourage the carriage of timber by coastal shipping echoes my suggestion in a speech in September. Far from being a dying business, shipping is experiencing a revival, especially as it is an environmentally sound way of moving goods. Shipbuilding might also be able to make a recovery on the Clyde.  Although I am glad that GEC Marconi will build the new type 45 destroyers, which will secure the future of thousands of jobs, I want more commercial ships to be built there. Both Ferguson Shipbuilders and Ailsa-Troon Ltd are building small ships again. Hunterston is probably the best bulk handling installation in Europe; it can discharge the biggest bulk cargo ships in the world in a matter of three days. It is a good distribution centre and we should be thinking about exporting bulk cargoes as well as importing them. Why not think about exporting wood chips to Japan, for example?

I agree with George Lyon's point about the importance of tourism. Dunoon should be a main gateway to the Highlands and Islands, but we need good, flexible, fast and efficient ferries to cover islands such as Arran, Cumbrae and Bute. There has already been a trend of investment in the Clyde, such as the millennium link project, the developments at Pacific quay and the cities divided by rivers in Europe—or CIDRE—project. However, to enable that money to filter down the river, we need a better infrastructure and a better system of water transport.

Will the minister give way?

Will Jackie Baillie give way?

I am happy to be speaking on fishing once again—the census is simply a huge exercise in fishing for information. A great deal of money has already been spent. The estimated cost of the Scottish census is £23.2 million by 2002. Since the exercise is so expensive, it is vital that we get it right and include  questions that will provide valuable information on the whereabouts and needs of our population for the next 10 years. Like Trish Marwick, I was amused by the comments of John Rickman, the clerk to the House of Commons at the end of the 18 th century. Outlining 12 arguments in favour of a census, he said: "In a time when many fear the disaffection of the people, doing a census would improve the Government's image as setting out to promote the public good". That was more than 200 years ago. Nothing much changes, does it? To judge by the low turnouts in recent elections—most notably the most recent European election—people are more disaffected than ever. An improvement of the Government's image would be more welcome than ever. Our message to the Government is, "Stop spinning and have a good census." Mr Rickman also said that the life insurance industry would be stimulated by the results. I bet that today's life insurance companies would love to get their hands on the results of the census. Luckily, however, confidentiality is assured: the census forms are withheld from the public for 100 years. As a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I am glad that Mr Wallace has seen fit to agree to a question on religion. Scotland's reputation as a tolerant nation would have been at risk if we were the only country not to have a census question on religion. We should be grateful to the Commission for Racial Equality for its work towards that goal, to Brian Monteith for his earlier motion on the subject and to members of parties other than my own—Irene McGugan, Donald Gorrie, Dennis Canavan and others—who signed that motion and showed undoubted cross-party support for the inclusion of a question on religion. I am glad that the ethnicity question is being revised and that the Executive proposes to consult bodies, including the Equal Opportunities Committee, on the precise formulation of a new question. I hope that the Executive will give thought to the inclusion of a category for travelling people of different ethnic origins, such as those identified as gypsies and Romanies. They can certainly lay claim to having one of the oldest histories of any group in the UK. It is to be hoped that increased recognition would lessen the prejudice and persecution that they have suffered in the past and unfortunately still suffer today. When we formulate the question on ethnicity, we should achieve the aims set out by the CRE. We welcome the Executive's change of heart on the issue. Although I take Tommy Sheridan's point and the  spirit with which it was put, a question on income would throw the entire validity of the census into question. Previous census tests show that people are very sensitive when asked about such matters, which leads to unanswered questions and inaccurate results. Other methods exist for obtaining that information and I would hate to jeopardise the outcome of such an important document when those alternatives are to hand. I am a firm advocate of the protection of the Scots language. Like Gaelic, its history is timeless and is surrounded by romance. I love the poetry of Burns and MacDiarmid and never go anywhere without my nickie-tams. However, although I would like the question to be put to the Scottish people, I see no straightforward way of doing so. We can go round in circles debating what exactly constitutes a language or a dialect, argue about its origins and where it is spoken, and lately most of us have been doing so. If we cannot agree on what exactly the Scots language is, how can we expect the Scottish public collectively to comprehend any question on the subject? Although the eight-volume Scots language dictionary and the Scots edition of the James VI bible prove the validity of the argument for what I consider to be Scots, a true definition of Scots does not yet exist. We can only hope that such a definition has been established when the next census comes around. I am encouraged by the news that the boosted household survey will include a question on Scots. From the point of view of the Equal Opportunities Committee, we now have a question on religion and a question on ethnicity, and, in the words of the song, two out of three ain't bad.

Will Susan Deacon give way?

I wanted it before the debate.

We are having this debate in the shadow of the terrible tragedy that recently befell the Solway Harvester. I would like to convey our deepest sympathy to the family and friends of the brave fishermen who lost their lives in that disaster. The scallop industry makes an exceptionally important contribution to the economy of many of Scotland's remote rural and fishing communities. Landings peaked in 1998 at just under 5,000 tonnes, valued at more than £8 million. The total value of the industry to the Scottish economy is about £20 million. Last year, the scallop industry, which plays an instrumental part in the lives of our rural areas, was dealt a devastating blow: the decision by the Scottish Executive to close down almost the entire west coast fishery—8,000 square miles—which was the largest closure in our history. The ban denied employment and an income to those whose lives depended on the scallop industry, and was imposed without any consultation. A scallop fisherman explained how he found out about the ban. Out fishing, he heard through various forms of communication that health and safety officers had gone round hotels telling them to remove scallops from the menu. He then learned, from a message that had been left on a fisherman's answering machine at home, that the whole of the west coast had been closed. He was asked by another member of his association whether a ban had been imposed, and replied that somebody was pulling his leg because, if a ban had been imposed, only boxes that were affected would be closed, and the association would have been informed immediately by the Scottish Executive, as the association was on the Executive's list for information. That was on Friday 9 July; on the morning of Monday 12 July, at  10.49, the association received a fax informing it of the closure. The testing regime leaves no room for manoeuvre. Scotland's scallop industry is now on its knees as a direct result of the Executive's policy. Many processors are operating at less than 50 per cent capacity. Others had to lay off 50 per cent of their work force. In the central belt, such job losses may be viewed as small beer, as a result of institutionalised urbanism. Does the Executive fail to understand that the effect of those losses in remote fishing communities is simply devastating? Amnesic shellfish poisoning is caused by a toxin called domoic acid. Scallops graze on the toxic algal bloom that causes it. There must be scientific research to find the source of the blooms that are suddenly affecting our west coast waters. Scallops are filters, which give warning of marine pollution. Neither I nor anyone whose livelihood depends on the industry underestimates the seriousness of the problem or the health risk that it may pose, but the Executive's extreme response does not deal with the problem. The Scottish Fishermen's Federation has said that, in the interests of protecting public safety, it would be far more appropriate to introduce end-product testing. Experience has shown that processing scallops removes the toxin. If there were end-product testing, there would be no need to introduce widespread, crudely defined closures. End-product testing would benefit the industry and better protect public health. It is common sense that the time to test the product is when the product enters the market. Between 22 June, when the readings were first taken, and 9 July, when the ban came into force, 273 tonnes of scallops were landed and presumably consumed. Luckily there have been no reported illnesses, but end-product testing would have prevented that blind spot. If ASP is detected, an entire, arbitrary production area must be shut down. Fishing for scallops in that area is then illegal. People, including ministers, all too often forget that a given area can produce both very high and very low levels of ASP on the same day. The outright ban on scallop fishing is therefore illogical and unnecessary. I agree that the primary consideration must be to protect public safety but, in seeking to protect the public, it is common sense that scallops should be tested not straight from the sea bed, but when they have been processed and are ready to enter the food chain. With end-product testing, we can ensure both public safety and a future for our scallop fishermen and processors. In mid-December 1999, the European Union declared that end-product testing for scallops was  compatible with EU law. That is why the Irish, who have also had a problem with ASP, have introduced end-product testing for their scallop industry. If such a regime is compatible with EU law and is deemed acceptable for the people of the Republic of Ireland, why does it not satisfy the Scottish Executive? Why did the Irish manage legally to save their scallop industry in three weeks when our Executive has done nothing to help our industry for eight months? The Scottish Scallop Fishermen's Association places the blame firmly at the door of the Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs and his staff. After a recent meeting with him, it said: "We must admit to being stunned at your evident lack of awareness with regard to the serious situation facing the scallop sector . . . Perhaps your advisers would be better employed in the Sanitation Department, not in an advisory capacity but in the Shovelling Department. It is unbelievable that after some five months, your staff at SERAD remain unable to brief you accurately on the situation. For the sake of our industry, we ask that you stop playing silly politics . . . get SERAD's act together and give us consistency in monitoring and sampling procedures." That is not the view of just one organisation. Alisdair MacLean of the Mull Fishermen's Association said: "The Minister showed a breathtaking lack of understanding and despite being responsible for fisheries showed no sympathy for the fishermen, shellfish processors and their families, who are going out of business and putting boats up for sale." That is not an understatement of the trouble facing the industry, and it brings me to the subject of compensation. Financial assistance for the scallop industry has been totally rejected by the Executive. There have been precedents in assisting primary producers whose businesses have been interrupted for reasons of disease. Beef farmers received compensation for BSE. Salmon farmers received compensation for infectious salmon anaemia. Why, then, does the scallop industry fail to merit compensation for the problems visited upon it by the Scottish Executive's policy? Will the minister follow the lead of the Conservative Government, which, in the early 1980s, offered financial support to the industry in its time of need? Will the minister finally release a copy of the full minutes of the meeting on ASP in Pentland House on 19 January? Both my staff and people from the scallop industry have asked for the minutes, but our requests have been denied. Will the minister respond to the demands of the industry and ensure that he develops an understanding of what is facing the industry? Will he agree that we can all learn from this disaster so that we never again institute a testing regime that  puts our fishermen out of business unnecessarily? I urge him to listen to the Scottish Fishermen's Federation and the various scallop associations when they ask him to put an end-product testing regime in place, so that they can make an honest living once more.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Rural Affairs last met the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and what issues they discussed. (S1O-1104)

I thank the minister for his reply. When he next meets the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, will he discuss the issue of farmers' incomes, which have fallen to the lowest level since 1930 and average about £75 a week? Will he ask him whether he agrees with the principles of the common agricultural policy as laid down in article 39(b) of the Treaty of Rome, which are designed to ensure "a fair standard of living for the agricultural population, particularly by raising the individual earnings of persons engaged in agriculture"?

I congratulate Elaine Smith on bringing such an important matter to the chamber. It is terrifying to see the images on television of children fighting adult battles, carrying AK47s and machetes, participating in wars that they are in no way responsible for let alone understand. That is the worst form of exploitation—a child's mind poisoned by hatred and violence is likely to produce an adult with a twisted and perverted inclination. Other images, of child prostitution, child slavery and close-up pictures of tiny frames of skin and bone dying in front of our eyes are set in front of us every day in our living rooms. Those children have no rights. That is why the UN convention of 1989 is so wonderful. I would like to pay tribute to all the voluntary organisations—there are too many to name—that do so much worldwide to alleviate children's suffering. On this issue we should be helping others who do not have our stable democratic society with a relatively high standard of living to clean up their sometimes nightmarish backyards before we do a spring clean in our own, by comparison, slightly dusty premises. Having said that, the situation here is not perfect and there is much to be done. I believe in the principle, which runs through the UN convention, that actions should be taken in the best interests of the child. For example, most parents are beneficial to their children's development and know best what is right for them, but in cases of abuse it is often in the child's best interests to be separated from damaging influences. Children must have the right to go to court, along with  others who can make representations on their behalf, to make their views known without fear of reprisal. As a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I have had the chance to talk to many disabled children and their parents. They are quite clear that, whenever possible, disabled children should be grouped among their peers in mainstream education and activities, rather than singled out for specialist institutions. Our aim should be to provide a level playing field of rights for all children, whatever their circumstances. Highlighting particular groups for special consideration or treatment is divisive and can lead to discrimination. Education, information, inclusion and compassion should be the bywords of our new Scotland, especially where children are concerned.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to solve the present difficulties being faced by the Scottish nephrops fishing and processing industries. (S1O-1056)

I thank the minister for his answer. Does he realise that price is now the question? Does he recognise the importance of the prawn industry, especially to the west coast fishermen? Is he aware that, this week, the price of whole prawns plummeted another £5 per stone, to reach an all time low, and that the price of small prawn creels is now half of what it was in 1979? Does he agree that the main reason for that drop is the over-landing by large fishing boats using twin-rig trawls in the North sea? What will he do to protect the livelihoods of the west coast fishing communities that depend on prawn fishing?

The minister said that she found it difficult to find solutions. Lorn and Islands district general hospital in Oban has had the generous offer of a new computed tomography scanner worth £310,000 and a further offer, from another charity, to run it for two years. Why is that offer not being accepted, if the Executive is pushed for money?

Does the minister agree that it is a pity that the trunk road programme in the Highlands has been so savagely cut? Does he further agree that it is a shame that the Highlands and Islands no longer have objective 1 status? Because of that, we have lost about £40 million over the next five years and some of that money could have been spent on improving the A9 north of Helmsdale.

rose—

Although the Highlands and Islands population is only a tiny percentage of the 28 million people who use the post office every week, the importance of the post office in such rural areas in enormous. Devolution and the Scottish Parliament was designed to look after the interests of rural communities as well as those of urban man, and the Government must show its commitment on this issue. In the north of Scotland, only two post offices are run by Post Office Counters Ltd. All the other offices are either franchised or run by sub-postmasters, which means that they can be given up at only three months' notice. If that were to happen, it would be a terrible blow to vulnerable people. The rural network of post offices is a lifeline to the elderly, the infirm, the sick and those without a car who have to cope with the ever-decreasing public transport system to get their benefits from post offices further and further away from their homes. How will poorer benefit claimants survive for a month without any money, as the automated credit transfer system will pay monthly in arrears? That is unfair and only adds to the burdens already faced by rural pensioners. Why should anyone be forced to have a bank account if they have  survived into the 21 st century perfectly well without one? Is there any evidence that the banks really want the Benefits Agency business? So far, I have not found any bank that will give a straight yes—

I am sorry, but I do not have time. One gets the impression that the banks regard that as an expensive nuisance. There is not a sufficient banking network in remote and rural areas, and there is likely to be even less of one in the near future. I hope that bank machines are put into post offices. The loss of 40 per cent of post office business would make most rural post offices commercially unviable, and the loss of post office assistant jobs would threaten more jobs on the retail side of such businesses. The closure of the post office often means the end of the only shop in the village. It cannot be the way ahead—it is a step backwards. We should be encouraging rural communities by improving their infrastructure. Let us have some joined-up government, to ensure a good, accessible network of postal centres.

rose—

rose—

As the constituency member for Western Isles, does the minister agree with Mr Jim Hunter, chairman of Highlands and Islands Enterprise, who recently suggested that the officers controlling what used to be objective 1 money should go to Benbecula?

I welcome the opportunity to take part in the debate and I am sure that my friend Jamie Stone will not mind my broadening the area to include the other constituencies of the Highlands and Islands region. On Tuesday evening, I attended a very good dinner of Scots beef at Glasgow city chambers, in order to hear Mr Eddie George, the governor of the Bank of England, deliver a speech on the economy. He is the first governor to have the remit of controlling UK interest rates—a position of enormous power—and I was hoping for some crumb of comfort from the great man to give to those living in the Highlands and Islands. I hoped in vain. I wish I could take Mr George there, even just for a few hours, to show him an area where the UK economy is not flourishing, but is in danger of dying on its feet. High interest rates, exorbitant fuel prices and the subsequent high cost of living are hitting industries such as agriculture, fishing, tourism and textiles, which are already on their knees. Because of that, sustainable jobs are at a premium. I welcome Donald Dewar's statement, particularly the presumption against locating new units and agencies in Edinburgh. I also welcome his saying that, when existing leases on government buildings terminate, relocations will be considered to places outside the capital to include more of Scotland in the governing process and to provide jobs in areas where they are desperately needed to sustain the infrastructure of the local economies. That is completely in line with Scottish Conservative thinking on true devolution, taking government departments to the areas that they most represent. During our election campaign, we put forward the idea that the new Scottish Parliament should benefit not just Edinburgh, but should be a Parliament for the whole of Scotland. We would decentralise many of its government departments to cities and towns in other parts of Scotland as a way of bringing government closer to the people. That would allay fears, especially in the Highlands and Islands, that the creation of the Scottish Parliament will lead to a concentration of power in Edinburgh, to the detriment of the rest of the  country. For example, the department of tourism and culture could be located in Inverness, and its branches at other locations in the north. Agriculture would probably find its home in Perth and, again, extra offices could well be located in the areas that Jamie Stone has mentioned. As I suggested in a previous debate, fisheries should go to the north-east, with branch offices located on the north and north-west coasts. The ministry for Gaelic should, of course, go to Stornoway. All that is possible due to the improved telecommunications that can link centres together. It is no longer necessary to centralise government departments. One only has to look at the success of call centres to see what can be achieved. Furthermore, it is now possible for people to be educated and trained in the northern regions of Scotland, thanks to the new University of the Highlands and Islands. I very much hope that more young people will see a future in staying in the beautiful areas of the Highlands where they were born, and that others from outside will wish to come and make their homes there. That alone will stop the Highlands and Islands descending into an area of sterility. Only from happy and busily employed communities can we hope to see the ancient tradition of Highland culture continue to flourish. How will that be paid for? The budget rebate that the United Kingdom receives from the European Union was achieved only by sacrificing many of the rural grants that were due from EU sources. I am sure that Eddie George would be among those who stress that the UK as a whole had benefited by many billions of pounds as a result of the agreement that the Conservatives negotiated. However, if moving those departments and jobs to the Highlands is expensive to initiate, surely a few million of the billions that were saved to make the UK prosperous can now be spent in the areas that were partly sacrificed to achieve that end.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to ensure the future of the scallop industry. (S1O-923)

I am aware that the ban has been lifted in four new areas, but 32 areas are still closed. Licensing restrictions have been eased, but that will allow only an extra four boats to fish. I know also that the minister has had one meeting. Can he explain why the Irish Government is able to protect its consumers' health by end-product standard testing, whereas the Scottish Executive rural affairs department insists on a draconian ban on all scallop fishing? To get this highly significant industry going again, should not we follow the commonsense approach, supported by the Scallop Association and the Association of Scottish Shellfish Growers, that scallops should be tested when they enter the food chain?

Will the minister give way?

I welcome the minister's statement, but does he agree—or does he know—that the slaughter of stocks without compensation may be a fundamental breach of property rights, as enshrined in the European convention on human rights, which is incorporated in the Scotland Act 1998? Will the Government offer any compensation to those farmers who have been forced to slaughter their stock on suspicion of ISA, only to find that there is no evidence to support the claim? Does the minister realise that in Norway, where ISA has existed for 15 years, the disease is dealt with case by case and only directly affected salmon are slaughtered? In that way, the incidence of the disease in Norway has been reduced from more than 150 outbreaks in the early 1990s to only two this year, whereas in Scotland, despite the wholesale slaughter policy, the number of outbreaks appears to be on the increase. Does the minister agree that the compulsory slaughter policy should be ended and a different, comprehensive system should be introduced? We should establish a code of best practice in aquaculture hygiene and management to minimise the incidence and spread of the disease. We should remove the ban on vaccines and encourage further development of effective vaccines. Is the minister aware, for example, that in Canada—

To sum up, we should introduce— [Laughter.]

Does the minister agree that we should introduce a compensation system for affected fish farms, either through insurance-based schemes or on a co-financing basis, funded by the Commission and the UK Government?

Does the minister agree that, as the test result takes 14 days to produce, there is a period during which people will be at great risk? However, if the end product were tested, we would know that the thing that was going into the food chain was safe.

All that is suggested is that we do what the party campaigned on. We campaigned on the Cullen blueprint, which suggested moving the Government department for fisheries to Aberdeen, for health to Dundee and for agriculture to Perth. I am surprised that the SNP wants to keep things at Westminster, but I am delighted to hear that that is the case.

I am sorry that I reminded everyone that Franz Fischler is coming, but, as not all members are on the European Committee, some members may not have known. Talking of committees, when is some sort of response going to be given to the report of the Rural Affairs Committee on ASP? The poor scallop fishermen are getting poorer—they have nothing left. Does Mr Rumbles agree that they should not be given any compensation?

Is the Executive trying to do something positive?

It was good to see a Scottish fisheries minister leading for the UK at a recent fisheries conference. I believe that the Scottish Parliament can be good for Scotland's fishing, albeit only under new management. In recognition of the importance of Scottish fisheries to Europe, I can reveal that the European Parliament's Committee on Fisheries will visit Scottish fishing areas in June 2000 and that the new fisheries commissioner, Franz Fischler, will come on a separate trip in the new year. Scotland has the most important part of the UK fishing industry, accounting for more than 70 per cent of all fish landed in the UK. The landed value is almost £300 million, which represents almost £1.6 billion when retailed. Two thousand eight hundred vessels employ 6,700 fishermen, which is regrettably fewer than the 8,200 who were employed in 1997. The total number of jobs that are attributed to fishing and aquaculture is between 20,000 and 25,000, many of which are in rural areas, where secure employment is at a premium. Fishing is a great, traditional, Scottish-owned industry, which demands respect. However, there was not much respect, and absolutely zero consultation, when the new east coast boundary was implemented. A report by the Rural Affairs Committee is due to be published tomorrow, which, I sincerely hope, will recommend a rethink, because the transfer of 6,500 square miles of Scottish fishing territory is not only unnecessary, but insensitive and illogical. The boundary goes straight through the middle of excellent fishing grounds and will cause gross difficulties and irritation. A boundary was set in 1987 to define the offshore jurisdiction of the Scottish courts. We now have an unnecessary second line solely for the Scottish Parliament's legislation. Better consultation between officialdom and the fishing industry is essential for future policies. Fishing is very heavily regulated within Europe. This Lib-Lab pact is guilty of gold-plating EU regulations and rules to the competitive disadvantage of our fishermen. One example is the recent farce over amnesic shellfish poisoning. Over the past two years, all king scallops and queenies have been required to undergo tests for ASP at source, but common sense dictates that the time to test the product is  the moment at which it enters the market to go into the food chain—end product testing. Our fishermen should have parity on testing with those in the rest of Europe and the world. The scallop fishermen have suffered, in many cases, from a total loss of income by complying with the ban. I am horrified that the Executive has rejected the principle of compensation for the scallop industry. It is not enough for us to compliment scallop fishermen on their good behaviour during the ban. I suggest that the Executive should reverse its decision and retrospectively compensate the industry for this unforeseeable nightmare. We should remember that there are scallop farmers as well as scallop fishermen. The salmon farming industry has had at least some help—not very much—over infectious salmon anaemia, and the scallop industry should not be forgotten at this crucial time. I press now for a reaction from the Executive to the report on ASP from the Rural Affairs Committee. When will the Executive do something? The most worrying aspect of the whole affair is not knowing from where the toxic algal blooms have originated. If they are a naturally occurring phenomenon, there is, presumably, not much anyone can do, but it is vital that there be maximum scientific research now. The west coast of Scotland has always had a reputation for class A waters. Indeed, the tourist industry sells the area on its environmental excellence. The lucrative and valuable shellfish export trade is very important to west coast fishermen and aquaculturalists, so any loss of confidence in the products from our sea bed is disastrous and difficult to rectify. We must keep a clean sea. Historically, there is nothing indicative of an algal bloom on our west coast, so why is that happening now? We must discover the source of the domoic acid that is being found in scallops, and we must find out why all the cod have disappeared. That is not due to overfishing. Another major worry is that following the dioxin fiasco in Belgium, the European Commission might set the safe limit for dioxins in animal feedstuffs at a level that would be lower than the level of dioxin that is found in fish from the North sea and the Baltic—lower than the level that is thought safe for human beings. If that is true, the consequences would be catastrophic. I therefore ask the deputy minister to investigate. The nephrops—or prawn fishery—are very important to both the small boats of the west coast and many white fish vessels. It has become one of our most important landed catches. The TAC should be enlarged to cover the increased area now being fished. European markets, especially Spain, have been vital in adding to the species that can be traded by  our fishermen. Velvet crabs, green crabs and even razor-fish are now valuable products. The electronic markets do work, but much of the west coast is not yet equipped to deal in them, due to lack of infrastructure. What is needed there is improved piers and new grading facilities. I am delighted that the Scottish inshore fisheries advisory group—SIFAG—has recently been established. It should be a good forum for fishermen and others to thrash out the local issues and rules, such as a policy on seal management and charging schemes. Something like that is long overdue and should give a greater voice to the independent fishermen. To be effective, however, it must adopt a long-term strategic approach to the management of the inshore industry. On fleet modernisation, it is ridiculous that the British taxpayer is subsidising other European vessels, not its own fleet. The UK Government must access the available European funds and must put an end to capacity penalties. We must modernise, especially on factors relating to vessels which enhance the quality of the catch, including refrigeration, grading and gutting facilities. Improving the value of the catch is paramount; at the same time, we must improve safety. I hate to say this, but the Government is gambling with the lives of our fishermen. It withdrew safety grants because the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food had overspent. That was due to a combination of BSE compensation and expenditure on the pets quarantine scheme, compounded by a shortfall in the money expected from the sale of the Covent Garden complex. Pets before people: that is not good enough. A new approach is needed. Conservation of fish stocks is being undermined by the dumping of dead fish. Equipment should include technology that protects undersized and immature stock, such as square-mesh panels. Zonal management would give our fishermen a say in their own future. Each species that is important to Scotland must be managed with forethought, to maximise conservation and catch. Haddock quotas have been reduced to profit cod and whiting, but the discards of small fish will negate any conservation benefit. A single TAC for monkfish will require skilful negotiation to ensure that Scottish fishermen have sufficient quotas, especially in the west. The prawn TAC should be enlarged to cover the extended area in which the species is now fished. It is no good deciding a fishing policy annually; continuous reassessment, at least every quarter, is the way ahead. We believe that the advice of the Cullen blueprint report to locate the fisheries ministry in the north-east, close to the major part  of the UK fishing industry, would bring that Government department closer to those most affected by it, and would fulfil the ideal of true devolution. I move amendment S1M-358.2, to delete from "calls" to end and insert: "recognises that the current Common Fisheries Policy arrangements are failing our fishermen and calls upon the Scottish Executive to advocate reform of the CFP that devolves power to regional and zonal levels which would give our fishermen better control over the stocks of fish whilst recognising the traditional rights of other countries, and further calls for the fishing section of MAFF to be relocated to the North East of Scotland, the UK's main fishing centre, and that continuous assessment should replace the current practice of annual negotiation."

On gender equality, I would not want it to be construed that I meant that I wanted an entirely male-dominated world. Apart from that, I took the word sex to include sexual orientation as well as gender—

As the only Scottish Conservative member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I am delighted to contribute to this debate. The Scottish Conservatives are totally committed to eliminating discrimination and ensuring equal opportunities for everyone in the UK, regardless of race, religion, sex or social class. We are one nation and we are proud of our traditions, our achievements and our reputation for freedom and tolerance. The Scottish Parliament gives us a wonderful opportunity further to enhance equal opportunities. Our aim must be to create a society that is comfortable with heterogeneity and which sees nothing unusual in the differences of its members. That will be achieved only when people of both genders, all races, all faiths and all backgrounds are found in all jobs across the land in positions that they have reached on merit and on merit alone. The Scottish Conservatives are proud of our multicultural society. Scotland and the UK are enhanced, not diminished, as nations by the contributions of people from different backgrounds and cultures. In recent years, great progress has been made in breaking down the barriers to equality in business, the media, sport, entertainment and the arts, academia and public administration. Opportunities for young people have also been enhanced through greater access to further and higher education, although that has been undermined by the Lib-Lab tuition fees scandal. In spite of all those advances, we cannot allow ourselves to become complacent. Undoubtedly, barriers to opportunity remain in our society. We must do more for our disabled citizens to make  them feel included in the new Scotland. For example, we should ensure that, wherever possible, disabled children follow mainstream education, rather than being sent to special schools or units. In trains, boats and planes, provision should be made to make life easier and more comfortable for the disabled. As always, I make my plea that the Parliament works for all of Scotland, not just the central belt. As our observant and splendid First Minister recently said, people live and work in rural areas; however, they cannot do so in a museum-like time warp. I thank him for that, and remind the Executive how difficult it is for people living on the edge, with fuel at 90p a litre and all basic commodities priced well above the Scottish average. People who feel forgotten feel unequal, and cynicism about our new Parliament is tragic. The Conservative-inspired University of the Highlands and Islands goes a long way—

On her first question, I think that Ms Jamieson was referring to sexual orientation and on her second, no, we do not think that it is a good idea to repeal section 28. I thank her for that. The Conservative-inspired University of the Highlands and Islands goes a long way to providing more equality in education but, needless to say, its colleges are at a disadvantage due to the extra costs of being so remote. I ask the minister whether the Executive has plans to take account of that by increasing funds, as it does for primary and secondary education in those areas. In this country, we are fortunate—

Come on.

We are quite clear that we should leave it up to the heads of our armed forces to give us advice on that.  In this country, we are fortunate enough to have some of the toughest legislation in Europe aimed at combating the evil of racial discrimination. The Scottish Conservatives are fully committed to building upon that in the new Scotland. Our message must be loud and clear: discrimination, whether positive or negative, is inexcusable. I look forward to the day when the Scottish Parliament has many more members, of all party affiliations, from black and ethnic minorities. Last Saturday, I made a speech on behalf of my party at the Scottish Trades Union Congress black workers conference in Glasgow. I greatly enjoyed the conference and the party afterwards. In my contribution, I referred to the most moving speech I have ever heard, by a man who influenced so many of my generation. I am talking about Martin Luther King. He stressed that in the process of gaining minorities their rightful place, we must not be guilty of wrongful deeds. I whole-heartedly endorse that principle. There is no question but that the ethnic minorities have the aptitude and ability to represent the people of Scotland in this chamber and I hope that they will be doing that soon. However, we must recognise once and for all that so-called positive discrimination is a wrongful deed. It unfairly favours and patronises some and discriminates against others. Indeed, it was part of King's dream that one day his children would live in a nation where they would be judged not by the colour of their skin, but by the content of their character. Let us make King's dream a reality in Scotland. Let us have a society that treats people on the basis of merit, not background. Let us have a society where access is universal and there are no special rules or status for any group. Let us have a society that fulfils Martin Luther King's dream that "All of God's children, black men and white men, Jews and Gentiles, Protestants and Catholics" will "sit together at the table of brotherhood."

Of course I include women in that. [Interruption.] I am referring to women and men at the same time. We can achieve the dream, not by "drinking from the cup of bitterness", but by creating a society that treats everyone as equal. I move amendment S1M-334.1, to leave out from "and to" to end and insert:  "regardless of race, sex, class or faith and further recognises that this will not be achieved by positive discrimination or politically correct strategies which label people as categories, but by a commitment to limited government and enhanced personal freedom."

I am very pleased to hear the minister's statement, as will be the beef farmers. Will she answer the second part of Alex Johnstone's question? Will the minister and the Executive turn their attention to the sheep industry, where the new rules requiring slaughterhouses to split carcases have imposed huge extra costs and have resulted in many sheep being shot in the fields?

The only turbot experiment that I know of is the one off Islay, which ended in a disastrous outbreak of viral haemorrhagic septicaemia.

The Kintyre peninsula is a very special part of Scotland, particularly to me, as I have lived in Argyll for more than 40 years. It used to be one of the more prosperous areas in Argyll, with some good agricultural land that suited mixed farming and dairy farming, unlike most of the rest of the county, which is limited to disadvantaged hill farms. Kintyre suffers now because it is a peninsula and therefore similar to an island. I remind the Executive that Argyll does not yet have special islands needs allowance. Perhaps the Executive ought to consider awarding that to the area. Peripheral communities are being forgotten under the present Executive. The disastrous downturn in all areas of agriculture in the past two years has hit Kintyre very hard. The cost of transport to faraway markets exaggerates the hideously low prices that farmers are receiving for sheep and beef cattle. The extra slaughterhouse procedures and charges have made older sheep virtually worthless. The Government should never have imposed those procedures and charges without working out how to tackle the ensuing chaos, in which it is not worth taking animals to market. Many are being shot on the farms, to the great distress of the owners. Why will this Executive not take the lead on lifting the beef-on-the-bone ban in order to put Scottish beef back on the most prominent shelves of European shops, where it deserves to be? On the dairy sector, it is vital for the area that Campbeltown Creamery continues to be successful. Dairy quotas must continue to be ring-fenced. The dairy sector has been very hard hit by milk prices falling as low as 16p per litre, yet we continue to import cheap milk from abroad at the expense of our dairy farmers.

That is irrelevant to this problem. A fall in interest rates would be much more to the point. Is it impossible to persuade Argyll and the Islands Enterprise to take some notice of the agricultural sector and its importance to Kintyre? The present chaotic debacle concerning ABIS must be resolved, as farmers have put out thousands of pounds in good faith, only to be told that there is now no money to support the applications.  There is hardly time to mention Kintyre's fishermen, but I believe that its scallop fishermen, whose boats have been tied up due to the ban, are due some retrospective compensation. As I keep saying, the key to prosperity in the Highlands and Islands is much cheaper fuel, good roads and better access. We need a good infrastructure for businesses to survive and expand. When one considers what it costs people to fill up their cars and lorries in Kintyre, one realises the disadvantage that businesses face from the word go. The paltry £66 million that this Government has committed to expenditure on roads is insultingly useless to rural Scotland. It is estimated that there are 120,000 tonnes of timber waiting to come out of Kintyre. Why not take it by coastal shipping, which would save millions of pounds on damage to roads? Kintyre, and Campbeltown in particular, used to be a thriving tourist area. It has a mild climate, some beautiful beaches and a very famous golf course at Machrihanish. The problem now is that it is too expensive for tourists to go there. Income has dropped, and new investment is badly needed to upgrade facilities for tourists. It is up to the Scottish Tourist Board and Argyll and the Islands Enterprise to come up with some ideas to achieve that. The situation in Campbeltown is dire. I imagine that incomes average little more than £120 a week. Twenty-seven shops have recently closed and nearly all the hotels are for sale. If it were not for the Jaeger textile factory, employment would be even lower. The future of that mainstay of the Kintyre economy must be assured. There is an exciting possibility that there will be a major investment in wind farming, in the renewable energy sector in Scotland. That would be a tremendous boost to the area, as it would create, perhaps, 100 jobs. However, as George Lyon has said, the company that is involved cannot get an answer from the Executive on what its policy is on wind farming in the Scottish Highlands. Unless the company gets some assurance that there will be a market for its turbines, this valuable possibility may be lost. I ask the Government not to let that happen. Good access to and from Kintyre is paramount. The ferry link to Ballycastle in Northern Ireland is especially important to people on both sides of the water. With the present operator withdrawing, it is imperative that another is found as soon as possible to continue a link that is so vital to trade and tourism.

It was good to see our First Minister, Donald Dewar, on television the other day saying that the Executive intends to eradicate poverty in Scotland within the next 20 years. However, his appearance was followed by a programme that showed people in the more deprived areas of Glasgow who were unable to walk to the shops to buy their food, because the local supermarkets had shut down and the enormous new supermarkets were miles away. I wonder how included those people felt, especially if they did not have access to a car, were wheelchair-bound or disabled in some other way. I represent the Highlands and Islands—everything from Campbeltown to Shetland. In that area, a strong sense is building up among the people that, far from being included, they are being forgotten. Gordon Brown tells us that the country is awash with money and so it should be easy for every UK citizen to share in this wave of new prosperity. The truth is rather different. The appalling agricultural situation, which runs throughout the social network of the Highlands and Islands, is reducing people's incomes to pennies. People with greatly reduced incomes are having to pay over the odds for almost everything they buy, mainly as a result, of course, of the price of petrol and diesel, which affects the cost of everything. In some of the islands, petrol and diesel can be as much as 90p a litre—the VAT content means that the people who live there are paying even more tax. Is that inclusive? The elderly and disabled find it even more difficult to get out and about—they cannot afford to. In new Labour's thriving United Kingdom, does the Government intend to include any people north of Loch Lomond? Fishing and every sector of agriculture—sheep, beef, dairy, pigs and grain—is at a low. One has only to look at the number of hotels that are for sale or at Caledonian MacBrayne's latest passenger and vehicle figures to see that tourism—an industry that is of enormous importance to the north—is also in decline.  People will feel included only if they experience a standard of living similar to that enjoyed in the more prosperous areas. A good health service, quality education and care for the elderly are seen as a right. I give members a local example. Lorn and Islands district general hospital, which cares for the needs of a large mainland area and many of the islands, was recently offered a brand new scanner—worth millions—by the North British Hotels Trust for nothing. However, our health service has so far been unable to come up with the £50,000 a year necessary to run it. That means that ailing patients, often in pain, are faced with long journeys to the central belt, when they should be treated at the new hospital in Oban. The Conservatives believe that we should devolve power locally to health care professionals and the communities that they serve. Those professionals and communities know the problems; they have the answers. "Social Justice" states that the Executive intends to reduce the gap between the employment rate in the worst areas and the average employment rate for Scotland. Why, then, is the Executive permitting policies to be pursued that are increasing unemployment, decreasing incomes and discouraging investment? Rural communities are being bombarded on all sides. The proposed legislation on land reform, feudal tenure and banning hunting will not increase income by a penny, but it will strike at the heart of communities—however they are defined—and simply add more bureaucracy and red tape. All people want is a simple, level playing field that includes all the players. In the Highlands and Islands, as in the rest of Scotland, people are concerned about their jobs, families, communities and having a stable future. This document addresses those issues with platitudes that—although they may be touching—are driven by ineffective idealism. The Executive may be good at producing glossy documents at great expense, but it never consults or includes the people who matter. If it did, it would discover that it should be working hand in hand with local communities to find the solutions that are relevant to the problems of specific communities in specific areas. That is what inclusion is about.

Could the minister give us an assurance about what his party is doing to ensure that the poor people of France can eat Scotch beef at their millennium parties?

I support Alex Johnstone's amendment, but I am truly horrified by the Executive's amendment. How can we commend the steps that the Executive says that it has taken to help Scottish agriculture in rural Scotland? I suppose that it is referring to the so-called new money, the £40 million that it claims to have made available. I want to show members part of that £40 million. I have in my hand what looks like a cheque book, but is in fact a British calf passport. Farmers use the passports to achieve traceability. The passport would cost our farmers £7, but as part of the new money package for agriculture, we are currently given it free. I am grateful for that until I look at the document that I have in my other hand, which is a Dutch cattle passport. The Dutch cattle passport costs the equivalent of £1.60. Either our system is far more expensive than that of the Dutch, or the value put on our cattle passports is exaggerated, to increase the size of the mythical compensation money. Incidentally, the Dutch passport has a bar code and is extremely easy to use, whereas ours are bulky and old-fashioned in comparison. If members visit any beef suckler calf sale in the Highlands, they will see the extraordinary sight of farmers carrying huge shopping bags—even suitcases—containing the passports. We have never had an agricultural crisis like this one. Since Labour came to power, the crisis has developed with incredible speed. Although farm prices have fallen all over the world, in Britain, we have had by far the worst experience. Sheep farmers have had to watch their ewes being sold for a few pence; their lambs have been sold for less than half what they were worth under the previous Administration. I would love to find a farmer who would not be happy to turn his clock back to 1996. Had farmers known what was going to happen to agriculture under the Labour-Liberal Democrat pact, most would have sold their farms and stock. However, there was no warning of the  speed of the collapse. The Government has heaped masses of extremely costly red-tape rules and bureaucratic paper on to the bonfire that is consuming Scottish agriculture at an alarming rate. As I look at the Government benches, I wonder which guy will be on top of that bonfire tomorrow night. There will not be many fireworks in rural Scotland. To most of us who live there, it seems as if there is a plot to destroy rural life that is far more effective than anything conceived by Guy Fawkes.

If Mr Finnie is referring to me, I have no intention of being on top of any fire. We are looking to the future; surely we shall not spend today discussing the BSE crisis all over again. We want to do something positive for rural Scotland. All I suggested was that we might have a slightly cheaper method of traceability, as farmers in other countries seem to have.

That is an interesting point. It had not occurred to me, but it is quite true.

I would like to refer briefly to the agricultural business improvement scheme—something else that is being done to help hill-farming businesses. In February, Lord Sewel said in a statement that, whatever happened, there would be enough money to fulfil all the ABIS plans. He encouraged hill farmers to take up the scheme. One condition is that planning must be done and paid for before the application is accepted, the money being refunded later by the Government. I will tell members what has happened: the applications amount to some £13 million, but there is only £1.2 million in the kitty to pay farmers.

That is not new money. That is old money which has disappeared. I sincerely hope that the Executive will honour Lord Sewel's pledge and its own commitment to the ABIS. I would also like to ask the Executive about its plans for next year's hill livestock compensatory  allowances, now that the European Commission has agreed on a one-year transition period to an area-based scheme. The industry must know in advance, so that it can budget and plan.

It appears that, although the price of lambs is even lower than last year—

Certainly. It appears that although the price of lambs is even lower than last year, the sheep annual premium, which is meant to be a safety valve for farmers, will be lower than last year. Can the Executive please explain that?

Will Mr Russell give way?

Does Mr Russell agree that if he had a fiver for every time that George Lyon, and  some other Liberals, had said that they would abolish tuition fees, we could easily afford to build a university?

I have a question on the subject of Lews Castle College. Does Nicol Stephen agree that, if primary and secondary funding is accepted to be one-and-a-half times as much in the Highlands and Islands, the university funding for Lews Castle College probably should be the same amount extra as well? That college considers itself to be some 25 per cent underfunded anyway. Will Nicol Stephen address that, to determine whether the college could receive extra funding in recognition of its remoteness?

I welcome the minister's statement, especially the bit about better consumer information, which will encourage more consumption of fish in this age of information addiction. I also welcome support for producer organisations, but I must ask the minister if he has taken account of the smaller fishermen, especially those on the west coast, who are not part of producer organisations and who are in danger of being swamped by them. How will the minister encourage the industry's future, and encourage young people into it? How can young people, for example, come into the prawn creel fishing industry with prawn quotas at their present price level? And what is he doing for the scallop fishermen who have been tied up all summer, complying with the ban on scallop fishing due to amnesic shellfish poisoning? They have  been unable to do any other fishing and have thus had no income at all.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. In deference to you and to Mr Ross Finnie—and before I am accused of ignoring protocol in this Parliament—I must explain that it is critical to my contribution to use the word ewe. I have recently been to markets in the Highlands and Islands for the Autumn store lamb and cast ewe sales. I have watched with horror the expressions of men and women as their livelihoods go down the drain. The price of lamb might have hardened slightly, but it is still half what it was three years ago. The price of cast correct ewes, which would previously have been upwards of £30, has fallen to less than a fiver. The feeding ewes, which one would expect to trade at between £10 and £20, are worthless. I saw one lot of 40 good feeding sheep go for £2. That is 5p per head—a drop of 99.66 per cent. That is just one example of the crisis in Scottish agriculture, which is in a worse state than it has been at any time in living memory. In Scotland, the agriculture sector employs 69,000 people directly and 200,000 indirectly. Most of those jobs are in rural communities and sustain rural populations. The Scottish tourism industry is worth about £2.7 billion a year and there is no doubt that farming shapes and manages much of the world-famous culture and environment that attracts people to spend that money here. The crisis in Scotland is three times as bad as it is in Europe. One of the main reasons for that is the ridiculously high price of fuel. Admittedly, red diesel can be used in tractors, but the reality of transporting animals and people in remote areas is that any so-called new money in support of Highland agriculture is absorbed by continual hikes in the cost of fuel. Since Labour came to  power, farm incomes have fallen by three quarters. Within the UK, more than 2,000 dairy farmers have gone bust, the pig herd has fallen by more than 1 million and numerous slaughterhouses have been forced to close. The Scottish beef industry, which used to be famous for having the finest product in the world, is being held back by the ludicrous ban on beef on the bone, even though the Donaldson report recommended lifting it and the Spongiform Encephalopathy Advisory Committee said that the chances of being struck down with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease owing to consumption of beef on the bone was less than the chances of being struck by lightning or hit by a meteorite.

Unfortunately, I was in the Highlands and Islands, dealing with people who were complaining about sheep prices. As a farmer in George Lyon's constituency, I ask him—I see that he is not here—why he cannot persuade the Executive to take the lead for once, especially as Scottish beef is one of our best exports and he promised before the election to support the lifting of the ban. I suppose that he will say that he is waiting for medical evidence, but what about the scandal whereby pig bones—which cannot be fed to pigs in Scotland—are exported, ground up and fed to pigs whose meat is sold in Scotland? So far, the Parliament has failed to protect the Highland hill farmers, who expected an improvement on Westminster. Although there are some factors over which we have little control, we should be able to produce a level playing field for Scottish agriculture. In last week's The Scottish Farmer magazine, a qualified vet called for an end to the ridiculous situation where inspectors turned up at his farm to inspect the inspectors who were inspecting him dipping his sheep. The new rules for slaughterhouses are cryptic. Why should we need qualified vets for hygiene inspections in abattoirs? The rest of Europe does not need them, so why do we? The Executive should push for a reduction in interest rates, which would reduce the value of sterling. It should cut the Meat Hygiene Service inspection charges and try to reduce the enormous veterinary costs to Scottish farmers and crofters. In the Highlands and Islands, farming and crofting still provide the basis of the social network  of many communities. All that those communities ask is that the Parliament gives them a chance to continue to farm.

Does the Scottish Executive accept that its loss of objective 1 status for the Highlands and Islands, which was so hard fought for by previous Administrations, was somewhat careless? It will cost the region about £40 million over the next five years, despite the temporary alternative funding.

Thank you, Mr Reid. It is a coincidence that this debate on the Mallaig road should arise now, as I was on that road just the other day, stuck behind a huge fish lorry on one of the single-track sections. I think that the driver was probably Spanish—the lorry certainly was—as he took no notice of, or perhaps could not understand, the sign suggesting that slow vehicles should use the passing places to allow overtaking. Although I was very happy to be among such beautiful scenery, I reflected that, if I had been a tourist trying to catch a ferry to Skye, Barra or Lochboisdale, I would have been a shade irritated if I had missed it because of the lorry. In fact, I was travelling in the  opposite direction, from Mallaig to Fort William. I had started my journey in North Uist, where I had filled up my car with diesel that cost 89p a litre, which made me a shade irritated, too. The Mallaig road is special. As Fergus said, it is the only single-track trunk road in Scotland, and it is an important artery for the fishing community in the area and to the many tourists who flock to the area each year and whom we in the Highlands want to encourage. Mallaig services many communities—such as the Knoydart peninsula—by boat; as the road is a main road in principle, it should be upgraded to one in practice. In the summer, tourist cars and buses mix with the heavy commercial traffic of fish lorries, fish farm lorries and timber extraction lorries, and there are many minor bumps and accidents, especially on the single-track sections. Many loads of sheep and cattle also travel the roads to the market in Fort William. The upgrading of that section would significantly lessen the time taken by service vehicles to reach Mallaig, and I have no doubt that Mallaig and the surrounding communities would prosper from improved and speedier access. On fuel, it is interesting to note that an average car will do about seven miles less per gallon on a single-track road than on ordinary roads. As I keep reiterating, the key to prosperity in the Western Isles and the western Highlands is cheaper fuel and improved access, and the Mallaig road is a classic example of what we are all talking about.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether, in the light of the £9 million aid package on offer to the salmon farming industry, it will consider the provision of support to wild fishery management in the west Highlands to reverse the decline of salmon and sea trout stocks. (S1O-399)

Does the minister accept and understand the value of wild salmon and sea trout stocks to the overall Scottish rural economy, which in 1997 was estimated by the Nixon task force report to be in excess of £70 million annually?

Does the minister accept that if there is no improvement in sheep prices and no reduction in fuel prices, there will not be many crofters left?

Will the Executive take on board the fact that a lot of the voluntary organisations that are being funded have to pay back a lot of money in VAT? For example, the Royal National Lifeboat Institution is paying back £1.5 million a year. Will the Executive address that matter?

There are many commendable voluntary groups and bodies in the Highlands and Islands, but in respect of the geography and topography of the area, there are two that stand out in importance. We have many beautiful but dangerous mountains and miles of equally beautiful and dangerous coastline that are visited by thousands of people. Luckily, we have the mountain rescue squads and the lifeboats. Both of those excellent organisations are totally supported by the public's voluntary contributions and they are fiercely independent. They not only save many lives but also save us, the general public, an enormous and unquantifiable sum of money each year. In the '70s, the then Prime Minister, Jim Callaghan, asked a lifeboat convener what it cost to fund the lifeboats. The reply was £17 million, to which Jim said that it would cost 10 times more if the service was run by the Government. Perhaps he exaggerated, but there is no reason to suppose that the equation has changed much. The Royal National Lifeboat Institution funding requirement, which today is £70 million, represents a far greater figure in financial savings to our people. The lifeboats are supported entirely by the public; they have no help, financial or otherwise, from the Government, so no strings are attached. There is partnership, in that the lifeboats work closely with paid civil servants, such as coastguards, who normally alert them to casualties, and the other rescue services. Occasionally, RNLI research has been useful to the Royal Navy. There are 250 lifeboat stations, of which 45 are in Scotland. All are voluntary with one paid man per boat, who is usually the mechanic or coxswain. The new fast boats, which do 25 knots, can operate out to 50 miles and co-operate with the helicopters. The operational side is run from the headquarters in Poole, but there are operational and technical staff in Scotland who work with stations independently and keep in touch with headquarters.  The present chief of operations was trained in Scotland. The make-up of crews varies greatly nowadays. For example, my local station in Oban, Argyll, has a master mariner as cox and a lawyer, a doctor, a cook, a shopkeeper and a fisherman as crew—people from all walks of life who take great pride in being a cog in this inspiring network. The fund-raising headquarters is in Edinburgh and Scotland has the best per capita fund-raising record in the UK. There are hundreds of large and small fund-raising organisations, both coastal and inland. The cox decides whether the lifeboat sails; we must remember that when ordinary craft come in to shelter, the lifeboat is going out. The RNLI saves more than 3,000 lives each year—sometimes at the cost of the lives of the crew. In 1971, the Longhope disaster occurred, in which nearly the whole crew perished. Despite Longhope being a tiny community, a replacement crew was in place within 24 hours. A year later, there was another lifeboat disaster in Fraserburgh—again, that did not deter recruitment. The Lochaber mountain rescue squad is the largest of the squads and, like the lifeboats, is entirely funded by the public. It costs £60,000 per annum to run and has so far undertaken 64 rescues this year—some of which were multiple rescues, not just individual rescues—and that figure is likely to rise to 90 rescues per annum. The squad works in partnership with the police, who supply it with some £1,500 of equipment per annum. It has access to the Sea King helicopters and services at Lossiemouth and HMS Gannet station in Prestwick. Each year, the squad raises some £20,000 from the highly popular Glen Nevis river race, which is also a great tourist attraction. Like the lifeboat people, the mountain rescue teams work in terrifying conditions for no money because they want to help others. Those wonderful organisations, financed by the public, save many lives and an enormous amount of money. They also provide the space for individual and team acts of bravery and self-sacrifice which inspire pride in people and in communities. With the millennium approaching, it is probable that there will be more exuberant, ill-equipped amateur mountaineers, and possibly more would-be Sinbads putting to sea in unsuitable craft. It would be helpful if the Executive could offset problems by putting out information through television, leaflets and information centres, warning of the considerable dangers of climbing and sailing in the Highlands and Islands in winter and during the millennium.

Karen Whitefield talks about victims of crime, but Labour has totally ignored them. Funding for Victim Support Scotland was slashed by £27,000 in 1998-99.

Will you take an intervention?

I do not know how, but I will try to condense my remarks. I am pleased to support Tavish Scott's motion and congratulate him on raising this issue. Shetland is, of course, part of the Highlands and Islands, although with its admirable independence, it has the Shetland Salmon Farmers Association. Shetland has a reputation for producing the best salmon in Scotland—the fish certainly look and taste better than most. I want, however, to widen the debate to cover the problems faced by the Scottish Salmon Growers Association, the other main relevant body in the Highlands and Islands, whose members face the same problems as those faced in Shetland.  ISA was classified as exotic by the European Union, which unfortunately means that stock has to be destroyed. Unlike in Norway and Canada, where ISA is simply controlled, we try to eliminate it. That has led to the slaughter of many thousands of perfectly healthy salmon of different sizes. In any other business, especially agriculture, which is similar to aquaculture, compensation would be paid for slaughtered stock, if the slaughter was deemed to be in the public interest. The Executive's response was to say that £9 million would be made available to the industry, provided that the industry could match that sum pound for pound. That was unacceptable to the salmon farmers, who were not only reeling from the effects of ISA, but were having to deal with the collapse in salmon prices. The farmers posed the question—which I asked in the chamber—whether the Executive would act as a guarantor for the insurance of the salmon farmers' stock. The Executive's answer was non-committal, although it was obvious that the matter was being considered. Such a solution seemed good—a Scottish solution to a Scottish problem—and was what the industry wanted. In any other fish farming country, insurance can easily be obtained with the payment of a sum equal to the value of a small percentage of the farmer's stock. However, in Scotland, because ISA-infected stock is completely destroyed, there is no collateral on which to obtain such insurance. The Executive has liaised with Westminster and produced a £9 million package for Scottish salmon growers. The earlier demand for a pound-for-pound match has been removed, and I will not call the sum of £3 million insulting, as any help for the industry is welcome. However, why was it necessary to go to Westminster? If the Scottish Parliament is meant to act closely with the Scottish people and with Scottish industry, why could it not—and, better still, why cannot it now—change its mind and accept a uniquely Scottish solution to a uniquely Scottish problem? Under these difficult circumstances, I ask the Executive to act as a guarantor for the insurance of Scotland's salmon farming industry.

The Scottish Parliament must recognise that Scotland has vast areas that are sparsely populated, with remote communities that are being crucified by the present policies. It is interesting to note that in Canada, which shares some rural problems with Scotland, a litre of petrol is 20p and car tax is £50. In the Highlands and Islands, petrol is 80p a litre, which is four times as much, and car tax is £150, which is three times as much. Frankly, it would not be surprising if we had another Highland clearance to Canada soon. It is vital that people understand that, in many areas outside the central belt, the car is a necessity, not a luxury. Although there is public transport in some localities, it is often inconvenient to use, which results in under-utilised buses. What is more polluting than an empty bus? Why should the people who most need their cars have to pay the highest fuel costs in Europe? It does not make sense to them. It is the Executive's responsibility to redress the serious imbalance. I was surprised to hear George Lyon and Alasdair Morrison state last week that the tourism figures for 1999 were not as bad as had been expected and were no worse than last year. Caledonian MacBrayne's recent figures expose that that was not the case in the north-west of Scotland. They show an overall decline of 20,911 passengers, 4,117 cars and 1,263 commercial vehicles. That comes on top of the fact that last  year's figures were considerably down on those for 1997. Any downturn in the economies of the fragile island communities that are served by CalMac could have devastating consequences, especially as those areas are already deep in recession because of the disastrous state of agriculture, fishing, the tweed industry and tourism. The key to helping rural communities to help themselves lies in low fuel costs and improved infrastructure. Previous schemes such as the Vattersay causeway, the Scalpay bridge and the Berneray causeway—which were all initiated by Conservative Administrations—have made a huge difference to people's lives, but we must not stop there; we must keep improving access with new and better roads. One such improvement would be a new road link from Tolsta to Ness on the Isle of Lewis. That link was first mooted 150 years ago, but the plan was never carried out. The road would be only nine miles long, but it would link up the whole coastline of the island and would be of great benefit to the local economy. A major problem that has recently been brought to my attention—I see Alasdair Morrison laughing—and which is particularly expensive is the damage that is being done to rural roads by enormously heavy timber lorries.

The obvious solution would be to upgrade rail systems to facilitate the carriage of timber, but that is unfeasible in many areas of the west. The option there is coastal shipping but—I hate to say this—if the coastal shipping industry is ignored for much longer there will be no ships left to turn to and that option will be gone. "It is the aim of the Government to maintain the social and economic development of the Scottish Highlands and Islands communities through the support of sea transport services in the Highlands and Islands". That statement was made in 1997. Where have all the ships gone? The gradual withdrawal of the tariff rebate subsidy has taken freight from coastal shipping and on to the roads. In 1995, the MV St Oran carried nearly 13,000 tonnes of timber, but so far in 1999 she has carried only 400 tonnes, which was cargo for the Argyll and Bute timber transport initiative. The withdrawal of the TRS from timber is immensely damaging to our road systems. The subsidised ferries encourage more haulage to ferry ports, often for just a short crossing. The large and heavily laden lorries increase congestion and can be the cause of major accidents. In contrast, in one recent trip by water, 415 tonnes of timber were carried from Ardrishaig in Argyll to the Mersey, saving 12,000 road miles.

I am finishing. The tariff rebate subsidy was discredited because of some fraud, not because it was ineffective. The TRS used to be 40 per cent on timber, coal and building materials, but it is now only 20 per cent and applies only to coal cargoes. A sensible solution would be to reintroduce TRS for timber and other bulk cargoes, such as road salt, which is used by all the Highland councils. Even if the TRS were set at 40 per cent, the bill for the carriage of 200,000 tonnes of timber by sea would be only £1.5 million, and the number of road miles saved from heavy lorries would be in excess of 6 million. Given that Caledonian MacBrayne's subsidy has risen to £17 million, it seems only fair that some consideration be given to the highly adaptable coastal shipping industry before it disappears.

Is the Executive aware of the laudable responsibility shown by Scottish scallop fishermen in complying with the ban despite the great financial loss to themselves? Can ministers give some idea of the lead time between the results of monitoring being ascertained by the scientists and those results being made public?

I welcome this debate on the future of the Cowal peninsula, which is an important part of Argyll and Bute and should be an obvious gateway to the Highlands and Islands. I congratulate  Duncan Hamilton on taking forward the initiative of the  Dunoon Observer and Argyllshire Standard  .  Transport infrastructure is the key to the region. The Cowal peninsula is in many ways similar to an island and two election campaigns in the western isles and a lifetime have made me aware of how crucial ferry services are to those areas.  Cowal's economy, which had become reliant on the Holy loch base, is now very fragile. The agriculture industry is in a chronic depression and while prices plummet, so does the level of employment in an area that has the second highest unemployment in Argyll and Bute.  Forestry, which used to provide a lot of jobs when the commission employed its own workers in the forestry villages, employs hardly anyone. Most of the work is done by outside contractors. That policy could be reversed by using local labour for planting, husbandry and felling. If much more were made of them, Forest Enterprise's outdoor sporting and leisure resources could help those villages to become healthy communities again.  Dunoon's shopkeepers are not making money. People find it easier to shop where the goods are cheaper-across the water-and what is the point of charging people to park in Dunoon when there is no serious parking problem? It smells of bureaucracy and drives people away.  The welcome addition of a marina at Sandbank will create some jobs and restore and improve the appearance of the area. It is vital that we attract more such inward investment to the area, but that will be difficult while the uncertainty about the pier and the ferries remains.  Dunoon pier is an attractive legacy of the Victorian era. It is a focal point in Dunoon and I believe that a breakwater should be built to protect it and that it should be restored and used commercially as a point of interest in the town.  A roll-on, roll-off pier facility should be built, because that is the sort of ferry that will be used in future for short-haul trips. The two ferry companies should continue in a spirit of healthy competition. Dunoon and the Cowal peninsula's beauty will always sell the area as a place to live in or visit, but financial incentive must be forthcoming to encourage people to make their homes there even if their jobs are across the water.  I cannot leave this debate without mentioning the special islands needs allowance, which Argyll and Bute, with its numerous islands, should surely now receive, or without mentioning that lower fuel costs are the other vital key to restoring our remoter rural areas. Dunoon and Cowal are steeped in history. Let us take a leaf out of America's book, and provide our rural areas with sound infrastructure and better access so that they  can help restore their former prosperity themselves.  We must remember that an economy that becomes dependent on a military or naval base is bound to suffer, at least temporarily, from a forced withdrawal. The inhabitants of Benbecula are about to experience the same problem, and I shudder to think what effect the closure of Faslane would have on Helensburgh and the surrounding areas if the Scottish National party was to implement its pledge to remove Trident.  Last, Para Handy and his puffer the Vital Spark were famous, frequent visitors to Dunoon. What Dunoon and Cowal need is the Vital Spark once again.

rose-

Will the minister give way?

In the run-up to the European election, our party's slogan was "In Europe, not run by Europe."  It proved quite popular with the electorate. I submit that this European waste water directive is an example of what we were talking about. It has been landed on the industry without consultation and its implementation will be disastrously expensive for the Scottish fish processing sector, whose 230 units provide 43 per cent of the sea fish processing employment in the UK. The industry is a vital employer in a region that has been decimated by the downturn in the oil and agriculture industries.  The directive will obviously affect the fishing industry as a whole, because the extra costs will push up the price of fish products in the shops, which will make them less competitive than other food products. Many processors will go out of business. Not only will jobs be lost, but some skills, such as the filleting of small fish, will disappear. Such skills are specific to the north-east; if they are lost now, they will be difficult to replace.  My friend, David Davidson, has talked about white fish in the north-east, but I would like to draw attention to Scottish salmon and trout producers and processors. The industry provides thousands of jobs in the Highlands and Islands and 38 processing units in Scotland deal only with salmon and trout. Recently, the hard-pushed salmon industry has been hit hard by the outbreaks of infectious salmon anaemia. It is nearly impossible for farms to obtain insurance against the value of their stocks because of the policy of destroying all fish stocks in an infected farm. That is not the case in other fish-producing countries such as Norway, so the Scottish product is already becoming less competitive.  It is vital that we do not simply accept a European directive that damages an enormously important Scottish industry. I ask for support in allowing time to digest the technical review, which, I hope, will provide less costly solutions for the  Scottish fish processing industry. We are here to promote sustainable jobs in Scotland, not sheepishly to accept a European directive that will have precisely the opposite effect.

I support amendment S1M-19.2. As the fisheries spokesman for the Scottish Conservative party, I have recently met many fishermen from the east coast and the west coast. They are all very angry men, and I do not blame them. Recent events have been a slap in the face for Scottish fishermen. The extraordinary failure of those in power at Westminster to consult has been perceived as a colossal insult to the representatives of one of our oldest and most valuable industries.  I recognise that the new boundary may be the median line between England and Scotland and that it has been drawn within the principles that govern the establishment of new sea boundaries between countries, but some thought must surely be given to centuries of history, convention and  fishery practices. Scottish members at Westminster surely have a duty to protect the rights and interests of their constituents and, above all in this case, the members of the Scottish fishing industry. The statutory instrument that has caused all this bother was approved without the knowledge of, or consultation with, Scottish fishermen or their representatives or, for that matter, any English ones.  Why was there no consultation and what were the Westminster parliamentarians thinking about? Did they honestly think that the removal of 6,000 square miles of traditional Scottish fishings amounted simply to what Donald Dewar called the tidying-up of boundaries in accordance with international law? Is that an example of open government by the party that champions that slogan? Is it an example of consensual process? On a scale of one to 10, how would members rate that? A resounding vote of nul points is echoing around the chamber. If that is open government, what is the alternative like?  I know that the Scottish Labour party, the SNP and the Liberal Democrats were campaigning in the Scottish election-perhaps that is an excuse-but the Executive's motion is a smokescreen to hide the fact that it has sold Scottish fisheries and the fishermen down the river. Members of the Executive could not even manage to leak the information, which is odd for a party that is famous for its faulty plumbing. Is there some sinister reason why Labour is introducing a boundary that is based on international legal conventions when all that was needed was a clarification of the existing boundary?  Although there is clearly a need for a geographical boundary to define the Scottish Parliament's area of legislative and administrative competence, it should have been based on existing custom, practice and precedent, after consultation with the fishermen. The current boundary, which has been recognised for centuries, is used by the Scottish Fisheries Protection Agency in its annual report. It is also used, as has already been mentioned, in the Civil Jurisdiction (Offshore Activities) Order 1987.  The line runs due east from Marshall meadows. As we know, the proposed new English waters contain the prolific fishing grounds of Swallow hole and Berwick bank. Scottish fisherman can still fish them, but what happens if inshore waters regulations and EU directives are interpreted differently by the Scottish and English Parliaments? The new line bisects the Berwick field and a boat might have to change its gear halfway through a haul if it crossed the line. Ninety per cent of the boats that fish that area are Scottish but, if prosecuted for any misdemeanour or offence committed south of the line, they would  have to face English courts and employ English lawyers.  Henry McLeish stated that the boundary has no significance for other matters at sea, such as oil and gas, which are reserved. Surely there must be some doubt about that. Please let us be positive now and use common sense between our two Parliaments to sort the matter out. Let us use our new, devolved politics to address this wrong and to purge this insult to Scottish fishermen. I ask that the pre-existing line on the east coast be restored and I call on the Liberal Democrats, who support that proposal, to follow their conscience and principles and to vote with us to protect the interests of Scottish fishermen.

Will the minister clarify the position in relation to drift-net salmon fishing, which is banned in Scotland, but not in England? Will such fishing now be legal in the new waters?