2. To ask the Scottish Government what advice it has received regarding an independent Scotland’s share of the United Kingdom’s overseas properties. (S4O-02878)

In recent weeks, in a variety of settings including evidence sessions at Westminster, a series of experts have cited international law and legal opinion to highlight their concerns about the practicalities of sharing diplomatic assets that are currently held by the UK. Does the cabinet secretary have any legal advice that contradicts those opinions? If so, will she publish it so that the debate can be fully informed?

12. To ask the Scottish Government when ministers will next meet the board of NHS Lanarkshire. (S4O-02848)

That is a very surprising answer. Healthcare Improvement Scotland produced 21 recommendations to address the problems that were identified in NHS Lanarkshire. Some of those recommendations are quite vague, which makes it difficult to establish exactly what criteria will be used to show that progress has been made in improving certain aspects—for example, in involving the staff and making them feel part of the way forward. Will the cabinet secretary make known the criteria that will be set and the targets that have been given to NHS Lanarkshire, so that we know whether it will meet the challenges that HIS has laid down for it?

5. To ask the Scottish Government when it will publish the statistics for the Scottish welfare fund for the final quarter of 2013. (S4O-02831)

I thank the minister for that response, but it leaves me quite puzzled. When initial statistics that were published around September last year indicated that there had been a problem with the take-up of the Scottish welfare fund, I asked the First Minister, when he came before the Conveners Group, whether the statistics could be produced, because of the importance of the information. He gave a firm assurance that those statistics would be available in November, and he was also confident that there would be an increase in the uptake. We were then advised that the figures would not be produced until February, and now the minister appears to be indicating that they will be delayed further. Can she assure us that those statistics will be produced? Any problems that exist in the Scottish welfare fund really must be addressed, because that money has to get to the people in most need, who require the support of that fund.

Will the member take an intervention?

As members have pointed out, this year the Finance Committee was asked not just to look at whether the figures in the budget added up and moneys were being spent where the Scottish Government said they were but to scrutinise the budget by examining its contents against its ability to meet the aims of the national performance framework. I certainly found that form of budget scrutiny to be more interesting than the forms that I experienced in previous years. The one thing that has not changed since last year is that we remain in a very difficult economic climate in which to bring forward a budget. We must recognise that. I believe that checking the budget against the aspirations of the NPF is a more useful way of scrutinising the Government’s proposals because, regardless of whether a budget line rises or falls, the ability to meet the NPF’s aspirations will always be the measure against which we judge a budget’s efficacy. Whereas before we simply argued about whether we believed that we were being presented with a budget that would do what the Government said it would, now we can identify the outcomes that are expected of it against the Government’s set of indicators. We will still have disagreements about whether we believe that the Scottish Government is addressing the correct priorities, but we should be able to do so in the context of whether the outcomes that it has set itself can and will be met via its budget proposals. Clearly, there are spending commitments in the budget that deserve our support overall, but the budget is, sadly, devoid of a coherent strategy to achieve the Government’s own declared objectives in areas such as creating jobs, growing the economy, eradicating poverty and reducing inequality, although there are clear budget lines that relate to each of those well-intentioned purposes. The major concern for me is bedroom tax mitigation, but I will come to that later. As a member of both the Finance Committee and the Welfare Reform Committee, the perspective of the budget that I have developed leads me to believe that, in purely presentational terms alone, the Scottish Government must enhance the budget document to show more clearly how the welcome additional contribution that it has made towards mitigating the impacts of welfare reform will help. For example, in relation to advice services, Scotland received £1.7 million a year as Barnett consequentials between 2013-14 and 2014-15. The extra money allocated by the Scottish Government, gives an overall projected expenditure on advice of £7.9 million up to 2015. The £5.4 million that is going to advice work is presented, on a different page in the budget document, as £7.45 million. That higher figure includes £2.35 million from Money Advice UK, but it is left out when it suits the Government’s purpose. The budget document gives two values for the Scottish welfare fund: £33 million and £37.6 million. The reason for that is that the latter figure takes account of £4.6 million for administration, but that fact is disguised in different parts of the budget. The component elements of the Scottish welfare fund should be clearer, as doubts are already emerging. For example, Citizens Advice Scotland has stated: “We have not seen much evidence of the holistic approach that was envisaged for the scheme”. Clarifying those budget details and having guidance on the scheme would undoubtedly assist people who are looking for information on what is being made available and would help them to assess the fund’s efficacy. Clarifications can be found in the budget, but the contributions made by various measures are not always explained, and I am left to wonder why that is the case. We need single, consistent totals for expenditure, and no expenditure should be cited that is not associated with an identifiable cost. We really should not have to trawl through supplementary information from a range of sources to establish what spending is actually being proposed by the Government. I could list a few other examples, but time does not permit. Suffice it to say that, in future budgets, all available breakdowns of costs should be reported. However, no amount of smoke and mirrors can mask the fact that it has now been verified, on more than one occasion, that there is no legal impediment to the Government spending more of its own money to fully mitigate the impact of the bedroom tax.

I must have used a buzz word, because the member obviously had her briefing handy. Well done for trotting out the facts about DHP.

Yes, the facts. No one disputes the fact that DHP can be multiplied by only 2.5. That is a well-established figure. We have discussed it in the Welfare Reform Committee. We know that. I turn to the important point that we cannot get around. The £20 million that John Swinney has allocated so far has rightly been welcomed, but it is also estimated that it is less than half the money that is needed. Just as the no-eviction policies that have been introduced in local government do not protect all social tenants, the £20 million that has been provided to top up discretionary housing payments is not sufficient to cover the impact of the bedroom tax. If North Lanarkshire Council can top-up its DHP allocation to the maximum and then put £2.2 million towards additional hardship funding, it surely cannot be beyond Mr Swinney to do likewise in his own Scottish budget. If it is the case that authorities are only allowed to spend up to the figure that Fiona McLeod outlined, North Lanarkshire Council must be breaking the law. If so, what is the Scottish Government doing to try to prevent North Lanarkshire Council from finding additional resources to help those who are affected by the bedroom tax? If that council can do it, the Scottish Government can do it. Where there is a will, there is a way.

12. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met Energy UK. (S4O-02788)

Is the minister aware that, although it is encouraging that business confidence in the energy sector remains positive at present, there was a slight drop in overall confidence in the third quarter of last year? Figures within the oil and gas sector in particular have stated: “Factors such as a shortage of skilled personnel, wage inflation and growing operating costs may have dampened any rise in optimism across the industry”. Does the minister recognise that situation and can he outline any specific actions that the Scottish Government is taking to address the skills shortage in particular?

This debate is welcome because it is vital that we look at what challenges the NHS in Scotland is currently facing and that we look forward in order that we can make the progress that we all want. The NHS in Scotland may not be broken, but is not at present in a good place. That is regrettable, because Scotland cannot afford our NHS to be doing anything other than addressing the current health needs of our people, and positioning itself to face the increasing pressures that will face it in the longer term. Whatever views are expressed in the debate, the one word that should not be taken with any seriousness is “surprise”. We have known for some considerable time that pressures have been growing and what the strains are. Primarily, they are demographic change and staffing difficulties. Those are not new issues. They did not emerge as problems for the Scottish Government after the last election or even after the 2007 election. They have been concerns that have been facing the NHS throughout the devolution period and before. Given that we knew that this was coming, why has it come to pass that our nursing and medical bodies are telling us today that things are as bad as they are? So, before we look forward, let us look back a few years to 2004. That was the year when, faced with the same growing demands on the NHS that confront it today, the then Minister for Health and Community Care, Malcolm Chisholm, set up the national framework advisory group to consider the future shape of the NHS in Scotland. Its report was delivered in 2005 and confirmed a lot of what we already knew. The NHS has a highly trained and committed staff who were capable of delivering health care that was on a par with that which was offered anywhere in the world. It confirmed that our medical and nursing schools produce first-class graduates and that huge progress has been made in tackling some of Scotland’s killer diseases. However, the report also noted that it was also apparent that over a range of health indicators we compared badly with some of our neighbours. It concluded that we needed to transform the NHS with a series of bold initiatives that would provide a framework to deliver safe, quick and sustainable health care for the future. It also concluded that we had to put aside what is sometimes seen as narrow self-interest and pull together to reconfigure Scotland's NHS to better serve our old, our infirm, our poor and our children’s children so that at last we might cast off our label of the sick man of Europe. When, on 20 October 2005 we debated that report—which was to become known as the Kerr report, and which has been denigrated this afternoon by the cabinet secretary—it was clear that there was widespread support for it. Indeed, when opening the debate for the SNP, which was then in Opposition, its health spokesperson, Shona Robison, said: “If the minister ensures implementation and delivery, he will have our full backing”.—[Official Report, 27 October 2005; c 20038.] In closing the debate that day, Stewart Maxwell was not so much concerned about the content of the Kerr report as he was exercised by a fear about the then Executive's commitment to implementing it. Indeed, he went so far as to say: “There are underlying concerns that the proposals that are laid out in Professor Kerr’s report will either not be fully implemented or will be” subject to “cherry-picking.”—[Official Report, 27 October 2005; c 20064.] However, barely a year later, the SNP—foremost among whose members was the man who is now the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing—began campaigning to have the Kerr report ripped up and to cherry pick NHS board decisions that it did not like. While the Kerr report was all about working smarter, looking ahead and planning to prevent crisis, the short-term electoral priorities of the SNP saw it being consigned to the dustbin. We should be in no doubt that that is one major reason why our hospitals are in crisis, why our nurses and doctors are under such pressure, why we have had to have investigations into the increasing mortality rates in NHS Lanarkshire and why there is such disarray in parts of the NHS. It is why, despite the warnings in the Kerr report, Audit Scotland has said that the NHS is focused on short-term measures and has no long-term financial plan. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will listen to Audit Scotland, if he will not listen to me. It is also the reason why the British Medical Association says that the strain that staff are under is unsustainable and why the RCN believes that the NHS is “creaking at the seams”. In its response to the Kerr report, Unison said: “the policy of ‘Partnership' developed by Scottish Executive Health Department, the Service and Staff Side since 1997 is the key to successful implementation of the Kerr Report.” It also said that “The NHS of the future will require a set of staff providing a different service, in different working environments and with different skills and roles” and that “We need to be sure that we make the best and the most appropriate use of our staff.” However, when it was necessary to invest in community projects to keep people out of hospital to enable health boards to save money against hospital budgets, we got obstruction to change from the Government and, rather than the prescribed reforms, we got petrification. When we needed rebalancing of budgets by health boards to make the proportionate spend on primary care and community services go up and the proportionate spend on hospitals go down, we got short-term political grandstanding in order to court popularity at the expense of progress. That approach simply cannot be allowed to continue. That is why we need another review. We cannot go back; we have to consider how we will go forward. We need an independent look at that because we cannot trust the present cabinet secretary with the future of the NHS.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the BBC in relation to its proposals for public service broadcasting as outlined in the white paper on independence. (S4O-02726)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her comprehensive response, which partly explained why I asked my question. She will contend that the white paper covers all the answers to the questions that are posed around public service broadcasting, should we have the misfortune to become an independent Scotland in the near future. However, there has to be more detail and we can have that detail only if there is on-going dialogue with the BBC. Can the cabinet secretary tell us whether, and how, she will keep the Parliament updated as we move towards 18 September next year?

Can the cabinet secretary tell the chamber whether Healthcare Improvement Scotland reported directly to him in the first instance? Has the report that was published today changed in any way from its original draft? Did any discussions take place between the cabinet secretary’s officials and Healthcare Improvement Scotland prior to publication of today’s report? Was the report presented to the board of NHS Lanarkshire before publication and did NHS Lanarkshire have any opportunity to seek a redraft of the report?

I will not take up much of the Parliament’s time, because we have moved on in relation to the issue since stage 1. When I heard evidence at the Finance Committee on the new criteria for the use of the landfill communities fund, alarm bells rang for me because, although the provision is well intentioned, we heard that organisations that seek to promote or further environmental projects in areas where there is no direct link to a landfill site foresaw the potential to use landfill communities fund moneys to further those projects. That is not of itself a major problem, but it takes away from the general principle of the landfill communities fund, which is that it should benefit those who suffer the disamenity of having a landfill site in their vicinity and who are subjected to noise and air pollution because of their proximity to a landfill site. The fund that supports those local communities should not be diminished in any way to support projects that have no connection to a landfill area. We have to address the problem, as it is a matter of principle. I have had discussions with the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, which have moved the issue on a fair way from where we were initially, for which I thank him. However, having spoken to representatives of those who use the landfill communities fund, I know that they are concerned that the fund might be diminished if the criteria are not set down clearly in the bill. They know the benefits that go to the local communities that are affected. That is why I have lodged amendment 1. I hope that the cabinet secretary will take on board the genuine arguments that have been made by those who see the inherent danger in changing the criteria to widen the scope of the landfill communities fund. That would be a retrograde step. It is not sufficient to have any protections in guidance; we have to see them in the bill. We must be absolutely clear what the landfill communities fund is for.

There is a set criterion at the moment that communities within a 10-mile radius of a landfill site can benefit from the tax that is collected in their area, which works well. We do not want to move away from that system. There is flexibility in it. We have heard arguments about its application in areas such as Skye, where the landfill site is 25 miles from the nearest settled community, but all the traffic to the site goes through that settled community, so there is a clear link between the landfill site and the community, which is affected by the site being in close proximity to it. I am talking about the fact that, as we heard in evidence and discussed at the committee, projects that have no direct link with where the landfill fund comes from are looking on it as a source of funding. That is not right and it must be changed. That is why I hope that the cabinet secretary will support my amendment. I move amendment 1.

Thank you for giving me the opportunity to wind up, Presiding Officer. I thank the cabinet secretary for genuinely trying to reach an accommodation on my desires on the matter. We have moved to a point where there is not much distance between us, but, as often happens, that has become the sticking point. I do not believe that there will be any additional red tape or obstacles put in the way of local communities that are directly affected. We are trying to uphold the criteria that currently exist; the 10-mile criterion takes away the problem, because a community in the vicinity of a landfill site is allowed to access the landfill communities fund. Those who administer the landfill communities fund have done so successfully for a number of years, and the system works well. The problem is that other people now have designs on the funding, and we want to prevent them from accessing it. The obstacles that amendment 1 would put in place are aimed at stopping the dissipation of a fund for local communities so that it cannot be used for projects that have no direct link to local areas that currently benefit from that funding. Unfortunately—although we have come very close, cabinet secretary—I will press my amendment, and I hope that the Parliament will support it.

Like the land and buildings transaction tax, the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill has been very technical, but it has had a remarkably straightforward and consensual passage on to the statute book. It is important to observe that, although they have never been a major obstacle to the smooth passage of the bill, some concerns remain that many aspects of the tax are to be contained in subordinate legislation. To an extent, that approach has created a lack of clarity and certainty about issues such as rates of tax and the power to change the list of materials to be taxed, as Iain Gray pointed out. Although the use of subordinate legislation has been somewhat contentious, members will know that I have been particularly exercised about the potential for the landfill communities fund to be raided for purposes that are beyond communities that are directly impacted by having landfill sites located near them. There can be no doubt that the landfill communities fund’s purpose is to provide benefits from the taxes that have been raised from landfills where there is a clear and recognisable disamenity to local communities. During evidence taking in the Finance Committee, I became concerned that organisations with a good appreciation of environmental issues indicated that they have designs on the resources available from the fund and are seeking to siphon off some of the moneys to help projects that are no doubt worthy but are entirely unrelated to the communities around which the landfill tax is generated. The suggestions that those groups put forward to review the scope of the landfill communities fund rang alarm bells with me, so I am glad that, despite the cabinet secretary’s rejection of my efforts to have the issue addressed in the bill, he has moved from where he was at stage 1 to accepting the validity of my concerns and agreeing to develop in guidance the points that I have made about ensuring that the connection between disamenity and funding is made. As I said at stage 1, any change to the current scope of the landfill communities fund would be fundamentally unfair and would violate the principles of environmental justice that we hope to deliver. There is no doubt that communities that are near landfill sites face more environmental problems as a result of landfill than those that are not. People who live near landfills have to deal with odours, dust, litter, noise and often visual intrusion, and changing the latitude of the fund would leave their communities with less money to mitigate the effects of landfill. Opening the fund to broader environmental objectives coupled with the envisaged reduction in landfill tax receipts will inevitably produce less funding to landfill communities in the long run. It is only fair that the communities that are the dumping ground for waste should receive the maximum possible benefits from the taxation of those landfill sites. At the end of the day, the money is raised at the expense of communities near landfills, so the money should be dedicated to those communities. I thank the cabinet secretary for taking the issue on board. It is because of his efforts that I have absolutely no difficulty whatsoever in voting for the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill.

While I have absolutely no sympathy for the Conservatives’ predicament, I appreciate that it must be difficult being a Tory in Scotland. It seems from the array of arguments that they have to deploy in trying to defend the coalition Government’s record that doing so cannot be easy for them—or, for that matter, for their partners in crime the Liberal Democrats. I can only imagine that it is due to the Tories’ desperation in the face of the overwhelming rejection of the contents of George Osborne’s autumn statement that they have chosen to ignore reality and bring to the chamber this delusional and perfunctory debate. I applaud Gavin Brown’s attempt to validate his Government’s economic analysis in his party’s self-congratulatory motion, but I remind him of the words of that committed Tory Dr Samuel Johnson, who said: “He that applauds him who does not deserve praise, is endeavouring to deceive the public”. Despite the case that is proffered by members on the Tory side of the chamber, the OBR has refused to endorse the chancellor’s self-assuredness, and it has instead contended that any recent economic and fiscal improvement is entirely cyclical and that growth will slow again significantly in 2014.

I am always looking on the bright side, Mr Rennie—I am just about to come to that. The OBR accepts that the economy has expanded by 2.6 per cent in the year to the fourth quarter of 2013, far ahead of its own 1 per cent March projection. However, it does not believe that that improvement in growth will carry over into next year with any impetus. Instead, it continues to hold to its prediction that we can expect quarterly growth of 0.5 per cent during 2014. That suggests that the annual GDP increase will peak at 2.7 per cent in the first quarter and slow to 2 per cent by this time next year. While the coalition partners try to talk up the country’s economic position, the country’s independent fiscal institution maintains that the chancellor’s claims for the success of his economic strategy are unsubstantiated, and that the change that he cites in his defence can be ascribed entirely to nothing more than cyclical strength, with no contribution from better supply-side performance. That in turn means that the structural budget deficit forecasts are no better—and are in fact slightly worse—than they were in March, despite falling headline borrowing. Despite what the Tories say, the OBR analysis indicates that the chancellor is barely meeting his medium-term fiscal mandate while balancing the cyclically adjusted current budget five years ahead. Indeed, the OBR predicts that the economic situation will become less favourable, with growth slowing and unemployment levelling off at 7 per cent.

Because the rate of growth will be slowing down—that is not a difficult concept. We need counter-cyclical measures in a period of economic downturn, and not self-delusional back-slapping for an economy that is doing what most economies would be doing at this point in the economic cycle, regardless of Government policy. So much for the Tories’ position—what about the Scottish Government’s position? Predictably, the Scottish Government’s counter-argument to the Tory motion is to resort to the tried-and-trusted excuse that any economic woes facing Scotland are all the fault of the constitution and that only constitutional change will fix the problem. Ministers sit there twiddling their thumbs and hoping that economic misfortune will drive Scots into the yes camp next September. We know that that strategy is not working, but that gives me no pleasure because it means that Scotland’s workforce, its unemployed and its households are not being properly defended from the Tories. A cynical short-term political strategy is hurting Scots and there is a failure to protect them from the damage that is being inflicted on them. That need not be the case. Under current devolved powers, the Scottish Government has the ability to support the long-term future of important industrial sectors such as manufacturing, and in vital areas such as education and skills the Parliament already holds full powers. Public procurement could be better used to enhance Scotland’s economy, as it is not Westminster but European Union directives that impose limits on what the Scottish Government can do. That is the case now, and the same circumstances would prevail in an independent Scotland, so it is simply not credible to argue that constitutional change in and of itself will boost Scotland’s economic prospects, as the SNP amendment claims. Global economic forces have acted on all world economies and will continue to impact on Scotland, whether or not it is independent. Bad policy decisions from Westminster and the Scottish Government are adding to our problems, so let us start to address them now. For a start, we need an end to the Tory-SNP alliance—[Interruption.]

We need an end to the Tory-SNP alliance against Labour’s plan to freeze gas and electricity bills—members might as well accept that that is the one thing that they agree on. In addition, it is not too late to support the long-term change to the energy market that is needed if we are to stop bills rising this winter. Rather than make uncosted promises of jam tomorrow, the Scottish Government could start its transformational change in childcare now. We need long-term planning if we are to tackle the cost of living crisis, and we need genuine transformational change in areas such as house building, skills development and childcare. All afternoon, Tory and SNP members have patted themselves on the back and congratulated themselves without having any right to the praise that they afford themselves. As people say, self-praise is no praise.

Although it is undoubtedly welcome that BAE Systems has chosen the Clyde for the construction of the future type 26 combat ships, we should be in no doubt that that work will materialise in Govan and Scotstoun only if they, like the rest of Scotland, remain part of the UK or if the white paper tells us next week that an independent Scotland will see massive investment on a similar scale to the UK’s future naval procurement for the newly created Scottish navy. Somehow I doubt that we can expect that, so the reality we face is that Scottish independence will put at risk the Scottish defence industry and with it, the wider Scottish manufacturing sector. Before the scaremongering klaxon sounds, let me explain why the defence sector is so important to the wider manufacturing sector. When I was a welder during the 1980s and 1990s, engineering in Scotland was going through a very difficult period. If we were not losing whole companies such as Caterpillar, Cummings, Findlay’s and many others, we were seeing downsizing on a massive scale. Skilled tradesmen in Lanarkshire had to travel further afield to the oil-rig manufacturing yards or to defence contractors on the Clyde or at Rosyth in order not simply to find work but to retain their skills. Recently, I was in discussion with union representatives at a major manufacturing company in my constituency, which has undergone a very difficult period of rationalisation, redundancy and short-time working. The unions expressed concern that many tradesmen had left that company rather than trying to continue to eke out a living under the financial constraints that were inflicted on them by the firm’s circumstances. Those welders, platers and electricians were looking for some stability and they saw it in the shipyards, where defence work is being carried out at present and could be carried out in the future. Why then, when up to 90 per cent of the orders that are received by Scotland’s shipbuilding industry are from the MOD, would the SNP want to introduce a barrier to that trade and put at risk the job prospects of so many highly skilled workers? Lodging an amendment that raises the issue of Trident, while making the SNP back benchers happy, does nothing to address the reality facing workers in the defence industry in Scotland. Academics have clearly said that as many as 16,000 defence jobs would be affected by independence, including those on the Clyde and at Rosyth, and yet the Government seeks to deflect attention away from that by throwing in an issue on which even it cannot agree any longer but which suits its purposes this afternoon. Also, the SNP blithely promotes the idea that Scottish shipyards could be used to build submarines but rather than provide a well-considered answer to diversification, that idea merely illustrates the SNP’s lack of knowledge about the defence sector and shipbuilding. Although the Motherwell Bridgeworks company benefited from large contracts in the 1980s to build submarine hulls, not only has that work gone but the factory itself is now a housing estate. That company had the highest level of coded welders in Scotland at that time, as the skills that were required to build submarine hulls were so extensive. The shipbuilding workforce in Scotland does not currently have the specialist skills that are needed to build submarines. That is a sad reflection—it is an indictment—but it is a fact. In the longer term, such work could lead to the creation of good jobs, but acquiring those skills would be a lengthy and costly process; it would not be a short-term solution to the adverse impact of losing major defence contracts due to Scotland becoming independent. That is why people who know a bit about these things, such as John Dolan, the GMB convener at Scotstoun, are not just sceptical about the SNP’s defence contracting plans, but scathing about them. As John Dolan rightly points out: “if Scotland votes yes, we will not be building ships for the UK Government”. That is simply a fact, and yet, according to Nicola Sturgeon, as John Dolan went on to point out, “we're the only shipbuilders capable of doing the work.” Clearly, Nicola Sturgeon has never heard of an organisation called the Confederation of Shipbuilding and Engineering Unions, which brings together the workforces of all the shipbuilding sites across the UK. It has 1.2 million members. That hardly suggests that there is no other place in the United Kingdom that can build ships. The very existence of those shipyards means that Nicola Sturgeon’s claim that there is nowhere else for the work to go is either ill informed or deliberately misleading. The SNP needs to stop playing with people’s livelihoods in that way. It is far too important. Next week, we expect the much-heralded white paper from the Scottish Government. Obviously, that will be after the media get hold of it first, as it will not be for the Parliament to have its place recognised. However, we will supposedly learn what we can expect in an independent Scotland. We will be expected to believe in what the white paper contains, because the Government says it is so. They are the Government’s policies, and the white paper will tell us how things will be. When the UK Government and the UK-wide political parties state their policies, they are simply dismissed and denied if they do not sit with the SNP’s view of the world. When Whitehall states that, post independence, the rest of the UK would not award certain defence contracts to Scotland, just as it will not presently give them to foreign countries, we are told not to believe that. Not only will the white paper tell us what Scotland will do; it seems that it will also tell us what Scotland will tell other countries to do. That is not good enough for the workers on the Clyde. It is not good enough for the defence industry in Scotland. That is why we should support the Labour motion.

Will the member give way?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what it considers the adverse environmental impacts are of pyrolysis incinerators. (S4O-02560)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that we need consistency with regard to applications for pyrolysis incinerators? A series of these plants are being located in communities across Scotland; indeed, the cabinet secretary’s colleagues have been campaigning in Perth against the pollutant-belching monstrosities proposed for their area while the same pyrolysis incinerators have been agreed in Carnbroe and Dovesdale in Lanarkshire. Is there not an inconsistency in the planning process that has to be addressed?

As is evident from the 59 per cent decrease in the amount of waste that was sent to landfill between 2000 and 2010, the UK landfill tax has been effective in helping the environment and moving us towards a zero waste Scotland. I am confident that the Scottish landfill tax will do the same. I therefore welcome and support the overall Scottish landfill tax scheme. However, concerns were raised during scrutiny of the bill about the fact that many aspects of the tax are to be dealt with through subordinate legislation. That has created a lack of clarity and of certainty—as some members have outlined—with regard to issues such as the rates of tax and the power to change the materials that are taxed. The bill is a framework that leaves the specifics to subordinate legislation, and the Scottish Parliament must ensure that future action on the Scottish landfill tax is open to debate and further scrutiny. A specific area in which details will be set out in subordinate legislation is the landfill communities fund. I support continuation of that fund, which was created to benefit places that are blighted by close proximity to landfill sites. The fund works by providing benefits to such communities from the taxes that are raised from those sites. In Scotland, the idea that communities should have access to environmental justice is spreading, which is welcome. That has led the Government to take a dual approach to environmental justice, by stating first that “deprived communities, which may be ... vulnerable to the pressures of poor environmental conditions, should not bear a disproportionate burden of negative environmental impacts”— which is absolutely right—and secondly by stating correctly that “communities should have access to the information and to the means to participate in decisions which affect the quality of their local environment.” I represent an area in which there are four landfill sites in close proximity to each other, and my community has been disproportionately burdened by the negative effects of those sites. However, in the past, the landfill communities fund has helped my community by funding local projects to mitigate the effects of living near the sites. In that way, the landfill communities fund has helped to move Scotland towards fulfilling the principles of environmental justice. However, it has now been suggested that the scope of the fund should be reviewed, which leaves me with some concerns. Organisations such as SEPA and COSLA have suggested that money from the fund could be used for funding wider environmental objectives that are not specific to any one location, instead of being used exclusively for communities that lie within a 10-mile radius of landfill sites. I take on board the points that have been made by members such as Rob Gibson—for example, that for rural communities a 10-mile radius may be too restrictive because communities beyond that limit may be affected by a landfill site. However, we are talking about specific projects that may be Scotland-wide and have nothing to do with landfill at its location, so we must be concerned if that is to be the case. A change in the current scope of the landfill communities fund would be fundamentally unfair, and would violate the principles of environmental justice that those who are interested in the subject have sought to uphold. It is widely known that communities that lie near landfill sites face much greater environmental injustice than those that do not. Those living near landfills have to deal not only with the emissions that pollute the air, water and soil, but with the burden of costs to address the local nuisances including odour, dust, litter, noise, vermin and visual intrusion that result from living in close proximity to a landfill. Landfills not only affect the quality of life in a community, but present an actual cost as exemplified in house prices; in Scotland, homes that are in close proximity to landfill sites are valued at 40 per cent less than similar homes that are not. To change the current scope of the fund would leave communities with less money to mitigate the effects of landfills. It is estimated that the landfill tax will generate £107 million in the first year of implementation, but it is also estimated that the fund will fall to £40.5 million in 2025. To open the fund to broader environmental objectives—coupled with the projection that landfill returns will dissipate—could in the long run leave the communities that are most affected by landfill with less funding. Although the amount of waste that is dumped in landfills is projected to decrease as a result of the landfill tax, communities in the vicinity of landfills will continue to need funding. Landfill sites will, even if they are closed, continue to affect communities negatively for years to come, and those communities will need access to the funds long after the sites have closed. Communities that are dumping grounds for the rest of Scotland should receive all the benefits that result from taxation of landfills, and should be the only ones that have a say in how those funds are used. At the end of the day, that money is being raised at the expense of communities that are near landfills, so it should be dedicated to those communities. As was said earlier, it has been suggested that the bill, like other bills that have been introduced as a result of the Scotland Act 2012, would be dry and detailed. I have, however, found the context of the debates around those bills to be interesting, and I look forward to hearing how the cabinet secretary will, as we move forward to stage 2, address the points that have been raised this afternoon and in the committee’s report.

Perhaps I can clarify the matter. There are two distinct aspects to the issue, one of which is the distance. It is clear that, in some instances, the 10-mile radius can be too restrictive. The other aspect is the identified individual projects, which would be Scotland-wide and would take money from the local communities to areas of Scotland that are not impacted by landfill in any way. Jenny Marra and I agree that, although the 10-mile radius could be flexible, we must be very careful if we start to take money from local communities to spread it across the rest of Scotland.

The distinction is not subtle at all. The projects happen predominantly in the local communities and the 10-mile radius protects the impact on those local communities. If we take money out of those communities to put into Scotland-wide projects, that will reduce the amount of money that is available to the communities that are most affected.

12. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the effectiveness of the Douglas Street treatment suite in Hamilton and whether NHS Lanarkshire plans to introduce similar services elsewhere. (S4O-02393)

Clearly, the cabinet secretary is aware of the concerns of patients and general practitioners in Hamilton that the centralisation of treatment at the Douglas Street centre has created more problems than it has benefits for patients. If such a model has the Scottish Government’s support, why will the cabinet secretary not just admit that to the people of Hamilton? Does he also support the rolling out of that model across the rest of Lanarkshire? The Minister for Public Health intervened to ensure that NHS Lanarkshire reversed its plans on mental health services—

So why will the cabinet secretary not intervene now rather than claim that he has no power to intervene in relation to treatment centres?

I congratulate Nanette Milne on securing the debate, which allows us to speak positively about the role of palliative care in Scotland. I also commend Marie Curie Cancer Care, the University of Edinburgh and NHS Lothian for producing their study, which was published recently. I want to focus on the section in Nanette Milne’s motion that highlights the reality that we in Scotland have a real collective difficulty in talking about death. Death, dying and bereavement affect all of us, but talking about and planning for the experiences and practicalities associated with them can be difficult. We simply do not open up as a country when it comes to talking about dying and bereavement, and that is not good for us as individuals or as a society. Indeed, studies have shown that unnecessary harm is caused because people in Scotland are not open about the subject. As the study that we are discussing found, GPs can find it difficult to discuss death and dying with patients. Few patients openly discuss the possibility that they might die from their condition, although doctors think that that can be helpful. A lack of understanding around terms such as “palliative” and “hospice” can be barriers for starting palliative care and support. It does not have to be that way. At a meeting of the Scottish Parliament’s cross-party group on palliative care a few years ago, we had a presentation from palliative care specialists who had recently returned from west Africa, where they had witnessed an entirely different cultural attitude towards death and dying. Professor Scott Murray, one of the authors of the report on palliative care, was one of those specialists. They told us that they had gone out to learn about the delivery of palliative medicines but that they were struck most not by the difficulties that face medical practitioners in the developing world in delivering adequate palliation in challenging circumstances of high mortality rates and severe poverty, but by the way in which death and bereavement is celebrated in those cultures. Another CPG meeting was on the history of death and dying in Scotland, and I was amazed to learn just how much of an impact that the reformation had in creating the closed culture around death that still pervades Scottish society today. As a member of the Irish Catholic community in Scotland, I am familiar with wakes, so I found it fascinating to learn of the strictures placed by the Church of Scotland on burials and associated rituals. I am pleased that those restrictions have loosened over time, but there is still some way to go before Scotland becomes more comfortable with burials in the future than it was allowed to be in the past. I particularly welcomed the creation of the good life, good death, good grief initiative, which seeks to engage support for and enhance the assets of organisations and individuals who have the potential to improve the experience of death, dying and bereavement in Scotland. The initiative is an alliance of more than 700 organisations and individuals who believe that Scotland should be a place in which people can be open about death, dying and bereavement. I believe that Scottish society would benefit from being more open to death, the dead and dying, and that we would become more aware of the options and choices that are available when we are faced with the end of life. Health and social care professionals and volunteers in all care settings would undoubtedly feel better about being able to discuss with patients and their families and friends a wider range of issues relating to death and bereavement. If people were better placed to talk about death and deal with related issues in a constructive way, there would be more effective support for those dealing with death and bereavement. Death is an inevitable part of life, but we would face it better if we could make palliative care more available, accessible and appropriate to meet the various needs of each individual person requiring additional care to live well until it is time for them to go and leave the rest of us behind to celebrate their lives.

Will the minister give way?

For a very long time, I have campaigned for a balanced energy policy and have been concerned that we do not throw all our energy-producing eggs into the renewables industry or, on the other hand, reject out of hand the potential contribution that the civil nuclear energy industry could make in ensuring security of supply. I have very real concerns that the contribution that domestic coal reserves can make to securing energy supply is being hampered by the negative perceptions of the industry that are regularly cultivated by its opponents. The regular omission of the role that the future deployment of carbon capture and storage technologies could play in reducing the overall carbon emissions from coal-fired power stations conveniently allows those negative arguments to be slanted against carbon energy sources.

I will take one in a minute. Those were the concerns that I had coming in to this afternoon’s debate. Having heard the debate so far, my concerns have moved on, and I appear to be on the same side of the argument in favour of the Scottish coal industry as the Conservatives, who did so much to try to destroy it in the past. However, I am concerned to see Willie Rennie and Patrick Harvie competing to reach beyond the grave and grab Margaret Thatcher’s handbag to finish off the coal industry in Scotland. I will take you now, Patrick.

What I will not do is throw my hands up in despair and rule out the potential of those technologies being used to offset some of the concerns of opponents of coal. We must have a positive agenda. We can work towards and share the same objective without necessarily having to agree on the direction for going forward. I genuinely welcome the Scottish Government’s efforts to overcome the negative mindset against the surface coal mining industry. I recognise the contribution that the extraction of indigenous coal supplies could make to driving economic growth and achieving energy security. Just as I have said that it is wrong for opponents of opencast to close their minds to its potential, I fully recognise that genuine issues relate to the restoration of sites, protection for local communities during excavation and other major considerations, which Claudia Beamish and Graeme Pearson outlined. The consultation that the minister announced, which will look at the regulation of sites that is required, will benefit by building up the confidence that communities need when plans for opencast mining emerge in their areas. As other members have said, the collapse of Scottish Coal has raised a variety of issues in relation to the restoration of opencast mines and environmental concerns. I recognise the importance of the Scottish coal industry task force in identifying solutions to the problems that the coal industry faces and I look forward to seeing what emerges from the consultation in that regard. I come from a community that was built around mining and I am the grandson of a coal miner, so on no account would I wish to diminish the importance of deep coal mining in developing the history and psyche of Lanarkshire and Scotland as a whole. However, I am aware that many miners wanted a better prospect for their sons than a life spent howking coal hundreds of feet underground. According to many industry analysts, open-pit mining is cheaper, safer and mechanically easier to operate. Open-pit mining poses some dangers to mine workers, but it has safety advantages over shaft mining, as open-pit mines are not subject to cave-in accidents and open-pit miners are not exposed to the same explosive poison gas dangers as deep-shaft mine workers are. Open-pit mining will never be completely safe, but it is safer than shaft mining in some ways. It is more than a little disappointing that, at a time of increasing demand, Scottish Coal failed to take proper advantage of the potential for the commercial viability of opencast mining and missed the major opportunity to increase activity and output that was available in Scotland. Across Britain, surface coal mining directly employs about 2,000 full-time workers and creates an extensive supply chain. The loss of such employment in areas that already have extremely limited opportunities for skilled and permanent employment is a major challenge as, in addition to providing well-paid and skilled jobs in economically depressed areas, the surface coal mining industry generates significant funds for local economies and provides significant tax contributions via rates to local authorities. Apart from those obvious economic benefits, the surface coal mining industry plays a significant role in the rejuvenation of derelict land. In my constituency, there was an opencast mine adjacent to the former mining village of Legbrannock, which was James Keir Hardie’s home for a number of years. That site is now home to a fine 18-hole golf course designed by Sam Torrance, which is—unsurprisingly—called Torrance park. It is regrettable that a major manufacturing firm in my constituency has been adversely affected by the liquidation of two of its largest opencast customers in the Ayrshire coalfields and has lost significant customers for the product that it manufactures. As with coal extraction, reparation work will require the use of that firm’s product. The facility in my constituency has endured long periods of short-time working, so I hope that the input of any taxpayer funding can be used to ensure that equipment that is used in the restoration process is manufactured here in Scotland rather than by overseas competitors. I welcomed the opportunity to have a brief conversation with the minister about that last week. I hope that he will look favourably on my request for a meeting to discuss that company’s prospects in relation to the work that I hope will arise when restoration works are progressed.

I congratulate James Dornan on securing this evening’s debate. Despite the success of politicians such as Anne Begg, Jack Ashley and David Blunkett at Westminster and a few disabled MSPs in this place over the past 14 years, the political representation of disabled people has not improved substantially or to the extent that we should expect. Disabled people are entitled to believe that the policies that affect them might be drawn up a little differently and be of more value to them if they had more of a say in creating those policies. Starting from such a low baseline, in the short term we might be expecting too much to hope that one in four MSPs might have some form of disability, but there is no doubt in my mind that it would be better if the membership of this Parliament looked a lot more like the society that it represents as soon as possible. The independent living in Scotland report on disabled people’s involvement in politics contains much that cannot be refuted, and I congratulate ILIS on its production. As a member of the cross-party group on disability since the outset and its convener for the past 10 years, I have heard many testimonies from disabled people about the barriers that prevent them from participating in many aspects of life that are taken for granted by the majority. I have also heard too many examples of the difficulties that people face just as political activists, let alone elected representatives. I have had many discussions with disabled people in my party, so I know that the pool of human resources from within the disabled community is large—yet it is largely untapped. I have always tried to encourage disabled activists to put themselves forward for selection—members might even know one who was successful, although she never needed much encouragement from me—but I have been left disappointed on most occasions, when party members could not see past the wheelchair or the crutches to see the potential of the candidate before them. Therefore, I have no hesitation in supporting the recommendations in the ILIS report. In particular—I know that it might hurt some colleagues to hear this—we should follow Westminster’s lead by establishing a Scottish fund for access to elected office for disabled people. Even in these straitened economic times, there can be no excuse for ignoring the demands of the disabled community for funding to be found to overcome some of the constraints on them in pursuing candidacy at elections. I have heard fears expressed that much of the support available is more about patronising people than offering genuine support. There is still too much belief around that disabled people are people for whom things need to be done. We would soon see the value in policy development terms of having more people deliberating on issues as disabled people brought solutions to their own difficulties. Despite the fact that interest in Westminster’s access to elected office fund has been limited, I think that there are grounds for optimism. Over the years, things will change and we will get more disabled people into politics. This is about levelling the playing field rather than giving disabled people an unfair advantage. The optimism of those with whom I have engaged over the years on the cross-party group on disability has encouraged me to see more and more—and to be much more optimistic now than I might otherwise have been—that there is a great future ahead for those from the disabled community who want to join us here or in council chambers across the country and to start to put forward a strong voice on behalf of those whom we seek to represent.

I congratulate Mary Fee, the committee members and the clerks on the report that we have before us. In the 14 years during which I have been here, there have been quite a few achievements of this Parliament in which I am honoured to have played a part. Among the most important of them for me was helping to bring forward the first ever report of the Equal Opportunities Committee in 2001, after the issue of discrimination against Gypsy Travellers was brought to my attention, as the race reporter at that time, in a letter from an individual Traveller. Having taken on board the issues that were highlighted in that letter, I convinced the committee, of which you were a member, Presiding Officer, as was Linda Fabiani, to hear evidence from organisations that represent Gypsy Travellers and from individual Gypsy Travellers. We were so concerned by what we heard that we decided to appoint an adviser and to conduct a full inquiry in order to ascertain the level to which public sector policies discriminated against Gypsy Travellers. That committee published its report in June 2001. It contained 37 recommendations—a similar number to the report that we have before us today. The 2001 report covered a range of issues relating to the standards and location of accommodation, on-site facilities, the management and cost of local authority and private sites and the lack of facilities for roadside encampment. So, what has changed? Virtually nothing has changed, according to the new report. On education, worrying evidence highlighted key areas of difficulty in accessing services for Gypsy Traveller children and in the management—or lack thereof—of interrupted learning. So, what has changed? Clearly, not much. On health and community care, institutional discrimination in health service provision was identified as an issue. So, what has changed? Little, if anything. On police and criminal justice, key issues were raised about the lack of awareness of Gypsy Traveller lifestyles and culture. So, what has changed? Not very much—next to nothing. When we debated the report in 2001, the committee took the unanimous view that the then Scottish Executive’s response was a disappointment that fell into two categories: the problem was someone else’s responsibility, or the issue was already covered by a Scottish Executive policy. Sadly, I have to ask again: what has changed? We concluded that if all those issues were already covered, it was obvious that the policies were not working, because Gypsy Travellers were still facing discrimination in every area of public service delivery. How disappointing it is that here we are 12 years on and the Equal Opportunities Committee in the fourth session of Parliament has also completed a report on Gypsy Travellers after hearing virtually all the same evidence, and has arrived at more or less the same conclusions. Yet again, the key findings of an Equal Opportunities Committee report point to Gypsy Travellers’ widespread experience of the systematic failure among local authorities and organisations to ensure that they have access to the levels of service and legal rights that are available to other inhabitants of Scotland. I could not agree more with the EHRC that absence of leadership lies at the heart of the problems that are faced by Gypsy Travellers and the settled community. That means that instead of focusing on solutions, we get short-term action that is more about fighting fires than about sorting out long-standing problems. No one can dispute the fact that Gypsy Travellers have the right to travel or that local residents have the right to be protected from unacceptable behaviour from anyone. With all rights come responsibilities, and a balance has to be struck, but it will require more than warm words to achieve that. We need real understanding and commitment and, in my experience, those remain all too sadly lacking. In responding to the debate in 2001, the minister who was then responsible for the matter said that it had been painful to hear the criticism that had been levelled by the committee at the Administration, but that “it is to the credit of the committee and the Parliament” that we had a debate that “puts the Executive under pressure to account for itself”.—[Official Report, 5 December 2001; c 4514.] Some things have clearly not changed when it comes to equal opportunities. I hope that the Scottish Government is equally discomfited by this latest report. More regrettably, the Gypsy Traveller community is still facing a situation in which far too few local authorities understand its issues and make the necessary provisions. Just as in 2001, the Scottish Government has pleaded in its defence that it is doing what it can to address all the points that the committee has raised. Unfortunately, the evidence is just not there to support that assertion. As was the case 12 years ago, Government policies could be identified and resources highlighted that pointed towards solutions for the issues that were being raised. The fact remains that much of what we have today points to the fact that the buck is being passed and that the relevant policies are little more than dead letters that have never been delivered. Let us hope that this latest report takes the issue further forward than the last one did, so that in a decade, those who take part in any reporting on the condition of Gypsy Travellers in Scotland do not have to suffer from the déjà vu that we have had here today. In conclusion, I will recount an anecdote that other members have brought up. There is a tale of the pilgrims arriving in what we now know as America. When they asked the natives, “What did you call this country before we came here?” they said, “Ours”. That is part of the problem and we must bear that in mind when we are talking about the Gypsy Traveller community in Scotland.

9. To ask the Scottish Government whether it considers that pyrolysis energy-from-waste plants have a role to play in achieving its zero waste target and what its position is on the comment of Pete Wishart MP that they should not be given planning permission as they are a “pollutant belching monstrosity”. (S4O-02330)

Is the minister aware that confusion has been caused in the industry and communities by the Scottish ministers’ refusal to support a planning appeal to site an energy-from-waste plant in Perth? In my initial question, I quoted the local Scottish National Party MP, but is the minister aware that John Swinney also backed opponents of the incinerator, while Roseanna Cunningham expressed her health fears about pollutant fumes? In a letter to campaigners, Richard Lochhead said: “treating ... waste in thermal treatment plants where the heat can be captured and electricity generated is undoubtedly more preferable than sending to landfill.” So, can the minister tell us which it is? Are incinerators “pollutant belching” monstrosities that pose a risk to health? Is it only in Perth that there are legitimate health concerns, while at Dovesdale, Carnbroe and Hamilton in Lanarkshire they are safe? Are pyrolysis plants vital components in the zero waste strategy or are they not? Are they safe or are they not?

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to Audit Scotland’s report, “Managing early departures from the Scottish public sector”, which states that the public sector is spending £280 million a year on early departure schemes. (S4F-01432)

I thank the First Minister for his response, but I am not sure whether he agrees that Audit Scotland is right to criticise the extensive use of early exit packages. Does he at least share my unease about the concerns raised with me by civilian staff in the newly created Police Scotland that a pool of money has been allocated to provide for exit packages for a tranche of senior police officers in order to reduce their numbers through enhanced redundancy settlements? As it is not unheard of for senior officers in the police and fire and rescue services to take exit packages only to return in the same or similar capacity, will the First Minister today give the Parliament a commitment that if and when senior police officers take golden goodbyes, they will not thereafter be able to say a golden “’Ello, ’ello, ’ello” to new and similar jobs in Police Scotland?

I am grateful for the opportunity to make a short contribution to the debate on an issue that I do not think has come up yet. Like many members of the public and commentators who are interested in the forthcoming referendum, I look forward to the time when the process of the plebiscite makes way for the debate on the substance of the issue. However, in the meantime, the technical aspects of the referendum vote must be addressed. Therefore, I welcome the bill, although, like organisations such as SCVO, I look forward to moving towards that wider discussion on how we encourage all those Scots who will have the opportunity to vote next year to get involved in the debate. On the technicalities of the referendum, I remain concerned about one aspect of the financial memorandum that came to the attention of the Finance Committee, of which I am a member. Unfortunately, the bill is another in an increasing list of bills whose financial memorandum has not withstood the rigours of the committee’s scrutiny. When the committee considered the recent underoccupancy legislation, we found that the Scottish Government was less than robust when defending the financial assumptions that it had presented to Parliament. For that legislation, the projected costs were tens of millions of pounds out, but the best defence that the officials could come up with was a hope that they were right, rather than a detailed rebuttal of the concerns that had been raised about their financial assessment. Although the degree of disparity in relation to the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Bill is much less—it can be counted in a few thousand pounds—the fact is that there remains a difference and therefore a technical problem with the financial memorandum. The principle remains the same, in that a lack of financial robustness emerged during our scrutiny that is worth highlighting. In the case of the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Bill, we were told that the figures in the financial memorandum were calculated on the basis of advice from printing companies that printing and postage costs accounted for roughly 25 per cent and 75 per cent respectively of the cost of printing and distributing the forms. I welcome the fact that the Government’s officials agreed to look again at their assumptions about the cost of sending out reminders. Unsurprisingly, when they did so, using information provided by contractors who currently provide such a service to registration officers in Scotland, they concluded that the cost of issuing and receiving the reminders for the young voter registration form, which will be sent to 40,000 households, will be much more than the £6,000 that is outlined in paragraph 14 of the financial memorandum. It might well be that, in the event, significantly fewer than the 40,000 reminders that are projected in the assumption are needed. However, the issue needs to be taken into account. It is not acceptable practice to make an assumption in the financial memorandum and then later to dismiss it. The estimate that was set out in the financial memorandum was too low and must be corrected. I appreciate that officials have already written to the software providers to ask for revised quotes given the changes that might be necessary as a result of the possible changes to the electoral software. As a result, the financial memorandum might have to be amended. I welcome the commitment that the officials gave the Finance Committee that they will do the same in relation to printing companies and forms. However, the officials advised that they will be able to submit any revisions to the financial estimates in the financial memorandum only just ahead of stage 3. I would therefore be grateful if the cabinet secretary could update us on progress and commit to providing the information that has been promised as soon as possible, rather than leaving it to the last minute. I doubt that the problem would, or even should, prevent the passage of the bill but, given the pattern of contentious financial assumptions being brought before the Parliament, I would welcome more accurate projections for members’ consideration so that reassurances could be sought sooner rather than later.

This is not the first time I have taken part in a stage 1 debate in which there has been very little to say that has not been said already by the time I have stood up to speak. However, the truth is that, having listened to the often highly technical and complex evidence that an array of witnesses provided, and having read the detailed and informative written submissions to the Finance Committee, we can do no more than conclude that the land and buildings transaction tax is a welcome addition to the powers that are available to the Scottish Government to make decisions here in Scotland that will better reflect the circumstances that exist in relation to property markets in this part of Britain. Little can be found to criticise in the detail of the bill. The concerns that were raised were more to do with issues such as implementation of the tax within the overall taxation regime across the UK. As others have said, major challenges will now be faced when agreement on block grant adjustments has to be reached between the different legislative jurisdictions. However, the structure of LBTT is not the subject of any great concern. Indeed, more than one voice was heard to say how welcome it was that the Scotland Act 2012 had provided the opportunity to replace stamp duty land tax, with all its inherent flaws. As has been said, among the most welcome aspects of LBTT is the removal of the slab structure and its replacement with a progressive structure. Witnesses were highly supportive of that approach. No organisation was more supportive of it than the Council of Mortgage Lenders Scotland, which rightly identified that it is inevitable that there would be winners and losers in any new system but preferred to look at the positive side. It highlighted the fact that “a progressive system would be more equitable and overcome some of the inefficiencies created by the slab system.” However, there was some concern that there could be a disproportionate effect on high-value transactions that are liable to the top rate of LBTT. The CMLS was joined by the Confederation of British Industry Scotland in identifying that concern, but I am less concerned about that aspect of LBTT, as the Scottish Government will continue to ensure that people in higher-cost houses get a nice wee discount on their properties through the council tax freeze, which gives most to those with the deepest pockets and the biggest homes. However, the CBI is right to argue that, when setting the rates for higher-valued domestic properties, the Scottish Government would need to be take cognisance of rates that apply elsewhere in the United Kingdom. Most concern arises—with some justification—regarding the uncertainty that may emerge around LBTT rates in the lead-up to the introduction of the tax, especially in relation to commercial property, because that may discourage investment in the Scottish market. Although Adam Smith would perhaps be very proud of the cabinet secretary’s adherence to the laissez faire free-market policies that he laid down, he would not be very keen to endorse the cabinet secretary’s position with regard to the uncertainly around taxation. I have read and re-read all the evidence that was made available to the committee, and I cannot find anyone, other than the cabinet secretary himself, who gave evidence that ran counter to the view that such uncertainty might be a problem. For us to conclude that there was a range of views on the subject stretches credulity to the limit. Any statistical analysis of the evidence that was brought before the committee could lead us only to the view that the cabinet secretary is an outlier when it comes to where the weight of evidence lies. The Law Society of Scotland, while commenting that residential rates would not be quite so important, expressed concern that a forward timescale was important for commercial property. In general, witnesses were very clear regarding their view that the absence of any indication of likely future rates of LBTT creates an additional layer of uncertainty. Most important is the view that was posited by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland, which argued that the lack of clarity even on provisional figures for tax rates or bands goes against the principle of certainty in taxation. Given the concerns that have been raised over the slump in construction, which emerged again in this morning’s gross domestic product figures, it is worrying that the Scottish Building Federation conveyed a message to the committee that, in relation to commercial rates, it would prefer a minimum of 12 months between the publication and the impact and that, if we could get towards 18 months, that would be even more preferable for the federation. Homes for Scotland and the Scottish Property Federation were both supportive of that view, and Brodies informed the committee that the feedback that it had received from commercial clients revealed their concern about uncertainty. I urge the cabinet secretary seriously to reconsider his position on the matter, as it could have a direct impact on the construction industry in particular, in its battle out of the economic downturn. As many witnesses attested, if specific rates cannot be published, guidance about the intentions and an indication of the top rate, at least, would be welcome. That is the very least that people should be able to expect. Overall, the bill should be a good piece of legislation, delivered under the devolved settlement, which will help Scotland to consider its own property markets and address the concerns that currently exist in the sector. I would be encouraged if the cabinet secretary could give us some indication that he will reconsider that major point of concern—the only one that divided the committee. It would be useful if we could have the gap closed between those who have concerns and the Government as it pursues the new legislation. The bill is very worthy of support, although it just needs a little more effort to make it a bit more perfect with regard to what we actually need.

Does the cabinet secretary recognise that the range stretched from him on one side to everyone else on the other?

I am pleased to open this debate on behalf of the Welfare Reform Committee. The rhetoric around welfare reform and the United Kingdom Government’s austerity agenda has been discussed at length. In having this opportunity to address the topic and speak on behalf of constituents who are extremely concerned about the impact that welfare reform will have on their families, I feel confident in saying that representatives in this Parliament are all in it together. The motion invites the Parliament to note the research that the Welfare Reform Committee commissioned from Sheffield Hallam University. I place on record the committee’s thanks to Professor Steve Fothergill and Professor Christina Beatty for their work in producing the research. The purpose of the research was to analyse the impact of welfare reform on Scotland, nationally and across each of the 32 local authority areas. The headline figure is that the UK Government’s package of welfare reforms will result in a loss of £1.6 billion per year to the Scottish economy. That averages out to about £480 for every working-age adult in Scotland. I want to go beyond the headlines and say a little about what the figures actually mean. The loss per year is averaged out across the working-age population, but we know that it will be experienced by a far smaller group of people. Within that smaller group, we know that particular people face the biggest losses. Women, one-parent families and disabled people will be faced with losses that are far greater than the majority of members would think are fair. The committee’s report details the impact of nine aspects of welfare reform. I will highlight the potential impact of just three: incapacity benefit; the move from disability living allowance to personal independence payments; and the underoccupancy provisions for people in the social rented sector, which are otherwise known as the bedroom tax. I quote from page 10 of our report: “Sickness and disability claimants can also expect to be hit hard. The individuals adversely affected by the incapacity benefit reforms can expect to lose an average of £3,500 a year, and those losing out as a result of the changeover from Disability Living Allowance to Personal Independence Payments by an average of £3,000 a year. Often these will be the same individuals: most DLA claimants of working age are out-of-work on incapacity benefits and in both cases the groups most exposed to benefit reductions are those with less severe disabilities or health problems. The same individuals may also find that they encounter reductions in Housing Benefit entitlement.” Therefore, a person could be faced with a loss of income of around £7,000 a year, simply as a result of three of the nine benefit changes that were analysed in the research. That is a £7,000 loss each year for individuals who are among the most vulnerable in our society. Beyond that financial loss, vulnerable people are being threatened with the loss of security in their lives, such as the security of a safe home, close to the support of family and friends. Just this morning, the committee heard from people who feared the loss of those securities. Who is being affected by these so-called reforms? Is it the apparently feckless claimants who see a life on benefits as something to which they are entitled? Is it the families who have not worked in three generations—families that the Joseph Rowntree Foundation found no evidence of when it carried out research in some of the country’s most deprived areas? Or is it the many people who have told the committee their stories, expressing their fear, confusion and anger when faced with the tattered rag that has replaced the safety net of the welfare state? Those people include Ian Megahy, a veterinary surgeon, who explained that, when he had to stop work: “I was a senior partner in my own practice and a part-time university lecturer. Before I stopped work, a client took my business partner aside and virtually accused him of being a callous so-and-so for allowing me to be at my work. A lot of the general public think that the chronically ill are feckless people who give up, sit about and do not try. I have made massive efforts to get better. I have a list of 38 treatments—medicines, procedures and so on—that I have tried. I desperately want to get back to my work. I love my work.”—[Official Report, Welfare Reform Committee, 5 February 2013; c 530.] They include Henry Sherlock, who said: “I fear, without a doubt, I will only lose more income once I have to go through this undignified process once again. I am tired of fighting officials who seem to think they know more about my disabilities and needs than I do. It now makes me feel ashamed of who I am. I am being punished for being disabled and feel powerless. Being blind is an isolating disability. If my benefits are slashed in any way, I will become even more isolated. I would not be able to afford to use my computer. This is the only true way of providing me with information and communication. I would not be able to afford the Internet, which will cut me off from family and friends. I would not be able to afford the additional high cost of assistive technology I use, which will leave me in danger. I will not be able to afford the support I need.”—[Official Report, Welfare Reform Committee, 18 September 2012; c 248.] There was also Lesley McMurchie, who told us: “My husband paid in for many years with the view that, when he was older ... he would be looked after. He is not being looked after. In fact, the state has contributed to putting him in a worse position than he was in in June last year. I am a history graduate and I thought that, when we set up the welfare state, it was to be there for people such as my husband who worked hard and did his best so that, in times of need, something would be there for him, but it is not there. ... There should be something there for those hard-working men and women who have contributed to society; they are being left with nothing.”—[Official Report, Welfare Reform Committee, 5 February 2013; c 533.]

That is a very easy question to answer: no, we are not. Indeed, in relation to that point, I will talk later about some of the evidence that we heard this morning. Instead of not doing enough for them, we seem to be doing less and are putting them in an even more difficult situation. I do not really think that that question helps Mary Scanlon’s position at all.

When I am asked a political question, Presiding Officer, there is only one way in which I can answer it. I am sure that no one in the chamber this afternoon will be surprised to hear that the research highlights the link between the areas of higher levels of deprivation and the impact of welfare reform. Put more bluntly, the result of these welfare reforms is that the poorest areas will get poorer. It has been understood that the biggest impact of welfare reform on an area basis will be felt in Glasgow. According to the research figures, the impact will be £279 million a year or £690 for every working-age adult. Across the UK, that puts Glasgow second only to Birmingham in terms of absolute financial loss and 23rd out of 379 districts in terms of average loss per working adult.

I am coming to the evidence that we took this morning. This morning, a lot of witnesses said that they understood that the system had to be reformed and streamlined. No one disputed the fact that a system that is 60 years old may not be fit for purpose in the modern era. I do not think that any of us has ever heard that argument. However, to be fair to the committee, in the first year we have worked towards identifying a picture of where the impact of the changes will fall. A lot of the issues that must be dealt with are devolved, and the committee has been encouraged by the positive nature of the regulations and changes that the Scottish Government has brought forward in response to the welfare reform changes. We have looked at what changes can be made so far and have built up a picture of what the impact will be. I assure the member that, as we move forward, based on the evidence that we heard this morning, the committee will make recommendations on where more mitigation could come from. We will also continue to criticise the Welfare Reform Act 2012 when we see the impacts that it is having on people. I will speak about some of those. Unfortunately, this morning’s evidence session was informal—it was not televised or officially reported—but it was open to the public and the media were there. The reaction that we have had from the public and the media who were there will make difficult reading for people in their newspapers tomorrow morning. We heard a woman break down in tears talking about having to eke out her money by eating toast for a week because of the money that she will lose through the bedroom tax. Anyone in Glasgow this morning who shed a tear last week might have found the space to shed a tear for that woman as well. We heard from people with learning disabilities—people who have steady supported lifestyles at present. A married couple who both have learning disabilities are now fearful of losing their home because they will have the support that they have depended on taken away from them. For anyone not to be moved by what we heard this morning and not to want to see changes to the welfare reforms that are being implemented would be beyond anyone’s measure. So, yes, we will produce some suggestions. To hear witness after witness talk about their individual experiences and then to see the research report that shows how widespread the impacts will be, not just in Scotland but throughout the United Kingdom, demands that we look for alternatives and see where we can have change. I close with the words of Marlene Hepburn, who appeared before the committee earlier this year. When she was asked what questions she would put to lain Duncan Smith if she had the opportunity, Marlene responded: “I would just ask him where is his heart and where is his sense.”—[Official Report, Welfare Reform Committee, 5 February 2013, c 532.] Looking at the findings of the research and at the impact that welfare reform will have on the most vulnerable in our society, it is difficult to find an answer to that question. How helpful it would be if the secretary of state would show the respect that is due to this Parliament and the people of Scotland and appear before the Welfare Reform Committee to provide some answers. If members on the Conservative and Liberal Democrat benches have any influence at all, they might want to impress on their colleague at Westminster the need for him to come and talk to us about the evidence that we have heard from people, which I have outlined, including those from whom we heard this morning. If he were to do that, it might change his views. On behalf of the Welfare Reform Committee, I move, That the Parliament notes the Welfare Reform Committee’s 2nd Report, 2013 (Session 4): The Impact of Welfare Reform on Scotland (SP Paper 303), commissioned from Sheffield Hallam University.

Will the member confirm that the report showed that the impact on the economy in the more prosperous parts of Scotland will be comparable to that in prosperous areas in England and that the report exposes not a geographical split between Scotland and England but a split between those who are in the deprived areas of the UK and those who are in the more prosperous areas?

13. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on how national health service boards apply the Liverpool care pathway. (S4O-01937)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of recent press reports that have painted a negative picture of the Liverpool care pathway. It is always concerning when families are left upset following the loss of a loved one and when the care that they receive is considered to have been unsatisfactory, but would the cabinet secretary agree that the application of the Liverpool care pathway has a good record overall and that it is being used as a positive care package in end-of-life situations? Will the cabinet secretary therefore commit to working with practitioners in the hospice and palliative care sector to promote the LCP, and to support public education on what the LCP can provide in order to overcome the negative perceptions that might have been promoted by some in the media?

The Austrian philosopher Paul Watzlawick once said: “The belief that one’s own view of reality is the only reality is the most dangerous of all delusions.” He died in 2007, so it is possible that he could have made his observation after watching the development of the SNP, but even if he did not, his apposite observation is certainly a valid interpretation of the thinking of the Scottish Government when it comes to its position on nuclear missiles. “Deluded” hardly suffices to describe the SNP’s current defence policy. “Fantasy”, “illusion”, “pipe dream”—you name it, the SNP concocts it. For example, it appears that NATO rules will not apply to the SNP—oh no. When Angus Robertson rolls his tank on to the lawn of NATO headquarters to tell it to get Trident out of Scotland, the might of the biggest military alliance that the world has ever known will cower in fear as he raises his kilt, “Braveheart” style, to moon NATO into submission. The SNP has decided—as a matter of principle, mind you; not as part of a cynical attempt to convince a sceptical electorate in the run-up to the referendum—that it is possible for Scotland to be both a member of the NATO nuclear club and to have its own set of rules to play by. Although Germany can oppose nuclear missiles on its soil and still be forced to have them, and smaller NATO countries can object to nuclear missiles crossing through their territory yet can do nothing about it, Scotland should have no fear, because NATO’s might will not stand like a mighty oak in the face of a resolution that was passed at the SNP conference; it will wither as if it were naught but a weed and shrivel under a barrage of assertions from the first battalion of the Brigadoon foot-in-mouth regiment. As with all the SNP myths, this one is based on the notion that Scotland has some kind of moral superiority over the rest of the UK. What kind of morality is it that suggests that you are better than someone else by sending them something that you do not want for yourself? That is like feeling good about throwing a dog poo over the fence into your neighbour’s garden. There is nothing to feel superior about in doing that; that is just another delusion on the part of the SNP. The SNP thinks that the Scottish people will be more likely to vote for independence if it can convince them that an independent Scotland can get rid of nuclear weapons. The recent poll that was conducted for Scottish CND—the organisation that is itself becoming more like the campaign for nuclear delusion—clearly indicates that Scots who want to be part of the UK are as much opposed to nuclear weapons as the separatists are.

The member knows. We are not arguing that independence is the issue here; it is SNP members who are arguing that independence will solve the problem. We know that Trident is not an independent nuclear deterrent in the way that—[Interruption.]

No, I did not. If you look back at what I said, you will find that I did not say that. Most people know—because Scots are not stupid—that it is not possible to wish difficult situations away just on a political whim. International relations are not as simple as the SNP spin machine would have us delude ourselves, and the general populace knows that. Jean Urquhart, the Greens and the other independent MSPs are absolutely right when they state that membership of NATO—whether as part of the UK or as an independent Scotland—is a barrier to the removal of Trident. A country that is in NATO must accept that it is part of an alliance that is centred on a nuclear first-strike policy. Therefore, if we are to get rid of nuclear missiles in Scotland and be part of NATO, we must get the UK to play its part in making NATO a nuclear-free alliance. Making Scotland independent will not remove the UK’s or NATO’s nuclear arsenal. Like me, many people will recognise that it is the UK that holds Trident and that only the UK can get rid of it. If Scotland stays part of the UK, it can play a part in any decision to remove Trident or to prevent its replacement. If Scotland leaves the UK, it will become like Ireland—a near neighbour that can do nothing to influence what happens with Trident. I have no doubt that a truly independent Scotland could, like Ireland, be free of nuclear missiles on its territory, but a Scotland that is in NATO will not be able to pick and choose like a neutral country.

The minister must accept that it is not possible to say that Scotland would not have nuclear weapons on its soil—the situation would be the same as it is for Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands. It is not possible to be part of NATO but not to play by the rules of NATO. The Scottish Government will win the vote at 5 pm and will satisfy and reassure itself. However, deep down, SNP members have to know that the Scottish Government is deluding itself with its position on Trident. The split that emerged at the SNP conference showed that ordinary party members understand what the Government is trying to do. No doubt those same SNP MSPs who opposed the change in policy but who stayed in the party will be back in line tonight and will once again be fully signed-up members of the Stepford gang. Come 5 pm, as Dr Carl Sagan said, “It is far better to grasp the universe as it really is than to persist in delusion, however satisfying and reassuring.” SNP members can keep fooling themselves if they like, but the Scottish people will not be fooled by their posturing next autumn.

Will the minister give way?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on recent reports expressing concern at the police handling of unauthorised protests. (S4T-00293)

I had a meeting yesterday with a chief superintendent in Glasgow about the issues that were raised on Saturday. However, does the cabinet secretary recall that, at justice questions last week, I raised the concerns that have been expressed by lawyers, academics and football fans that the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Act 2012 and the policing of it are failing to tackle the problem of sectarianism in Scotland and are, in fact, raising tensions and being counterproductive? In response to the harassment, victimisation and disproportionate actions of the police in pursuing the 2012 act, a protest was held on Saturday by Celtic fans. Sadly, it has now been widely alleged not only by fans but by Queen’s counsel and independent legal advisers who attended on Saturday that the event was met with the very harassment, victimisation and disproportionate actions from the police that the fans were protesting against in the first place. The proposed procession may well have been outwith—

The proposed procession may well have been outwith the regulations outlined by the cabinet secretary, but the complaints that have emanated from the actions of the police in dealing with the procession should shock and alarm the chamber. Will the minister therefore agree to hold an independent investigation into the police’s handling of the event, both to learn lessons from it and to try to reduce the increasing tensions across Scotland between fans and the police as a result of the police’s implementation of the 2012 act?

I congratulate the cabinet secretary on using the same deflection that the police used yesterday with me. The protest was held because of concerns over the implementation of the act by the police inside and outside football grounds, which has been deemed unfair and disproportionate.

I met Celtic supporters last night who are asking for an inquiry into what happened on Saturday, so that everyone can be satisfied that the 2012 act is not being administered in the way that people believe it to be. It is raising tensions and concerns. If we want to tackle the problem, we have to address the problem effectively.

I join other members in congratulating Neil Findlay on securing the debate. Although it is not a good idea to revisit historical events to do nothing other than pick at old sores, there are some events that are important enough to re-examine in order to learn lessons and, if possible, rectify wrongs. That is clearly the case with the issue that we are discussing, and Neil Findlay is absolutely right to ask the Scottish Government to consider looking into the manner in which the miners were policed in Scotland and to clear the names of those who were criminalised for doing no more than engaging in industrial action in defence of their industry, their livelihoods and, indeed, their heritage. In 1984, I was the GMB union’s representative on the Scottish Trades Union Congress youth committee. Being part of that body helped me to gain a wide knowledge and understanding of many domestic and international issues. However, nothing taught me more than what I experienced and learned in supporting the miners at that time. Hard as many of the lessons were to take, nothing angered me more than the fact that some police officers conducted themselves so badly across the country. That was even more the case in how the dispute was dealt with in my community in Lanarkshire, which was divided between supporting the miners and protecting its steelworks at one and the same time. To this day, I recall with horror the sight of sneering police officers waving £10 and £20 notes in the faces of miners who picketed the Ravenscraig steelworks to stop the scabbing Yuill & Dodds lorries entering the complex and breaking the tripartite agreement between the miners, rail unions and steelworkers. Well do I remember Tommy Brennan scuttling out of the community centre in Newmains to avoid the miners from Polkemmet pit lobbying him to plead with him to stop undermining their struggle by taking the scab coal that was being driven into the Craig each day. Seeing trade union colleagues so at odds with one another was not a pleasant experience, but what lives with me most is the litany of harassment and victimisation that was visited on a friend of mine—a fellow trade unionist who worked at the Polkemmet pit and whose life was made a misery by the local police in his home town of Shotts. He was constantly stopped in his car as he drove about and he was regularly obstructed in the street as he went about his community to drum up support for the dispute. He was a young man who had never been in trouble with the police in his life up to that point, but he found himself with road traffic offences against his name and a string of trumped-up breach of the peace arrests, which had been carried out for no purpose other than to break his spirit and undermine his efforts to act as a committed trade union activist. I know that the police do a good job on the whole, and I value and support the efforts that they make to secure our communities, but there remains the ability for the power that they wield to be a destructive force when it is allowed—or even directed—to be unleashed against groups in society who are deemed to be a threat to the designs of the Government of the day. We need therefore to look back at what happened during the miners’ strike and learn the lessons of history, so that we do not allow them to be repeated today. There is no justification for individuals and groups—other than those who might genuinely pose a direct threat to our country’s security—to be subjected to surveillance. No one in Scotland today should face trumped-up charges and organised police harassment for having nothing more than political views that do not suit the Government of the day. To show that those lessons have been learned, we must say to those who were wronged during the miners’ strike that we know that to be the case and that the stains that were placed on them by the past mistakes are to be removed. We need the inquiry that Neil Findlay has called for—nothing less will do, minister.

Does the minister recall that previously in this Parliament we heard similar arguments from the previous Administration in relation to calls for an inquiry into abuse in care homes? The Government at the time gave all the reasons that the minister is giving and said how difficult it was to have an inquiry and that no outcome would be forthcoming. Eventually, the Government relented and an inquiry was held. There are precedents in this Parliament for that to happen; it could be done again on the same basis.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the effectiveness of the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Act 2012. (S4O-01901)

No one would disagree that the blight of sectarianism and hatred in Scotland must be challenged strenuously and determinedly, but does the minister recognise the genuine concerns of lawyers, academics and others that football supporters are facing police harassment and that their rights are being routinely eroded under the new act? With supporters being put under surveillance, stopped at airports, remanded and refused bail before cases are dropped, and subjected to what can only be described as dawn raids on their homes, is the minister as concerned as I am that, rather than challenging sectarianism, this criminalisation process is actually heightening tensions, especially when only supporters groups, such as the union bears at Ibrox and the green brigade at Celtic park, are being deliberately targeted, although the problem permeates the whole of Scottish society? Indeed, the most offensive comments that I have seen recently were from the police officer who was responsible for overseeing such actions, who said on Facebook that he was a pest controller dealing with vermin—

Is that not the type of language that we should be dealing with?

Given the importance that the member sets on education in Lanarkshire, can she explain why the SNP group on North Lanarkshire Council proposed an alternative budget last week that would have cut £250,000—that is, one quarter—from the funds available for residential schools for disabled people?

I never said that. What a ridiculous argument.

There is no doubt that, when SNP members have spoken about the budget, they have consistently tried to convey optimism about its capacity to generate growth in the economy. However, after listening to Mr Swinney and his colleagues promoting their conviction about the budget, I am reminded of Voltaire’s view that optimism is “the obstinacy of maintaining that everything is best when it is worst”. I will not rehearse the argument that I made at stage 1—that witnesses provided no support to the Finance Committee that would allow the Government to maintain its proclamation that this is a budget for growth. Rather, I will convey my own example of why such a gap exists between what the Government asserts and the reality of its failure to deliver. Back in my office in Bellshill, I keep a glossy brochure that Transport Scotland produced in about 2006. The brochure contains a timetable for the M8 Newhouse to Baillieston upgrade, the Raith interchange reconstruction and the M74 Raith to Maryville expansion plan. The first of those projects was to start in 2009, the second was to start in 2010 and the entire interrelated programme was projected to be completed in 2014. Yet here we are in the second month of 2013 and the only sign of those construction schemes, which are now known as the M8 bundle, remains that sleek Transport Scotland booklet. Companies that have located in the area remain poised—if not suspended—in anticipation of the benefits that are predicted to accrue from that much-vaunted but delayed enhancement to the motorway network in the heart of Lanarkshire. We are approaching four years after the projects were supposed to start, and we have nothing more than the bloated boasts of the Government and the Scottish Futures Trust that those road projects will be ready to start in 2014—the year when they were due to finish.

What is more remarkable is that Bruce Crawford still refers to the SFT as if it was the money, when it is actually a body that was set up at huge cost to spend money that it does not have. Even more laughable is the claim of the First Minister and his Government that the works are part of a £3 billion infrastructure contract list that is already with us and is in the budget. If it were not so sad that construction companies—and, more important, their employees—know that the work should already be in progress, it would be hysterical. The projects are not so much shovel ready as shovel rusty, as the tools lie around waiting for the Government to pay someone to pick them up. Construction output in Scotland fell by an estimated 13 per cent in 2012, which means that the sector will remain in recession even as the wider economy sees some signs of life. Estimates for the sector indicate that, despite the 1.1 per cent growth that is predicted over the next four years, employment will fall by about 1 per cent in the same period—it is expected to stabilise only in about 2016-17. Economists who are assessing capital investment in Scotland expect growth and employment in the construction sector to fall, which they attribute to the scaling back of Government investment in housing and in spending on public non-housing projects, such as the building of schools and hospitals. That reduction in investment is likely to see a decline of 3.5 per cent in the public non-housing sector in the period up to 2017. If we add to that a public housing sector that is also likely to contract by 0.4 per cent over the same period, we can anticipate a 58 per cent drop in Scotland’s forecast annual recruitment requirement for construction. I am happy to commend the cabinet secretary for retaining his commitment to training and upskilling. We have to ensure that, as industry crawls back from the recession, it is prepared and ready to cope with the increased level of demand. However, if that commitment to producing the skilled workforce that we need is to be more than rhetoric, we need a reversal of the disastrous cuts that are planned for the education sector, which is best placed to provide the practical skills that industry sectors, especially construction, will need. At best, therefore, and taking an optimistic perspective on what it contains, this has been a very benign budget. Yes, there were huge challenges to be met because of the cuts from Westminster, but rather than rising to meet the challenge, Mr Swinney has played safe. He has protected the headline-grabbing populist policies that, while bringing short-term electoral success to his party, have diverted resources away from the long-term sustainable spending that Scotland needs at this time.

We could be forgiven for thinking that the budget is designed not to meet Scotland’s current economic needs but to lay the foundations of the more munificent budget that the SNP Government is preparing to deliver just before the referendum. While protecting the SNP’s short-term ambitions, Mr Swinney has sought to blame Westminster for the failure of Scotland’s economy to grow. What he has forgotten is that, when someone spends their time blaming others, they give up the power to change things themselves. As there is no strategy for change, there is little prospect of the investment in the right areas of the Scottish economy that we need from the budget if growth is to manifest itself as a result. Having forgone the opportunity to do what is right by the Scottish economy, the Government has also forfeited the right to our support for the budget.

Let me make a serious point about the M8 bundle. One of the key reasons why the M8 has to be extended is to allow goods to get to the Mossend rail freight terminal so that we get them off the road and on to trains. That is the intermodal shift that we need. In the longer term, some of those infrastructure projects will achieve the outcomes that Patrick Harvie wants.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what reductions it expects in unemployment levels during 2013. (S4O-01714)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his answer. The reduction in the latest unemployment figures is welcome, but does the cabinet secretary agree with the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, which pointed out that there are underlying issues that must be addressed by actions to stimulate the economy? Is the cabinet secretary concerned, for example, that companies such as Amazon, which employed large numbers of seasonal staff in the run-up to Christmas, have been reported as retaining relatively few people on a permanent basis. Given that the Scottish Government provided financial assistance to Amazon, can anything be done in such circumstances to seek agreement from companies that are in receipt of such Government funding to commit to retaining staff and to recruiting employees, particularly from the far too large pool of 90,000 under-25s who appear to have been dumped on the dole, with little prospect of employment at this time?

When considering the budget, I have been continually reminded of the quotation from Stuart Chase, the American Keynesian economist, who said: “For those who believe, no proof is necessary. For those who don’t believe, no proof is possible.” Experience has taught me to be an unbeliever about the assertions of the Government, so I am prepared for SNP members to dismiss me as a non-believer in the Government’s cause and accuse me of taking the view that no proof is possible for their contention that this is a budget for jobs and growth. Fortunately for Mr Swinney, no proof is necessary for his back benchers. He has said that it is a budget for growth and, therefore, it must be true. Mr Stevenson and Mr Gibson exemplified that view in their speeches.

Saying that he is doing his best is not necessarily agreeing, or saying that the Government is achieving. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will tell me that I was not looking hard enough for the evidence—I am sure that that is the point that Mr Gibson was trying to make—but I assure members that I was. I am still prepared to allow the Government to present evidence that sustains its argument that the budget will take Scotland’s economy forward. We can do nothing other than accept that it is a tough economic climate in which to propose any budget, but the circumstances make it all the more imperative that the Government obtain widespread verification that the budget is one that will stimulate the economy before it defends it as such. We rely on our committee system to facilitate the fullest scrutiny possible. Unfortunately, rather than considering the proposals in depth and making evidence-based arguments for changes to the budget, some committees, such as the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, selected partial scrutiny while others, such as the Welfare Reform Committee—of which I am convener—forwent the opportunity to consider the budget at all.

I say to Mr Stevenson that I will try to make some progress, but I will come back—

I will come back to Mr Stevenson if I can. One notable exception was the Equal Opportunities Committee, without which there would have been no mention of the horrendous impact of the Con-Dems’ welfare reforms in the Finance Committee’s budget report. In a time of austerity, when we needed proper analysis more than ever, we got compliance with the Government’s assertion. We are left with the Scottish Government proclaiming that its spending priorities will create “a more successful country, with opportunities for all of Scotland to flourish, through increasing sustainable economic growth”, but simply ignoring organisations such as the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, which takes the view that “it is difficult to discern the pattern of spending which aligns with successive … Scottish Governments’ top priority … of increasing sustainable economic growth.” The SCDI in particular, but not exclusively, questions the decision to prioritise the protection of some areas of public spending at the expense of others that are directly and indirectly responsible for increasing sustainable economic growth. The Centre for Public Policy for Regions was also sceptical and wondered why the Scottish Government’s spending priorities failed to show that it “helps secure faster economic growth.” The Royal Society of Edinburgh states: “It would be useful to see a cost-benefit analysis of the Scottish Government’s spending decisions against its stated core objective of sustainable economic growth.” Never mind. No evidence is needed for the SNP’s Stepford gang on the back benches. John Swinney says it is so and, therefore, there is no need to prove that the budget will achieve the aim that is set for it.

My recollection is that many organisations suggested that. One that I am about to come on to is the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations. We have to discuss the proposal. I know that the klaxon horns will sound as soon as we mention such proposals but—and this is where spending decisions are important—the Government cannot simply say that it will spend its money on one thing and that that will achieve sustainable economic growth if what it spends the money on is not aimed at sustainable economic growth. That is the point that all those organisations were making. One of those organisations was the SCVO, which argued that we need to take a long-term, holistic approach to the economy that encompasses a range of social, environmental and economic outcomes. However, we get what we have always had from the SNP Government: short-term, populist spending priorities. We are told that this is a budget with the needs of the economy at its core, but what we have is one in which only an extra £9 million is specifically spent on enterprise. That is not the type of spending priority that we would expect to see in a budget for growth. Another of the Government’s assertions is that capital investment continues to be a central element of its approach to supporting economic recovery. There is widespread support for that, but where is the evidence that it will be delivered? The Civil Engineering Contractors Association stated: “if what is in the budget actually happens ... civil engineering in Scotland will stabilise.” It will not grow, just stabilise. Equally, the Scottish Building Federation was more than a little unconvinced. It told us that progress is very slow and that anyone who suggests that this budget “could be a budget for growth in the construction sector is out of touch with reality.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 26 September 2012; c 1624, 1630.] Decisions have to be made, but the Government is cutting the housing budget by £66 million, it is reducing the college budget by more than £50 million and it has chosen to take EGIP out of the transport infrastructure spend. Those decisions are proof enough for me that, despite Mr Swinney’s assertions, whatever this budget is for, it is not a budget for growth.

Will the member take an intervention?

The Finance Committee has been looking at a few bills recently and an inconsistency in the Government’s approach to the use of a purpose clause in those bills has come to light during our deliberations. For example, when discussing the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill, officials made clear the value of having a purpose clause in place in order to avoid misinterpretation of the bill’s intent. However, in relation to the Freedom of Information (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill before us, we were told by the cabinet secretary at stage 2 that such a clause should be rejected, because adding such a clause “could lead to the act being interpreted in a very different manner from the one in which Parliament originally intended it to be interpreted.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 5 December 2012; c 1937.] That was despite the fact that it was made clear in the consultation document on the original FOI act that the purpose of the law was to allow information about our public services to be accessed by the public. How can that be misinterpreted? The original consultation stated that the law should cover “all Scottish public authorities and service providers”. The Scottish Government’s six principles also refer to FOI as “an essential part of open democratic government and responsive public services.” However, that does not form part of the law, and the Government argues that to introduce clarity on the purpose of the 2002 act could have “unintended consequences” or “change the fundamental ethos of the legislation”.—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 5 December 2012; c 1936.] How can it be the case that to introduce a purpose clause to state what the original act was intended to do can be said to change its fundamental ethos and be to the detriment of the bill and the use of FOI legislation? Quite simply, the insertion of a purpose clause is needed because the Scottish Government’s consultation in 2010 and the evidence that we have had from various sources indicate that the law is not delivering what MSPs intended or what the public wanted. Therefore, we need to legislate explicitly for what we all say that we support so that we can uphold the enforceable right of the people of Scotland to access information. That is what was promised in 2002, but doubt has been raised about whether that is what we have. The inclusion in the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 of the provisions that are proposed in amendment 9 would remove that doubt. I move amendment 9.

I do not believe that this is a particularly complex issue. It is more about principle than detail. The omission in 2002 of a purpose clause appears more and more to be a mistake. If we have the clarity that the cabinet secretary says that we have, why are more and more issues arising and being taken to the courts? Public bodies take different approaches, despite performing similar functions. More and more cases are coming under dispute and whether a request for information meets the purpose of the 2002 act is continually being challenged. I and others believe that the purpose clause would help to clarify the intent behind the 2002 act and give clarity in determining whether a refusal to provide information falls outwith the purposes of that original act. I therefore urge members to support my amendment for that very simple purpose. I press amendment 9.

Malcolm Chisholm believes that it was right to remove the royal exemption from the bill. However, had it not been taken out, would it have “overlaid” the bill or would it have “amended” it? If it would have amended the bill, surely a purpose section would have done the same thing?

I join colleagues in thanking the Finance Committee clerks for their hard work in facilitating the inquiry and producing the report that we are debating today. I also thank everyone who gave evidence to the committee and made the inquiry such an enjoyable experience. In particular, the event that I attended in Ardrossan along with the convener was very informative and thought provoking. Coming from Lanarkshire, I was keen to see whether the employment initiatives and the skills and training environment in Ayrshire compared more or less favourably with those of the area that I represent. Perhaps not surprisingly, I found that there were many general areas of similarity, even where local circumstances may make the specifics quite distinct. It confirmed to me that the overall conclusions of the committee’s report are applicable across Scotland. What struck me most and confirmed my prior experience was that the expectations of the private sector are far too often at odds with the structures for the employment programmes that are designed and run by public sector agencies such as Jobcentre Plus and Skills Development Scotland. That is why it is right that the report calls for the earliest possible private sector involvement, so that employment initiatives have the best possible chance to succeed in meeting the needs of the business sectors that we will rely on to provide the sustainable economic growth that we all desire. A recent meeting that I held with a youth training group in my area highlighted one of the main points raised with us in Ardrossan, which was that public agencies are so intent on delivering numbers of people through the system that too often they lose focus on matching the needs of employers with the skills and abilities of those who are looking to find work, especially those who are furthest away from the job market. A number of participants in Ardrossan commented that they would rather have fewer trainees with longer periods in training than lots of people going through schemes in short bursts, only to find themselves devoid of the employability skills needed to make their transition into the workplace more viable and sustainable. That chimed with what I was told in Lanarkshire, where there is genuine concern that SDS is so focused on inputting large numbers of jobseekers that it is not effectively and sustainably delivering people into the workplace. Too often, it would appear that SDS identifies the outcome that it wants and then tries to fit round small and medium-sized enterprise pegs into square training place holes that it has designed to meet its targets, rather than the needs of the business community. That is why it is important to emphasise another conclusion of the committee’s report. There has to be much more robust, independent evaluation of current Scottish Government skills and employment initiatives. Evidence has to be produced to show how employment programmes, rather than simply counting the number of people who go through the system, actually support people into sustainable, valuable and worthwhile employment. We often hear that businesses and Government are under intense pressure to become more strategic about developing and assessing employability initiatives and the skills sets that need to be created to meet current and envisaged skills shortages. Business groups claim to be linking strategic planning more directly with training, development and recruitment, while our education and skills system claims to be moving toward skills-based outcomes. Those messages were delivered repeatedly throughout the inquiry. Government agencies were identified as being keen on certifying learners’ employability skills—be they modern apprenticeships, Scottish vocational qualifications or other vocational courses—as a means of indicating that people have been enabled to negotiate their transition to the world of work. What is missing is robust evidence that that is being achieved. The committee’s inquiry shows that while employers and educators know that the development of skills is essential to Scotland’s competitiveness and growth in highly competitive global markets, they find it difficult to take effective, concerted action to establish programmes for delivering those skills. Whether or not it disagrees with that opinion, SDS appears to be unclear about what employability skills are, how they are connected to one another and how to approach the process of developing them. The early problems in relation to the my world of work website are clear evidence of that. I would not make a general point of attacking the website—I want good initiatives to be introduced and information technology can be used to enhance young people’s learning experiences. However, careers advisers in SDS have told me of their concern that, although the my world of work website can be a useful tool, there is now a lack of personal contact. They fear that, metaphorically speaking, careers advisers will be left standing at the school gate, hoping to catch the students with whom they used to engage one-to-one before they disappear down the road, never to be brought back into the advisory service again. There are problems and it is not good enough just to say that the my world of work website is a great idea. It may well be, but if problems are being identified, they must be addressed.

I do not dispute at all what the minister said, but my point is that, throughout our inquiry, the point was repeatedly made that the connection with the tools that SDS uses is not being made. There is no evidence that the outcomes are being delivered in the way that we would hope. From the evidence that I heard during the inquiry, I think that longer-term strategic thinking and planning on sustainable, long-term and deliverable outcomes has been sacrificed on the altar of short-term target-driven results. The inquiry should teach us that lesson and the debate should help to convey that message further. We need to emphasise that message more—we need quality training over quantity being put through the system with too little or too limited effect.

It remains to be seen whether the Scottish Government will hear the message that the Finance Committee heard and create the space to deliver the long-term strategy that the inquiry strongly suggests that we need. I hope that the Scottish Government will do that.

I thank the cabinet secretary for responding so positively to that point. Yes, it was in part in relation to college places, but it was also based on evidence that we heard, particularly in Ardrossan, from workplace training providers, who felt that they were being restricted by having to get numbers through workplaces rather than being allowed to work with young people for a longer time so that they were more able to retain those people in the workplace.

Can the member tell us how NPD is paid for in comparison with PFI?

Is it not incumbent on everyone who knows the Douglas Support estate to reflect the proposal accurately? Is it is not the case that protection of the archaeology and wildlife in the area is part of the plan? Instead of framing the debate in terms of the area’s destruction, should we not debate the potential to protect the area, protect the wildlife and bring much-needed jobs to the community?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made toward the commencement of construction of the Newhouse to Baillieston M8 upgrade. (S4O-01510)

The minister will be aware that I have been in constant contact with Transport Scotland about progress on this issue. At the last meeting that I had with Transport Scotland, sometime in September, I heard that an indication on the final decision on the contract would be given around this time. Can the minister confirm that that is the case? Does the minister agree that the issue is not just about the jobs that will come from building the M8, the Raith interchange and the M74, and that the potential economic growth of the area depends on the swift construction of the M8? Will he give a commitment that there will be no further slippage on the project, which matters a great deal not only to the economy of central Lanarkshire but to Scotland as a whole?

You’re out of order.

I apologise.

I do not think that anyone would dispute the cabinet secretary’s argument on that, but only those who are actively engaged in housing associations and in those technical areas would understand the process by which information could be drawn down via such routes. Given the greater understanding of FOI, would it not be better that the powers be available under FOI legislation?

Not many members would disagree in principle with the Government’s view that there is a need to reform the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. However, like the majority of members on the Finance Committee, many members might consider that, having decided to update the legislation, the Government has introduced a bill that is, to say the least, far from adequate. How strange that the Government started off with consensus and ended up introducing contentious issues that broke the initial accord and went against the will of the stakeholders who supported the proposals in the initial consultation. In short, there was a general desire for FOI to be extended and there was no disposition towards the extension of exemptions, yet the reverse of those positions has been put before us. The Government seeks no extension of FOI to cover arm’s-length organisations, housing associations and a range of other bodies that provide public services, and it has bewildered us all with its aim of extending the exemption from FOI to include the royal family. In recent weeks, Salus, which is a health board’s arm’s-length organisation, has signed a contract with Atos Healthcare, which has recently come in for a great deal of criticism. Why would the Scottish Government not want to bring Salus into the ambit of FOI and allow us access to information that might be useful as we deal with issues in relation to the Welfare Reform Act 2012? That baffles me and many other people. In effect, the Scottish Government has disregarded the views of stakeholders, which, regrettably, is becoming an all-too-familiar habit. For example, in response to the question “Did you take part in the Scottish Government’s consultation on the Bill and how have your views been reflected?”, the Campaign for Freedom of Information in Scotland responded bluntly and said: “Yes, but our views have been mainly ignored.” That cannot be a good situation to have when we are considering the bill. The campaign advocates that private and voluntary organisations that receive funding from the public purse should be subject to the scrutiny of freedom of information. Surely such bodies should be subject to scrutiny by the eye of the public whom they serve. I agree with that principle, but the Government seems to have taken a different view. The Government once advanced the concept of the arc of prosperity, but it now exhibits a predisposition towards the arc of secrecy, which extends from Victoria Quay to the High Court and which will continue to encompass far too many publicly funded bodies. For example, housing associations, which members have mentioned, benefit from high levels of funding from the Scottish Government—or, at least, they used to. If a local authority that builds council housing is subject to freedom of information laws, surely housing associations, which build social rented housing with public money, must be brought under the same scrutiny. Equally, the basic principle of providing exemptions in a freedom of information bill is not only contradictory but incongruous. As the Scottish Information Commissioner has stated, that “erodes the right to information enshrined in the Act.” The bill makes only limited improvements to the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. As Unison aptly put it, to fail to extend the act is to weaken it considerably. The Scottish Government has turned what was seemingly a simple and easy job of extending the 2002 act into an overcomplex task. The Government said in its consultation on independence, “Your Scotland, Your Referendum”: “We shouldn’t have a constitution which constrains us, but one which frees us to build a better society ... We must renew democracy and strike a new bond between government and the people based on trust and humility.” How can the Government renew democracy if it allows organisations that provide crucial public services to continue to remain secret? The Government must accept the calls from various stakeholders for amendments to the bill. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary indicated a desire to engage in discussion. As the Campaign for Freedom of Information in Scotland said in its submission: “The ability to exercise our human rights ... is crucial in our modern democracy.” I am puzzled as to why the Scottish Government appears to be intent on pressing ahead with the bill in a way that is reminiscent of the approach that Westminster took—wrongly—in 2010. The amendments that were agreed to two years ago were not subject to full scrutiny in the House of Lords, due to the imminence of the general election. The House of Lords Select Committee on the Constitution said: “It is inexcusable that the Government should have taken so long to prepare this Bill that it has effectively denied both Houses of Parliament ... the opportunity of subjecting this important measure of constitutional reform to the full scrutiny which it deserves.” Why would the Scottish Government take two years to consult, only to make the same mistake that the Lords, of all people, identified at Westminster? Unison said in its submission that it was “disappointed that the Scottish Government is making only minor changes via this Bill.” Unison went on to say: “the existing legislation is weaker and less clear than it should be for the growing number of public services delivered by private companies and other bodies not currently covered by FOISA.” I could not agree more. I am not surprised that Unison thought that its views had been disregarded and said: “Ministers have effectively ignored ours and others’ calls for action on extending the Act.”

The bill can be saved. We should vote for it today in the hope that the Government will listen to civic Scotland and show that the consultation was not a waste of time and that the bill can be useful.

Will Bruce Crawford take an intervention?

I thank Bruce Crawford for giving me the time to say that I do not agree. Why would it be right for the royal family in the United Kingdom to be exempted by devolved assemblies and the Government of the United Kingdom, while in other countries—such as Australia and Canada—where the monarch is also the head of state, she would still be subject to FOI legislation?

Will George Adam tell us how that money will be spent twice, given that Angus Robertson has said that that money will go on defence spending in Scotland?

I, too, congratulate John Scott on bringing the debate to the Parliament. As is the case in other jurisdictions, including at Westminster and in the Dáil, I hope that in future the British Irish Parliamentary Assembly will be not the subject of a members’ business debate—John Scott has had to use his member’s time for this—but an issue that is built into the programme of the Parliament. As the work of BIPA is becoming much more important, it should become an integral part of our debates and discussions in this Parliament. I first became involved in BIPA when it was the British-Irish Inter-Parliamentary Body, which was more commonly known as “the body”. I was an associate or substitute member at first, but I was slightly frustrated by that because, although I could participate in debates at the plenary sessions, where I could hear a vast array of speakers from a host of different jurisdictions speak on important matters, I could not follow through on the on-going work of the body’s committees. I could hear the work of the committees being reported back to the plenary session, but I was unable to engage in taking that work forward. That was a bit of a frustration, especially for anyone who had an interest in a particular subject. As a full member of BIPA, I now participate on an on-going basis in committee D, which deals with environmental and social issues. The development of BIPA from the BIIPB is a good-news story, but I have some criticisms about my early experiences of the body. Although Willie Coffey is right that there is a social dimension to what goes on and that meeting colleagues from other jurisdictions in a social setting can be beneficial to building up good relations, I felt that initially that was the focus of the body and there was too much emphasis on that. One cannot say that now about BIPA, which is a much more substantial institution. The elected representatives who have got us to this point deserve great credit for removing that almost talking-shop-type attitude from the discussions and for introducing much more important, substantive and substantial issues. However, I understand that the body, as it was, had to walk before it could run. In the initial stages in the post Anglo-Irish agreement days, many of the issues were pretty tortuous and there was a lot of trepidation—there was a lot of finessing and caressing of political issues—and things were pretty difficult. It is to the great credit of the MPs, TDs and others who were involved in those initial days that the body played such a huge role in bringing people together and helping to move forward the peace process. Having served that purpose well, BIPA can move on to discuss, in a much more constructive and substantive way, economic, social and political issues, and I think that it is starting to do that. As someone who is now more involved in the committees, I feel that their work has become more central to the work of the plenaries and involves other members much more as we move forward. When I first became a member of committee D, it had just completed a substantive report on the Irish diaspora in Britain. Although I had criticisms of the report, it is useful. We went on to produce a short report on flooding that helped to inform all the jurisdictions. Last night, I was in Belfast, where we had the latest leg of our inquiry into human trafficking, which has been an important piece of work. In January, we will be in Edinburgh to talk about the issue again. We must congratulate all those who are involved in BIPA, which is an important organisation. I am delighted to be a part of it and I look forward to the years ahead and to continuing to put effort into identifying areas in which we can work together across the British isles so that we benefit from one another’s knowledge.

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether it expects to receive Barnett consequentials as a result of the United Kingdom Government’s recently announced advice services transition fund and, if so, whether it will allocate those to advice services in Scotland. (S4O-01446)

The key phrase in my question was “to advice services”, not “for advice services”. In the past, moneys that have been allocated for advice services have not actually made their way to organisations such as Citizens Advice Scotland or other independent advice services. Those organisations are telling the Welfare Reform Committee and the Parliament about the pressures that they are already under because of the welfare reforms that are coming from Westminster. We need to know that Citizens Advice Scotland and other bodies will receive funding in order to help them cope with the pressures that are coming. Can the cabinet secretary guarantee that the consequentials from that fund will go to those organisations and will he commit to ring fencing that money so that it can be allocated directly?

In 13 years as a member of this Parliament, I have seen quite an array of legislation go through. Some of it was vital, and some of it was technical in nature and, at times, bewildering in its meaning and outcome. Some of it has tested my loyalty to the maximum and some that this Government has introduced since it came to office has tested my ability to treat it at face value and give it my support. I have supported some legislation and afterwards regretted having done so. However, without doubt, the bill that is before Parliament today is the worst that I can recall in respect of its policy intention and technical merits. It has been badly conceived and intransigently pursued in a way that I have never experienced and hope never to encounter again. I strongly opposed the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill and take pride in having voted against it. However, in doing so, I was always prepared to believe that the Government was genuinely seeking to address a major problem in Scottish society, even if I fundamentally disagreed with the efficacy of the proposal and its potentially detrimental unintended consequences. However, this bill has nothing whatever to commend it. It is not properly evidenced. In fact, it is not just poorly evidenced; it contains no evidential sustenance at all. Previous speakers have highlighted the root-and-branch flaws in the bill, but I will quote the Scottish Chambers of Commerce to highlight just how badly the bill sits. It said that “the Scottish Government is demonstrating, at best, a total lack of understanding of the pressures facing business in Scotland today”. Although evidence on the legislation that was introduced in England in 2008 is there for all to see, the Government refuses to take it on board. There are truly none so blind as those who will not see.

I refer the minister to the evidence that was given to the Finance Committee by the Scottish Property Federation, but there is more than that. The CBI, among others, has looked at and provided evidence on what happened in England—the detrimental impacts and the businesses that have been knocked down instead of being regenerated. The evidence is there, but the minister does not want to see it.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. John Mason was at the Finance Committee and heard the evidence to which I have just referred. The Government was asserting that the bill will bring 5,000 empty properties back into circulation, but there is no evidence whatever to back that up. Whatever John Mason wants to say about what has happened in England, we know that the legislation there has had a detrimental impact. It was introduced at the wrong time and in the wrong way—and it was a Labour Government that introduced it. Why would the Government want to copy what is being done at Westminster when that has not worked? The fact is that the Government evidence that was brought to the Finance Committee was shot through with holes that were created by false assumptions and downright mistakes in the costings that were presented. After listening to the arguments that were conveyed clearly by the business community, local authorities and others, and which have been reiterated in the debate this afternoon, and in the absence of any credible rebuttal from the Scottish Government, there is no course of action available to me today other than to oppose the bill as vigorously as I can, and that is what I will do.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The American Supreme Court justice Oliver Wendell Holmes once said: “This is a court of law, young man, not a court of justice.” That may have been his view of the American judicial system from where he sat, but I would like to think that anyone who looks at or works within the Scottish legal structure would believe that justice is what should be pursued here at all costs. I would never describe myself as having a high level of detailed knowledge of the ways of Scotland’s legal profession, but I am keen to speak in the debate, as there are areas in which I have a specific interest. I welcome Lord Carloway’s report, as it is an insightful commentary that I have found extremely helpful in understanding some arcane aspects of the law. Although the Scottish Government has already responded positively to several of Lord Carloway’s proposals, it is clear that some of his other proposals that are being consulted on will require a lot more consideration, given their more controversial nature. Not surprisingly, most members have focused on one of Lord Carloway’s more contentious proposals: the removal of corroboration. We must look at that objectively to arrive at a firm conclusion as to whether corroboration is suitable in modern day Scots law. Some will argue strongly that the principle of corroboration ensures that innocent people are not convicted on the basis of one person’s oral evidence. Others will argue that if it is removed, subsequent changes must be made to Scots law to preserve the integrity of the practice of the systematic use of evidence to convict an individual. It is in that area—the conviction of people in Scottish courts—that I have a particular interest. Whatever opinion people hold on the matter, few would argue that the three-verdict system of guilty, not guilty and not proven is uncontentious. I thank the cabinet secretary for his recent letter to me, in which he expressed an interest in the outcome of my consultation on the three-verdict system. I am happy to tell him that I will provide him with the final analysis and any relevant information I obtain, in order to inform his deliberations. In the meantime, he may be interested to know that I have included in my proposal for a reform of criminal verdicts bill a mock juror study that established clearly the relationship between the strength of evidence presented to a jury and the verdict delivered by that jury. Although we cannot categorically say what impact removing corroboration will have, evidence and studies show that it is highly probable that it will increase the number of not proven verdicts arrived at by juries. To mitigate such potential effects, additional measures will have to be introduced if the Scottish Government goes ahead with its plans to remove corroboration. First, as has been said a few times today, the number of jurors that is required to reach a verdict must be increased from the current simple majority. In normal circumstances a minimum of eight over seven jurors is required. I do not have a definitive proportion for what the majority should be, but I believe that no less than two thirds of the jury should be required to reach a decision. I invite anyone to give their views on this subject by responding to my consultation, which is currently published and in which I seek an answer to that question. Secondly, if we change the threshold that is required for a jury to make a decision, the outdated three-verdict system used by Scots courts must be done away with. If we stick with a three-verdict system after increasing the majority required, it will be more difficult for a majority verdict to be reached. It is highly probable that that will result in an increase in the number of controversial and unsatisfactory verdicts being reached in Scottish courts. I advocate that the three-verdict system in Scotland should be changed to a simple two-verdict system. I am unsure whether the two verdicts should be named “guilty” or “not guilty”, “proven” or “not proven”, or whether different terms, which can be suggested, should be used.

There are figures, but I cannot remember them off the top of my head. I will send Ms Grahame information on that if she would like. Information is contained in my report and I will get it to her if it helps with her consideration.

I welcome all responses to my consultation and I encourage members to look at it closely and let me know their opinions. The more information that I have, the better the consultation will be. With or without the removal of corroboration, there are areas that must be reformed and my proposal for a reform of criminal verdicts bill details my views on that. If the removal of corroboration goes ahead, it must go hand in hand with other changes that offer protections. As the Law Society of Scotland said, “If corroboration is removed, it is vital that careful consideration is given to the introduction of new safeguards to minimise miscarriages of justice based on uncorroborated allegations.” I started off by questioning the views of Oliver Wendell Holmes. I will conclude by agreeing with Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, who wrote in “The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes”: “It’s every man’s business to see justice done.” The cabinet secretary has brought us an interesting debate. Lord Carloway’s report goes a long way to addressing some of my concerns about seeking justice in our judicial system. If we move forward with the right resources and make the right practical changes, we can enhance our judicial system. The debate will obviously inform the outcomes that we can achieve.

5. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met Strathclyde partnership for transport and what issues were discussed. (S4O-01280)

Recently, both Holytown and Whitehill in Hamilton—two of the most isolated communities in my constituency—lost vital bus services. I understand that SPT has submitted to the minister a 10-point plan that attempts to improve the delivery of commercial bus services for the ordinary passenger and local communities. Among its recommendations, the document advocates that a statutory obligation be placed on bus companies to consult public transport authorities in advance of proposed service cuts, leading to proper engagement with elected members and communities to protect bus users in places such as Holytown and Whitehill. Does the minister agree that the current free-for-all in the market, which is adversely affecting most local communities, is no longer sustainable and that the SPT 10-point plan should be given serious consideration?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what measures it will put in place to stimulate the construction sector. (S4O-01254)

In the past few months, as the minister will know, my constituency has—among other setbacks—lost more than 500 jobs at W J Harte Construction Ltd. It has recently seen Laing O’Rourke Construction Ltd decide to close its Bison concrete plant, where it makes an array of products for the construction sector. At Terex, 70 job losses have been announced, and it is to go on to short-time working. I recently visited Terex and I was disappointed to learn just how little support and advice it has received from Government bodies, when it is facing its most difficult period in years, due to contraction in its main markets overseas, which are very dependent on the economies of America and China. Will the minister investigate why Terex believes that it is being overlooked and not considered favourably in relation to ticking all the boxes because it does not put up wind turbines, but makes equipment to build roads and to dig quarries?

I, too, congratulate Clare Adamson on securing the debate. Like Jamie Hepburn, I apologise, as I have to get to a cross-party group meeting in around eight minutes, or I will leave many people without someone to lead the debate. The debate is on an issue that is of great importance not just to communities in the shadow of Ravenscraig but to communities throughout Lanarkshire and in many other parts of Scotland. Steel making was as much a part of the lives of people in those communities as breathing. This debate is not just an opportunity to remind ourselves of the past and the fundamental role that the steel industry has played in shaping Scotland; it is also an opportunity to celebrate the industrial capacity and skills that we still have at our disposal. It is true that Scotland’s steelworkers have revolutionised the Scottish economy over the centuries, and there can be no greater legacy than to see it contributing to Scotland’s future growth and the emerging markets, especially in the renewable sector. In that regard, I pay special tribute to the Clydesdale tube works in my constituency and the many generations of highly skilled workers whom it has produced. As a boilermaker, he might be a bit surprised by this, but I particularly welcome my colleague Pat Donnelly from the Community trade union. Pat is the national executive representative for the steelworkers’ union in Scotland and a union stalwart of the Clydesdale tube works. I place on the record the invaluable role that the Community trade union—which was formerly the Iron and Steel Trades Confederation—has played in the industry over the years, all too often in the face of enormous difficulties. It has led the way for independent working-class representation in one of the most traditional industries, and it deserves the Parliament’s respect for doing so. Contrary to the general perception, it is a fact that, of all the steel-finishing processes to be carried out in our area, the most extensive and longest lasting was tube manufacture. By the latter half of the 20th century, Stewarts and Lloyds had the monopoly of that industry in the United Kingdom, and it had four large facilities in the Monklands district, at the Imperial, Calder, British and Clyde works. The decline in the industry began in the 1960s, and that led to many Lanarkshire workers transferring with it to follow the work to Corby. Many of those families originally came to Scotland from Ireland, Poland and Lithuania—the Mossend area is synonymous with the Lithuanian community in Scotland—in the 19th century as the steelworks grew. They migrated again to continue to work in the steel industry away from Lanarkshire as it declined. By the 1980s, the centre of tube manufacturing was in two mills in the Clydesdale works at Mossend. That plant is now owned by Vallourec Mannesman Oil & Gas UK, which, is the largest—indeed, the only—United Kingdom-based manufacturer and supplier to the North Sea oil and gas industry. I would like it not only to maintain that position but to grow and expand in the years ahead. For those like my father, grandfather and uncles who worked at Clydesdale, that would be the best memorial that we could build.

How many of those organisations are members of the CBI, which was earlier dismissed as being irrelevant in Scotland?

Does the member still agree with the Finance Committee’s finding that some of the evidence that he and I sought could have been produced had we had a business and regulatory impact assessment?

When we returned from the Christmas recess, neither the bill nor the Welfare Reform Committee that scrutinised it existed. Today is the last day before the summer recess, and the committee has been established, a consultation has taken place and the bill has been introduced. We are now in unprecedented territory in progressing the bill as rapidly as we have done. Jamie Hepburn is right to say that there is a desire among stakeholders for us to get the legislation in place so that we can move forward, and that has been delivered. With regard to amendments 1 and 2, we are discussing what happens with the subordinate legislation after we return from the summer recess to examine the detail of the consultation responses, so that we can ensure not only that we get the legislation in place in time for the changes that will come in next year, but that we get it right. The only way that we can reassure and have the confidence of stakeholders, who—in spite of what Jamie Hepburn says—have a real desire for scrutiny, is to give the legislation the maximum amount of scrutiny, which can be done through the use of affirmative procedure. The timescale does not change: it is 40 days for both affirmative and negative procedures. The Government should not hide behind technicalities and should give people the confidence that the Parliament is listening to them and will adapt to their requirements by getting the legislation right.

First of all, I thank Simon Watkins and the rest of the clerking team for their work in getting us to this point. I know that we will have to rely heavily on them as we begin to scrutinise the impact of the welfare changes. It is worth remembering what scrutiny of this legislation is all about. We might well criticise the Westminster Welfare Reform Act 2012—and there are very good reasons for doing so—but, as we move forward, we must remember that the job of the Welfare Reform Committee and the Parliament is to hold the Scottish Government to account. I also thank the voluntary sector for the work that it has carried out and the abundance of information that it has provided. All of that and the other details that it has supplied have been greatly appreciated by everyone involved in the scrutiny process so far and the sector’s continued involvement and assistance will be invaluable as we move forward. If we are to be a truly representative Parliament, we must ensure that measures to safeguard entitlements do the job that civic Scotland wants them to do. As a result of contact with the stakeholders who represent the interests of those affected by this legislation, unanimity on the view that the bill was necessary and welcome was easy to reach. Moreover, in spite of arguments that we had over the piece—at stage 1, at stage 2 and today—we should not forget that those stakeholders held a uniform view on the need for scrutiny of the subsequent subordinate legislation. Unfortunately, that unanimity was not shared among committee members. However, we will move on, as others have said. I am confident that today we will rightly unite on the bill, but it remains to be seen whether we will be able to stay unified as we scrutinise the subordinate legislation that will follow. Alex Johnstone has made it clear that, even in good humour, we may not always be able to agree. It was utterly apparent to me from the feedback received from stakeholders that the transparency of the legislative process is as much a matter for general concern as the detail. Numerous groups strongly advocated the view that the affirmative procedure should be used, among them the Child Poverty Action Group in Scotland, which urged MSPs to ensure that “the first regulations made under the new powers in the Bill that amend existing regulations” are “subject to the affirmative procedure.” Despite what was said during previous debates, including the earlier debate on amendments, CPAG and others are not naive. They knew exactly what they were asking for, and why. It may be the case that the affirmative procedure will not always be used, but it would be wrong for the cabinet secretary to dismiss the intent behind those requests. We should have the maximum possible scrutiny so that we can ensure that the legislation that we bring forward reflects the concerns that were expressed by stakeholders such as Inclusion Scotland, which said: “Any small error in the regulations could incur unintended and further damaging consequences to people who will already be suffering cuts to their income. It is crucial that the secondary legislation proceeds with the fullest scrutiny possible to guarantee that it provides positive outcomes for those affected.” That has been the Labour Party’s motivation in the discussions that we have taken forward. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary did not follow the lead of her party colleagues on the committee on the subject of reporting and instead lodged a very good amendment today to address that issue. Groups such as Citizen’s Advice Scotland recognised the importance of that issue, as did Children 1st. I agree whole-heartedly that we should ensure that “everyone with an interest in welfare reform and in particular, the impact of particular measures on individuals, families and households, has access to the fullest possible information about the Scottish Government’s work in this area”. The Welfare Reform Committee has to ensure that the concerns raised by various organisations are taken forward. Passing the buck and trying to apportion blame will cut no ice with those in Scotland who are damaged by the Westminster coalition legislation. Where this Government has responsibility, it can and will be held to account for any failings that materialise. Let us work together constructively to ensure that there are no such failings, so that the bill helps the people of Scotland whom we wish to serve.

Will the minister give way?

Is it possible that that has not been mentioned because it is not in the motion, which is about non-domestic rates?

The debate has been interesting. It was not exactly “Through the Looking-glass”, but it was a bit topsy-turvy at times. I will come to that later. No one would seriously argue against regenerating local economies and encouraging occupancy of empty premises in our town centres. However, Gavin Brown, Sarah Boyack and others have argued effectively that the Scottish Government’s plan to reduce empty property relief through the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc) (Scotland) Bill is fundamentally flawed. The proposal will not achieve its stated aim. In my view, and in that of organisations such as the Scottish Property Federation and the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, it will have a detrimental effect on business and the economy. The evidence that we have heard from various sources is that the proposal will cost the public sector considerable sums rather than save money for the public purse. If the Scottish Government disagrees with that analysis, it must do more than simply assert that it is right and everyone else is wrong. It must prove its case.

In the evidence to the Finance Committee, there was no basis for bringing the figure of £18 million to the table. It was not assessed properly and will not stand scrutiny. In recent weeks, the Finance Committee has taken a lot of evidence that has called for more robust verification and statistical analysis of the effects of public spending in Scotland. There is concern that we cannot prove that the money that we spend has the impacts that we hope for. So to a more bizarre aspect of the debate—and I do not mean Mr Adam’s reference to witch hunts. An oft-heard refrain from the nationalists in the Parliament—if there are any nationalists left in the Parliament, given what Angus Robertson has said—is that everything that Scottish Labour does results from its having to dance to the tune of London Labour. Once that old tripe has been dished out, we are often challenged to be like Labour in Wales, which has done this or done that differently from Labour in London. It is therefore ironic that the SNP demands that we copy a misguided but well-intentioned policy that was introduced by a Labour Government in London and which the minister has confirmed he wants to emulate. It is strange that, on this occasion, the SNP wants us to ignore the fact that Labour in Wales has looked at England’s situation and taken the same view as Scottish Labour, which is that the policy will not achieve the intention. As has been clearly exposed in evidence to the Finance Committee and in this morning’s debate, such legislation has been tried and has failed and should not be copied in Scotland. In the light of that, it beggars belief that the Scottish Government should reject calls for a business and regulatory impact assessment to provide Parliament with detailed information on the bill’s potential impact on business and to give us an indication not of the number of commercial properties that we can expect to be brought back into use, but of the number that will be brought back into use. It is not enough for the Government to continue to assert that, because it is doing something, it will work. We must see the evidence. As it stands, the evidence is not there. It is regrettable that the Government continues to assert that it is right and expects everyone to accept that proclamation without question. It is clear from the debate that SNP members accept that, but that is simply not good enough. Parliament and the business community must be listened to. So far, that has not occurred. Too many questions have been asked about the bill’s efficacy for us just to accept that the Government should follow England’s lead. The sounds that are heard from Westminster do not beckon us like the pied piper; they are a siren warning us to head away from the rocks. The Government should learn lessons from England and drop the proposal now.

Will the minister give way?

The point is that the Government is not learning the lessons or listening.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive how many jobs have been created by the small business bonus scheme and how this evidence was collected. (S4O-01154)

I thank the minister for his response, but it does not answer my question. I asked how many jobs had been created and how the information was collected. The fact that he was unable to answer the question has partly answered it. The minister will be aware that the Finance Committee has been considering the issue of data collection. In our evidence session with Dr Lena Wilson and others, the most robust evidence possible of the outcomes of public spending was requested. Does the minister’s answer reflect the fact that we cannot judge the overall outcome of the small business bonus scheme because we do not collect the information that relates to it?

Is the First Minister aware that, on Tuesday, Scottish Gas announced 135 job losses at its call centre and support facility in Uddingston? The GMB and Unison officials there are concerned that the work is to be transferred within the company to a facility with poorer pay and conditions. The First Minister was quick to call Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs for his friend Sir David Murray and he could not wait to make a call to Jeremy Hunt for his friend Sir Rupert Murdoch. Are 135 Scottish Gas employees in Uddingston worthy of a phone call, or does the First Minister’s statutory responsibility to fight for Scottish jobs, jobs, jobs apply only to some and not to others?

The sterling zone! [Laughter.]

I point out that, as the Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill is a relatively simple bill, I am unlikely to require my full speaking allocation. I hope that that will aid the management of the debate and earn me some brownie points. The bill is set in the context of its Westminster parent, the Welfare Reform Act 2012. Much of the evidence that the committee heard related to that act or to other welfare reform changes that are already under way. Some of that evidence was harrowing, but I will leave it to others to speak about those issues, if they wish to. I will restrict my remarks to what the committee’s report says about the bill. First, there was much in the bill and in the report on which the committee agreed. Fundamentally, we agreed—given the decision on the legislative consent motion on the Welfare Reform Bill—that, as a Parliament, we must make good on our commitment to take responsibility for these matters. That was very much the view of stakeholders. Citizens Advice Scotland spoke for many when it said in its submission: “As the Scottish Parliament rejected aspects of the UK Welfare Reform Bill Legislative Consent Motion, this bill is absolutely necessary to ensure that the citizens of Scotland still have access to passported benefits on 1 April 2013 when a raft of current benefits are effectively abolished and replaced by the new Universal Credit”. Speaking at the start of our first evidence session with stakeholders, Jeanette Campbell of CAS said: “We all agree that the bill is absolutely necessary”.—[Official Report, Welfare Reform Committee, 17 April 2012; c 93.] The Welfare Reform Committee concurs with stakeholders and agrees with the general principles of the bill. We agreed on the main powers that will be taken under the bill: we agreed on the powers that the Scottish Government wishes to take on universal credit and on those that it wishes to take on personal independence payments. We went further than that—we also agreed some important principles to do with how we felt that those powers should be used, and it is those points that I most want to draw to the cabinet secretary’s attention. We agreed that the powers should be used, in so far as it is possible, to mitigate some of the problems that the Welfare Reform Act 2012 will create. With that aim in mind, we also agreed that the regulations should be designed—for the transitional period at least—to preserve passported benefits for those who presently qualify for them. In short, we look to the Scottish Government to protect the most vulnerable of our citizens who will be affected by the changes. We appreciate that it can do that only within the powers that it possesses and we acknowledge that there are no easy answers or, as we put it in the report, that “there is no magic bullet”. On all that we agreed, but I would be doing the Parliament a disservice if I did not mention, as the report does, that there were some areas on which we did not completely agree. It would be fair to say that Alex Johnstone, as the sole representative of the UK coalition parties on the committee, was not entirely appreciative of our critique of the parent UK legislation or of our “grave concerns” about its impact. He dissented from those findings. In addition, Jackie Baillie and I did not agree with the committee’s view on the process for agreeing the regulations under the bill—we dissented on that. We wanted a more open process for the development of the regulations. First, we wanted a consultation to be held on draft regulations. Secondly, we wanted the affirmative procedure to be used for regulations that would have a significant impact, as the Subordinate Legislation Committee suggested. Thirdly, we wanted an overall policy statement to be produced on the regulations as a whole. It would be fair to say that the committee as a whole was not comfortable with that view or with the prospect of tying the cabinet secretary’s hands in what we all accept is a difficult situation and one that is not of her own making. I think that all members of the committee recognise how important and potentially controversial the regulations will be, in that they will involve deciding who gets free school meals, concessionary travel, blue badges for parking and so on. I know that the cabinet secretary has offered to respond to the Subordinate Legislation Committee’s concerns, and we welcome that. Anything that the cabinet secretary can do to help to overcome the outstanding difference of view on regulations among members of the Welfare Reform Committee would be welcome. Perhaps she could come back to the committee in September, when the picture on the regulations is clearer. We are open to offers. I close by making it clear that the committee was unanimous on some key issues. We unanimously agreed that the legislation is not just welcome, but essential; we unanimously agreed that we should speed its passage so that everything is in place in Scotland for the start of the new welfare regime in April 2013; and we unanimously supported the general principles of the bill. I hope that that gives members a clear starting point for debating the bill. I look forward to the debate.

I am sure that the cabinet secretary would prefer it if we all had short memories, but I clearly recall that in 2007 one of the first promises—among many—that the Government tried to ditch was its commitment to deliver 1,000 extra police officers, and that only pressure from the Tories, who were using the issue as a bargaining chip in relation to their support for the Government’s budget, forced the justice secretary to find money, which he knew was not there, to pay for the 1,000 officers that he had promised. The Government subsequently had to force local authorities to commit to deliver on the policy, under threat of financial penalties if they did not agree to do so. As with most of this Government’s political choices, a snappy headline is the prize for which some other area of public spending has had to pay the price. As ever, what the headline giveth, the small print taketh away. We have 1,000 more police officers, but as Unison told us and as ACPOS recently confirmed in evidence to the Finance Committee, we have lost 1,000 full-time-equivalent civilian staff. Police staff are being sacrificed on the altar of SNP populism. It is unfortunate that the carnage is due to continue unabated, because the Government stubbornly refuses to listen to the legitimate concerns of people who have identified flaws in the financial provisions in the outline business case for the new single police force. Given the significant financial implications of potential VAT liability for the new police and fire services, the police and public would be better served if Mr MacAskill spent more time pursuing the issue instead of praising himself for delivering 1,000 new police officers during the past five years. ACPOS predicts that more than 2,000 police staff posts will be lost in the next three to four years, on a best-case scenario, and that more than 3,000 jobs might be lost if pay and conditions are not further reduced and the exemption from VAT is not attained. That is not a good policy to pursue. Unison is right to point out that the Government’s “aim should be to ensure the maximum number of police officers ‘on the street’,”— in operational roles— “not substituting for police staff roles.” However, that truth cannot be fitted into a smart headline, which is what always matters most to the populist Scottish Government. The Government can deny all it wants that decivilianisation is taking place, but the people who have been affected and—this is important—the trade union that represents them know where the truth lies. I say to Mr Finnie and other members who made the same point that the fact that someone does not ask for the evidence does not mean that the evidence does not exist. Mr Finnie made clear that he had read the e-mail from Unison. He must therefore know about the survey that the union conducted and he must have seen the examples that it gave of jobs that have been transferred and are now being done by higher-paid police officers, who are no longer on the front line delivering policing services. That cannot be the way forward.

I accept that there is an explanation for the filling of some of those roles. However, the fact is that jobs are being lost and are being filled by police officers who are no longer doing policing. When budgets are tight—as I concede they are—we cannot pay police officers, at a higher cost to the public, to do jobs that they were not recruited to do. The police service does not need headline-grabbing policies; it needs a properly funded, realistically assessed and balanced workforce.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Just as I enjoyed the discussions that the Finance Committee held on fiscal sustainability, I have enjoyed this afternoon’s debate, which has looked at the range and diversity of opinions and information that were brought to the committee during its deliberations. I found that process to be stimulating, and I am sure that not only will individual members have benefited from being challenged on many axioms but that, collectively, the committee will profit from having acquired such a body of instructive depositions. Some of the areas that we looked at were non-contentious and can be taken almost as givens. For example, there is no doubt that the OBR could win the award for stating the blindingly obvious when it advised us that the public finances are likely to come under pressure as a result of an ageing population, but there is no harm in emphasising that reality, as a number of members of the committee, including the convener and Gavin Brown, have done. Underpinning almost all the evidence that the committee received was the need for good and reliable information to inform the choices that Government and other public agencies make when they allocate resources and set policies to address the challenges that society faces. Elaine Murray referred to that, and it is interesting that Dr Lena Wilson re-emphasised the point at this morning’s meeting of the Finance Committee. It is all well and good for us as politicians to set policy directions or to pursue agendas that are based on our ideological or political interests, but without verifiable evidence, we cannot know whether those decisions are justified, or even whether they are achieving the aims that we set for them. The point has been well made that although the public sector collects a great deal of data for different purposes, often best use is not made of it. For example, we all know that the Government believes that the hundreds of millions of pounds that it has spent, and which it intends to continue spending, on the small business bonus scheme is helping our economy. That may well be true, but producing figures that show how many businesses get the SBBS is vastly different from producing analysis that shows in what way local economies are benefiting and how many jobs are being created. Without the latter, all we have is assertion. Without evidence to back it up, all that we are left with is knowledge that a lot is being spent and that the recipients are happy with that. In the context of fiscal sustainability, it is entirely right to ask whether we can continue to fund a policy, the efficacy of which we have no evidence of, when we have to find resources to address the facts that, according to numerous witnesses, in educational terms the gap between the top 20 per cent and the bottom 20 per cent in Scotland is the widest in Europe; that Scotland has one of the highest proportions of people not in education, employment or training among the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries; and that levels of relative poverty have remained stubbornly high, even though they initially fell in the years immediately after devolution. My conclusion is that we certainly have a populist policy, but we have no verifiable evidence of the policy intent being achieved or of its being sustainable. Various witnesses indicated that, within the devolved powers, there was action that could be taken, and they pointed to the role that the private sector could play. An extremely interesting round-table discussion addressed the issue of additional models of finance—on which Elaine Murray, Mary Fee and Gavin Brown, among others, have commented. Again, that is a real challenge to the Government, which has consistently set out its stall against the use of private finance and has pledged to prevent private involvement in delivery of public services, particularly in the NHS. However, we know that the Scottish Government is now using the NPD form of private finance initiative and is considering the nascent idea of payment by results across various social service areas. It is also investigating social impact bonds, which involve the Government using investment that is raised from socially motivated private investors—I emphasise that they are private investors—to fund a range of interventions to improve a set of mutually agreed social outcomes, and in which the financial returns that the investor receives are dependent on the degree to which the outcomes are achieved. Like Mary Fee, I am not averse to such innovations being examined, but I wonder why ministers keep telling us that they are opposed to private investment in public services while we know that they are considering ways of securing it. Ken Macintosh questioned the short-term populism of the current Administration. In closing, therefore, I would like to quote what Thomas Frank, a former commentator on The Wall Street Journal, said about the inherent hypocrisy of populism. He opined that it “only benefits the people it is supposed to be targeting” and said that populist politicians march “irresistibly against the arrogant ... shaking their fists at the sons of privilege ... laughing at the dainty affectations of the toffs” and that “while the millionaires tremble in their mansions, they are bellowing out their terrifying demands. ‘We are here,’ they scream, ‘to cut your taxes.’” For me, that sums up this Government. It wants to be seen to be progressive and to be on the side of the poor and the disadvantaged, but the reality is quite different. A cut in corporation tax, a cut in this tax, a cut in that tax and free services for wealthy families are all dressed up as benefits to disadvantaged groups. However, at some point, the populist largesse will prove to be unsustainable and the SNP, or someone else, will have to pay the bill. The denial will have to give way to reality and the tough decisions will have to be made. At some point, this SNP Government will be made to pay for getting its priorities wrong.

Will John Swinney give way?

I will help the cabinet secretary and disabuse him of his confusion. I asked for evidence that policies have achieved the intended outcomes. Of course there will be policies that are populist just for the sake of being populist. The point is that the Government cannot just assert that it has got things right. All the witnesses who spoke on the issue said that there must be robust evidence to show the efficacy of policies.

I have a question on the steel industry, but first I ask the cabinet secretary to acknowledge that today is the last time in 36 years that Richard Lyle will be able to call himself Councillor Richard Lyle. It is appropriate to recognise the 36 years of service that he has given to the community in Orbiston and Bellshill. Richard Lyle and I have not always agreed, and we will not agree on this issue. Will the cabinet secretary acknowledge that on 3 February representatives of the Scottish Trades Union Congress and Community trade union and local MSPs and MPs met Tata Steel to talk about the failure of the Scottish Government to award the contract that would have given Tata the opportunity to supply steel for the Forth bridge? Dalzell steelworks is geared up to meet the demands of the offshore wind sector and it cannot afford to be overlooked in that respect. Will the cabinet secretary give a commitment that that will not happen?

Who is responsible for cutting their budgets?

Just get on with it.

In response to Paul Wheelhouse, I think that it is only fair to acknowledge that many of the problems that face transport companies are caused by circumstances that are outwith the control of the Scottish Government. Anyone who provides or relies on public transport has known for some time that there are huge pressures bearing down on companies due to the cost of fuel. The level of fuel prices at present is determined by a combination of international economic circumstances, oil production issues and many other commercial variables. That situation must be understood. What is not understandable, however, is the Scottish Government choosing to exacerbate the problems that bus operators face when it should be seeking to ameliorate the economic environment that bus operators are enduring, bus passengers are being subjected to and transport company staff are paying the price for with their jobs. As Transform Scotland has pointed out, Scottish ministers’ attempts to blame the UK Government are “complete rubbish”, as it is entirely within the power of Scottish ministers not to make the cuts. What is even more perplexing is that, reverting to type, the Scottish Government and SNP members choose to decry those who raise concerns rather than genuinely seek to address the concerns that have been highlighted. James Dornan and others have accused us of scaremongering, but I remind the Government that, less than two weeks after it rained down its bombast in the chamber to reject concerns over the curriculum for excellence a few months ago, it had to concede that remediation was needed. As with hospital blankets, we were not scaremongering then and we are not making up the problems now. These are not Labour’s warnings; they are the warnings of the public transport sector, transport workers and bus users. When we learn that there will be increased fares, a reduction in service levels and less support for socially necessary bus services—for example, those that are used to reach health facilities—we believe that we have a duty to raise concerns in Parliament and a right to call on the minister to address those concerns. That is why my colleagues in South Lanarkshire Council are listening to the people of Hamilton and Uddingston and why councillors such as Davie McLachlan and Maureen Devlin have been out collecting hundreds of names on a petition that I hope will soon be before the Parliament, to ensure that something is done to address the issue. Unlike the SNP, Labour has been listening to people such as Ralph Roberts, the managing director of McGill’s bus company, who is, as Elaine Murray pointed out, an SNP local council candidate. His comments are worth rehearsing. He claims that the Government is being “pig-headed and obstinate” in pushing through the cuts to the operators and that it is in denial about the impact of the grant changes. He accuses the transport minister of going back on an agreement that was struck with the industry in 2010 over the concessionary travel scheme. He is making those allegations; we are not. We are simply ensuring that members know about them.

We know that there are winners and losers from the BSOG changes, and we know that Mr Souter is a winner and that Henderson Travel might be a winner. The problem is that there are far too many losers. That is why the minister is not listening to his SNP colleagues in the City of Edinburgh Council, who share Labour’s concerns. They are not trying to wriggle out of their responsibilities in the way that he is. More important, as Patrick Harvie said, we should listen to ordinary constituents, such as Josie in my constituency. She can no longer get a direct bus from her home in Holytown to Bellshill health centre, which is only 2 miles away; now, she will have to take two buses to get her to Bellshill via Motherwell, and the journey will be 6 miles. It will not cost her any more to do it because of her free bus pass—Labour introduced those passes—but the price of her packed lunch for the days out that she now has is becoming a financial burden that she would rather not have. Her problem is not so much the level of funding that the Government provides, but the absence of effective regulation of the bus industry in Scotland, which allows bus companies to reduce service levels, withdraw routes and generally run buses with little regard for the social needs of local communities. Bus regulation must be reintroduced. When the SNP meets in a few weeks’ time to change its position on NATO, perhaps it should also change its position on bus reregulation. Mr Souter may not like that, but the people of Scotland will.

I welcome the minister’s concern about the implications of welfare reform. He will be aware that the Welfare Reform Committee has been considering that this week. There is concern about the level to which the Scottish Government can mitigate some of the effects, particularly in relation to council tax benefit. Will the minister confirm that the discussions between the Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities are leading to a situation in which COSLA might have to pick up a sizeable chunk of the deficit in council tax benefit that is being passed to the Government? If that is as much as the mooted £17 million, a huge chunk will come out of local government funds, which could impact adversely on carers and others who depend on services.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what consideration has been given to the use of social impact bonds in the delivery of public services. (S4O-00885)

Will the minister concede that the use of social impact bonds involves the leveraging of private finance—normally through social enterprises—into the delivery of public services, and that that has been recommended for use in offender rehabilitation, alcohol and drug services? Where does that sit with the Scottish Government’s commitment not to use the private sector or allow it to become involved in the delivery of health services?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to review the membership and functions of partnership action for continuing employment. (S4O-00759)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that I recently had discussions with Fergus Ewing about the involvement of PACE following the closure of WJ Harte of Bothwell in my constituency, as a result of which more than 500 employees lost their jobs. However, he may not be aware that only about one in 10 of the former employees attended the PACE event that was held subsequent to the closure, whereas almost one in five attended an event that I and Thompsons Solicitors hosted on the employment and redundancy rights of individual members of the workforce. That appeared to show that there was a gap in the service that PACE provides. Does the cabinet secretary have a view on whether the PACE service should be expanded to include the provision of advice on individual employee rights and redundancy rights, as well as advice on training, skills and employability?

We have heard a lot recently about Scotland being progressive and a beacon for others. Like most SNP soundbites, that claim is more about self-serving and rhetorical trumpet blowing than factual analysis of its policies. Child poverty in Scotland is increasing while the SNP Government is giving handouts to millionaire bus owners through the council tax freeze. It takes the biggest of brass necks to proclaim that that is progressive. Add to that the funding proposals that prefer the university sector to our colleges and the propensity to look after the already better-off shines through yet again. Once more, the haves are looked after at the expense of those for whom university education is too often an unrealisable aspiration, even for those who have the ability to go on to higher education. What sort of progressive budget is it that cuts college funding while protecting the share of the likes of Mr Russell’s alma mater? While Mr Russell was enjoying the benefits of University of Edinburgh tutelage, as a lesser mortal I was leaving school at the age of 15 to take up an apprenticeship as a welder. I wanted to go to university and my teachers tried to convince to me stay on to achieve that aim but, for me and the majority of my peers, getting a good trade was the level of aspiration set for us by the financial reality of the family income. My education continued through day release at Motherwell College. I was able to achieve the highest level possible in City and Guilds, and I am eternally grateful for the solid grounding that the college gave me. Fifteen years later, with manufacturing going through the floor under the Thatcher regime, I began to look for an alternative career path and was fortunate to obtain a place at Cambuslang College on a higher national certificate course in social sciences that was made available through a partnership with the University of Paisley and Glasgow Caledonian University. Completion of the HNC guaranteed access to second year on the social sciences course at either of the two higher education institutions and in 1996, 19 years after leaving school, I graduated with honours in politics and sociology at Glasgow Caledonian University. I know at first hand the value of both college and university education. Recently, the Finance Committee has discussed the sustainability of funding. It came as no surprise that someone such as Jim Gallagher said: “if we do one thing, what else are we not doing?”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 25 January 2012; c 579.] It is clear that this Government has chosen to fund universities and not colleges but, for me, one cannot be protected at the expense of the other. That is why, when the SNP was bragging about its progressiveness, I was standing in the forecourt of Motherwell College with the staff and students, who had come together to protest at the funding cuts that will inevitably lead to staff cuts, cuts to courses and hardship for students. Their choosing colleges as the subject of this morning’s debate shows that even the Tories can see the need for equitable treatment. Yes, there are budgetary restraints, but we cannot allow ourselves to be forced into agreeing with a Government that, because of populist decisions, looks after its own and forgets those who might be left behind. It is not too late for the cabinet secretary to see the error of his ways and become a genuine progressive. I ask him to give our colleges a fair funding settlement and to give everyone a chance to be what they can be.

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government considers any local authority to be not fit for purpose. (S4F-00421)

I was going to thank the First Minister for his answer, but it did not reflect my question. I will ask him a supplementary question, which he might be able to answer. Does the First Minister agree with Alex Neil’s view that North Lanarkshire Council is not fit for purpose, that it is overstaffed, that social workers refuse to help people, and that staff badger people who are on low incomes? Alternatively, does he agree with Audit Scotland, which reported that North Lanarkshire Council is a high-performing council that has “Good strategic direction, with good leadership and clear vision”? Does he agree with the trade unions in North Lanarkshire that Alex Neil’s comments “do little for the morale of thousands of low-paid, loyal, dedicated and hard-working public servants.” Will he therefore ask his cabinet secretary to apologise for insulting those employees? Will he offer his own apology to those North Lanarkshire Council staff who are rightly offended by Alex Neil’s gratuitous attack on them?

12. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of NUS Scotland. (S4O-00620)

Does the cabinet secretary recall the vitriol that was heaped on the Liberal Democrats when they reneged on their election commitment to students, and does he recall that every Scottish National Party candidate gave a similar personal election assurance to students in relation to student support? Although the cabinet secretary might wish to forget that commitment to students, is he aware that students have not forgotten that promise? Will he deliver in full on the commitment to students or is he prepared to replicate the Liberal Democrats’ betrayal of our students and suffer the same revulsion that was afforded to them? I repeat the question that Neil Findlay asked: is NUS Scotland lying when it says that there is an £11 million cut to student support?

Presiding Officer, section 1.2(c) of the “Scottish Ministerial Code”, says: “It is of paramount importance that Ministers give accurate and truthful information to the Parliament, correcting any inadvertent error at the earliest opportunity.” My concern is that, in answering my question to him earlier today, the First Minister misled the Parliament with the content of his response. The First Minister advised members that his colleague Alex Neil had been referring to councillors in North Lanarkshire Council when he made an allegation that the local authority was not fit for purpose. In my question, I quoted the comment that Alex Neil’s criticism would “do little for the morale of thousands of low-paid, loyal, dedicated and hard-working public servants.” That quotation came not from councillors, but from trade union representatives who are alarmed by Mr Neil’s attack on the staff members of North Lanarkshire Council. The unions’ concerns relate to the statements in Mr Neil’s recent article in the Wishaw Press. Mr Neil stated in that newspaper that the education department was bloated; not that there were too many councillors, but that there were too many staff members. He stated that the social work department refused to help people; not that councillors refused to help, but that the staff did so. The Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment also claimed that the finance department badgered people on low incomes; not that the councillors did that, but that the staff in that department did. It was the unions that responded, in the manner that I outlined at First Minister’s questions, to Mr Neil’s claims. They did so because they know who was the target of the insults. It may be the case that the First Minister was himself misled by his minister, but it is clear to the staff in North Lanarkshire Council that Mr Neil was talking about them and not about the elected members when he made those allegations. I therefore ask the First Minister to correct his earlier assertion and I repeat the request that I made to him earlier today: I ask that he and Mr Neil apologise to the staff and not play fast and loose with the truth in this matter.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment has had with construction sector representatives in Lanarkshire and what issues were discussed. (S4O-00596)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that full answer, but I will bring him to a specific issue in my constituency. Is he aware that the construction of the M8 upgrade, which is now due for completion six years later than planned, will eventually allow for the creation of a new road leading from Peter D Stirling Ltd’s Mossend railhead depot to the new M8 network? If that road is not given planning approval, it will result in the loss of a great deal of potential construction work, of increased road and rail freight and of new jobs for my constituency, which is badly in need of them following recent construction job losses. However, there are obstacles in the way of the plan that Transport Scotland and Scottish Enterprise could help to address. Will the cabinet secretary instruct officials at Scottish Enterprise and Transport Scotland to enter into discussions with me and residents in Bellshill who would be affected by the proposed road, so that all viable options for the railhead road can be explored and the proposal’s economic benefits can be delivered in due course?

Is the First Minister aware that, on Monday, more than 700 employees of the W J Harte construction company in Bothwell, in my constituency, discovered that the company had gone into administration, putting all those vital jobs at risk? It appears that the company, which has a long and successful history, was taken over a few years ago by a venture capitalist and that, since that time, the company has gone from being in healthy profit with a turnover of more than £100 million a year to going into receivership without warning, with the bank refusing to extend its credit although the company directors left at the end of last year with substantial pay-offs. Does the First Minister recognise the devastating impact that the situation will have on my constituency? Will he agree to arrange a meeting with an appropriate Government minister for me and my Westminster colleague, Jim Hood MP, to discuss what avenues are available to protect the workforce who are affected by this horrendous situation?

What about the bill?

We keep talking about bigotry, and all the references that are made in this debate appear to focus on Celtic and Rangers. However, after the bill is passed, will Kilmarnock fans stop singing about being up to the knees in Ayr blood?

I thank the cabinet secretary for early sight of his statement and join him in welcoming Derek Mackay to his new post, in which I wish him well. I fully appreciate that the budgetary constraints under which the cabinet secretary is operating make his statement one that he would rather not have had to make. Having seen the contents of this year’s local government settlement and the poor choices that he has made in it, I am equally sure that local government staff and those who depend on council services would rather that he had not made the statement. What the cabinet secretary has outlined is that the settlement will increase the rate of job losses and will cut services when demographic and social pressures are increasing and will damage economic recovery. My main concern about the statement is that the funding squeeze will be unnecessarily tight. According to official statistics, that has already led to more than 14,000 job losses between 2007 and 2010. Has the cabinet secretary assessed the scale of job losses that his settlement will cause? He has described the three-year plan as a flat cash freeze. Can he confirm that there is a real-terms cut of over £700 million—that is according to table 16.02 of the draft budget document—and of £350 million in this year alone? Can he confirm that the £70 million per annum funding for the council tax freeze is no longer ring fenced and that that will add to the cuts that councils will have to make? How much efficiency savings must each council make? Can the cabinet secretary confirm that the total savings that local government is being asked to make will be over £600 million this year and £1.6 billion over the spending review period?

They are your choices.

Does the First Minister also concede that the criteria for counting modern apprenticeships changed in 2008 and that Scottish vocational qualification level 2 is now counted? In the figures that he referred to, only those above level 3 were counted.

I agree with the minister that we need to take a community-based bottom-up approach as far as that is possible. However, in the case of regeneration projects such as Ravenscraig, which does not have a community in which to begin the regeneration, does he agree that the Scottish Government needs to have a greater say? Does he agree that the decision in 2008 to downgrade Ravenscraig to a regional priority prevented the project from having the impetus that it requires?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I thank the cabinet secretary for bringing the debate to Parliament this afternoon, but I do so with a sense of déjà vu. Last week, Patricia Ferguson and I led from these seats on a debate that centred on a fairly anodyne, if not utterly mundane, motion on the importance of architecture in relation to matters such as the creation, development and sustainability of local communities. It turned out to be an enjoyable and informative debate and I hope that this afternoon’s debate around an equally bland, if not insipid, motion is as good. My sense of déjà vu is not, however, restricted to recollections of last week’s discussion, but comes from a debate that was held in the previous session on regeneration. In that debate, I noted that the Government motion contained predictable platitudes, but that “the issue under discussion is hugely important and cannot be hidden, even under the banality of the motion.”—[Official Report, 3 March 2010; c 24170.] So, here we are again, debating a hugely significant issue around a motion that barely nods in the direction of just how vital regeneration is to Scotland, to its current and future economic prospects and to the wellbeing of our communities. As I said in the previous debate: “I am not saying that the Government has got it wrong on ... regeneration”.—[Official Report, 3 March 2010; c 24171.] Similarly, I am not saying that the Government has nothing to defend in that regard, and we really could have had a more substantive motion on what the Government believes has to be done. It would also have been good to see in the motion or have heard in Mr Neil’s speech a sense of humility or even an apology, with the cabinet secretary recognising that he was overseeing a reduction in regeneration funding for vital projects in the period ahead. For example, why is there no recognition that the ring-fenced budget for all URCs other than Clyde Gateway now only goes up to 2012-13 and that after that Riverside Inverclyde, Irvine Bay Regeneration Company and Clydebank Re-built will all have to bid for funding as part of the wider regeneration strategy, and that they no longer have guaranteed funding beyond 2012-13, even though they were originally guaranteed 10 years of funding?

John Mason has to identify his priorities. On an issue as important as regeneration, we can say that some budget lines have to be protected more than others. The cuts that we are seeing in the regeneration budget and URCs are well in excess of what is required.

I would like to make some progress. With the budgets of some regeneration programmes being cut in half, we cannot allow the Scottish National Party Government to get away with blaming Westminster for its decision to prioritise a referendum over regeneration. With the Ravenscraig project in my area of Lanarkshire already downgraded by this Government in 2008 and £70 million of funding being taken from it at a stroke, it is easy to see the direct correlation between this Government's decisions to reduce support for regeneration and a direct negative impact on areas such as mine. My constituency of Uddingston and Bellshill is home to some of the country’s largest construction companies and there are more people employed in construction in my area than there are in any other in Scotland, so I recently had a meeting with representatives of construction companies to discuss the current employment situation with them. The picture that they painted of the impending decimation of jobs in that sector is frightening. It is bad enough to learn that Mr Neil intends to make himself a latter day Dr Beeching with his rail franchise proposals, but it is worse to learn that he is taking a lead from Arnold Schwarzenegger, not in terms of his political leadership, but in his role as “Demolition Man”, when it comes to urban regeneration companies. I know that times are hard financially, but that is why resources that are available from central Government and local government need to be used smartly to maximise positive outcomes for people and to create virtuous cycles of education, employment, equity, civic pride and community cohesion. That is why our amendment focuses on the creation of jobs, particularly for young people. As we state: “persistent youth unemployment will have an impact on communities for generations to come.” There has to be a place for community enterprises, credit unions, co-operatives, housing associations and other community-based organisations in regeneration strategies. The bottom line, however, is that the Government simply cannot choose to slash the housing, regeneration, enterprise and tourism budgets and still claim to have sustainable growth as its purpose, as it is trying to do. Neighbourhoods frame people’s lives, and provide a bundle of services that people need and an environment on which families depend. They also provide a vital anchor to individual lives, as the cabinet secretary pointed out. That is why our amendment asks Parliament to recognise that the cutting of funding for further education colleges will undermine the important role that colleges play in providing local people with the skills that they need to gain the qualifications that they need for work. That is why we highlight that the provision of quality social housing is increasingly important as more people in our disadvantaged communities are classified as being fuel poor. Finally, it is why our amendment notes with disappointment that the Scottish Government has chosen to cut the funding to URCs, which will have a negative impact on areas such as Inverclyde, and why we are calling on the Scottish Government to come forward with details about its cities strategy and proposed enterprise areas as soon as possible. We will give those elements our support, because they are vital, but there will have to be constructive dialogue to ensure that we all move together in the same direction. As I have said previously on this subject, Government must create the space and capacity to assist communities in regeneration of their areas, and the planning framework is central to that. We know that communities need access to funds to help them regenerate their areas, to bring derelict properties and waste ground into productive use and to promote community engagement while creating local jobs and training opportunities. However, regeneration is not just about paying for new buildings; it must also increase social justice and quality of life by overcoming poverty and disadvantage and by producing more inclusive, equitable and sustainable areas. Neighbourhoods help to shape people’s lives because they do more than house people. They form a base for wider activities and provide many of the social services that link individuals with one another and give rise to a sense of community. Many neighbourhoods that are labelled “disadvantaged” are in areas where there have been major and long-term disruptions to the local economy, often through the closure or shrinkage of major employers. Regeneration programmes can claim some success in terms of the physical renewal of public space, the development of commercial properties in some areas and the provision of new and refurbished homes—although not necessarily on the scale and in the forms that are needed. As was identified in last week’s debate on architecture, people who live in disadvantaged neighbourhoods tend to feel they have very little influence over what happens to their area, and that the interests of those who fund developments often seem to come first. I am therefore delighted that the cabinet secretary has mentioned the importance of involving communities at the outset of regeneration. There must be a continuing emphasis on housing renewal that is dominated not by the interests of developers but by the needs of communities. There has been an associated lack of attention paid to the cultivation of social capital and community. We have also seen the continuing provision of housing that does not meet the needs and wishes of families, and there has been a tendency, for various reasons, to go for clean-sweep schemes at the cost of restoration and reintegration. That is a disappointment in too many cases. Regeneration initiatives often promise far more than they can deliver, but they will certainly fail to produce the positive results that we all want if the Government rolls back on any commitment on urban regeneration. If the Parliament does not wish to see any more backsliding on regeneration, I urge members to support Labour’s amendment. I move amendment S4M-01336.1, to leave out from second “acknowledges” to end and insert: “considers that central to this will be the creation of jobs, particularly for young people, as persistent youth unemployment will have an impact on communities for generations to come, the important role that colleges play in local areas to provide people with the skills needed to get them the qualifications that they need to work and the provision of quality social housing, which is increasingly important as more people in disadvantaged communities are classified as fuel poor; notes with disappointment that the Scottish Government has chosen to cut the funding to urban regeneration companies and the impact that this will have on areas such as Inverclyde, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward details of its Cities Strategy and proposed enterprise areas.”

There is no point in talking to the member.

I agree entirely with Clare Adamson about the importance of the Ravenscraig development, but does she agree that it was disappointing that the Scottish Government reduced Ravenscraig from a development of national importance to one of regional importance?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I do not know whether I will need entirely that amount. I have enjoyed the debate. Like Helen Eadie, I think that it has given us an opportunity to debate an issue that we do not often get the chance to discuss in the chamber, so I congratulate the cabinet secretary on bringing the debate this afternoon. The debate has also been helped by the fact that members have had the time to take interventions and engage in a discussion. That may be an indication that less is more and that, when we have such debates in the future, having fewer speakers and giving them more time to elaborate on the points can help us to have a better debate on a subject that is so interesting. I congratulate the minister on lodging a motion that allows us to unite—that is vital—and I agree with her argument that investment in creative industries can make an important contribution to other areas, such as construction. She was right to outline that point, as it is important that we consider cross-cutting investment. Investment in less prolific areas can play a vital part in assisting the delivery of overall economic growth. I agree that we need collaboration with the creative arts in all the areas that she outlined in order to expand the growth in the economy that we all want. There were lots of comments on the need to cut VAT. We cannot support the Tory amendment because it would remove the recognition of that point from the Government’s motion. The motion rightly identifies the stimulus that VAT reduction could have on the building industry. That said, I must disagree with Mr MacKenzie. We would benefit from such a reduction not just in Scotland but in the United Kingdom as a whole. It is important that we do not draw a distinction at the border when it comes to trying to help the economy. Scottish companies will benefit from any work that becomes available from a cut in VAT for the building industry down south. Not everything comes down to independence. In looking forward to the debate, I was drawn to recollections of having the good fortune as a young person to visit big cities such as London, Paris and Madrid. Who could not, regardless of their age, be impressed with the historic buildings in those cities? Their palaces, castles, parks and places of interest have made them interesting for centuries and continue to do so, along with their newer buildings. We can see the contrast between the old and the new, which are sometimes side by side and sometimes in different parts of the city. For example, the Louvre, which is an important old building in the heart of Paris, has a modern glass pyramid in its courtyard; similarly, we can contrast Notre Dame cathedral with the glass square of the Government buildings there.

I will come on to that later, because I want to consider the notion of beauty being in the eye of the beholder, to which Jean Urquhart and Marco Biagi alluded. I am fortunate in that, later in life, having visited those cities, I became friends with an architect from Toulouse called Laurent Ballas. While sharing with me a visit to Edinburgh, he opened my eyes to the importance of looking not only at the buildings but at their functionality, their place in the overall milieu and the contribution that each one makes to the sense of community in the area in which it is located. We looked at the contrast between buildings in the old and new towns of Edinburgh. I was drawn to a quotation that he left me with from Julia Morgan, an American architect who designed over 700 buildings in California, which is not a place that is immune to new ideas. She said: “Architecture is a visual art, and the buildings speak for themselves.” My friend taught me that every building speaks to and touches our senses, even if the sense is one of distaste. I remember distinctly walking around the bridges area of Edinburgh with him when he saw the Festival theatre and stopped in his tracks, not only to look at that building’s fine architecture but to contrast it with surrounding old buildings and 1960s buildings and consider how they all contributed to the community in that area. Again, it comes down to taste, which brings me back to the question about the Pompidou centre. It is important that we see everything in the round and how each building fits into the broader context of the city and place that we all want to come and look at. As we develop, even a building such as this one, sitting beside a historic palace, although it may not be to everyone’s taste, creates a contrast that gets people interested and talking.

I totally agree with the cabinet secretary on that point. We must take into account what local communities want in terms of architecture, which is a theme that has come through in the debate. How many of the buildings and places that we talk about had the input of local people at the start of the process? Patricia Ferguson quite rightly drew on her own experience in considering 1960s tower blocks, which became high-rise ghettos in some instances, and the monolithic council housing estates, which at one time gave great hope to so many people of a better life but latterly became a bit of a postcode noose around the necks of many young people, holding back their social advancement. However, Patricia Ferguson also rightly pointed out that regeneration turned those buildings and communities round, and the investment in that was vitally important. Even when we get something wrong initially, we can turn it round so that it can enhance the community that lives there and be part of the fabric of that society.

I was just about to come to Linda Fabiani’s speech, so I am happy to take her intervention.

Presiding Officer, I told you that I would not need eight minutes, but that has completely thrown me. Linda Fabiani and Helen Eadie made important points about putting people at the heart of the design of not just individual buildings but how communities are regenerated, including the programmes that the cabinet secretary talked about and the town planning system. I entirely agree with Elaine Smith that we must try to develop the brownfield sites that exist in communities. I share her concern that, although North Lanarkshire has an array of brownfield sites, the Scottish Government recently allowed reporters to overturn the housing strategy in North Lanarkshire and direct development away from brownfield sites and towards the green belt in the northern corridor. Planning is vital, but we must bring communities with us so that we deliver on the programmes that the cabinet secretary talked about, which have our support.

It is not so long ago that Fergus Ewing, as Minister for Community Safety, told the Parliament that the SNP Government did not believe that “a further strategy specifically on tackling sectarianism”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 5 February 2008; S3W-8846.] was needed, yet here we are, two years later, debating the most illiberal bill that has ever been put before the Parliament—supposedly to address a problem that not so long ago the Government was complacently dismissing. I am on record for criticising the then First Minister, Jack McConnell, and his Scottish Executive because their anti-sectarianism strategy was, although important and well intentioned, fundamentally flawed due to there being at its heart an implicit lack of appreciation of the impact of racism and sectarianism on the Irish community in this country in particular. The issue is not about there being two sides of the same coin. Each side has its own problems, which have their genesis in different sources, and they manifest themselves differently on each side. Unfortunately, that is clearly not apparent to the Scottish Government, whose anti-racism and anti-sectarian strategies still tend to ignore the distinct experience of the large multigenerational Irish minority in this country. The bill fits into that guileless and simplistic continuum, and comments on the subject—from the First Minister down—clearly expose the fact that the Government has little understanding of the problem. Instead of seeing issues around football as being visible symptoms of religious intolerance, the bill seeks to identify football as the cause of religious division. Records show that in the 1790s only 39 Catholics lived in the city of Glasgow, but there were 43 anti-Catholic societies in existence, which had a total membership of more than 10,000, so although football undoubtedly provides the arena in which some overt sectarian conflict in Scotland is exhibited, in bringing forward the bill, the Scottish Government appears to be genuinely ignorant of the true nature of religious intolerance in this country, or else it is deliberately trying to use football to create a political smokescreen. Either way, the bill will not work, and it is much more likely to exacerbate the problem and heighten the antagonism that already exists between football fans than it is to offer any effective solution to it.

I would not make legislative change. I will come on to the changes that I would make. I am proud to be a Celtic supporter, and I am proud of the fact that my team was founded to combine professional football with charity for the local Irish community in Glasgow at that time. At its inception, Celtic Football Club was supported by Michael Davitt, the great Irish nationalist—indeed, Fenian—leader of the Irish Land League. Many of the songs that are sung by Celtic supporters today refer to the tradition from which Davitt came. Equally, many people of Scottish, Ulster Scots and/or British Protestant backgrounds see their songs as being expressions of their religious, political and cultural inheritance, which is as much of a source of pride and distinction to them as the Irish nationalist disposition is to many from the Irish community in this country. When the First Minister claims that he wants to stop people reliving 1690 and 1916 on our streets, I ask him to reflect on that glib sentiment and to ask himself how prepared he would be to consign William Wallace and 1297 or Robert the Bruce and 1314 to the dustbin of history, and to set aside the celebration of his culture and heritage just because it may give offence to someone. This is one issue where a one-size saltire does not fit all. Many observers believe that the bill will be no more than a victims charter that invites fans to take offence. We know from our mailbags that football fans are already spying on rival fans and reporting offences, so although the Government claims that the bill is a means by which religious intolerance will be tackled, it is actually the Government that is showing intolerance. It is somewhat ironic that it is the vilified football fans who have best articulated the case against this draconian and illiberal proposed legislation. Demonising and criminalising fans of any club for their beliefs shows astonishing intolerance by the Government of behaviour that does not conform to its narrow view of Scottish society. The bill is not the solution. Education, the promotion of understanding and the development of mutual respect between the diverse traditions in Scotland is the route that we should pursue. I do not want my religion and culture to be tolerated; I want it to be celebrated. Sectarianism is a strand that runs through our national tartan; it will take a skilled and thoughtful hand to unpick that thread. The bill is not a scalpel to be utilised in that task but a blunt set of shears that will rip through the fabric of Scottish society and leave it tattered and torn. Parliament is, rightly, unanimous in its opposition to sectarianism but it is not united on the desirability or potential efficacy of the bill in dealing with the historical societal scars that have been left by centuries of religious division and hatred. I urge the Government to think again about the bill. In the words that are sung loudly and proudly at Celtic Park, “Let the people sing.”

It was Margo MacDonald.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I ask the First Minister to note that, although he is pleased that the Scottish National Party-dominated Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has decided to back—[Laughter.]

I repeat: will the First Minister note that, although the SNP-dominated COSLA has decided to back the SNP Government’s local government cuts, Labour MSPs are proud that their Labour council colleagues rejected John Swinney’s threats of financial sanctions and will not do his bidding? Will he acknowledge that only Labour councillors recognised the real-terms cuts in spending that will force councils, including Aberdeen City Council, to make unnecessary cuts in employment levels? Will he acknowledge that further service cuts will follow? Will he acknowledge that only Labour rejected his Government’s capital spending plan, in which John Swinney had the nerve to ask local authorities to do his borrowing without committing to reimburse them for doing his dirty work—[Interruption.] Does he not recognise that— Members: It is a speech!

Does the First Minister not recognise that this is a fraud conducted to blame councils for his failures?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Under the standing orders, MSPs are expected to show courtesy to one another. Although I fully accept that I am big and ugly enough to take the First Minister’s swipes, in an earlier answer the First Minister impugned the integrity of a member of the public serving an organisation. Is it appropriate for the First Minister to be continually allowed to slander the integrity and character of individuals outside the Parliament?

You just can’t help yourself, can you?

I begin by sympathising with Mr Swinney for having to make a spending review statement in the economic circumstances that he faces. I do not envy his task, but I do not support the game plan that he has set out for playing the hand that he was dealt. As with much of what has gone before in relation to the Government’s financial plans for local government in particular, the devil will be in the detail. There is as much interest in what was not in the statement and in what the cabinet secretary has kept hidden from us—or has just not dealt with. However, one thing that is clear is that the historic concordat is now consigned to history. No longer do we have the pretence of a respect agenda and agreed objectives dressed up as a deal, which was not worth the paper that it was written on. Now we have the historic diktat, and COSLA can be in no doubt that Mr Swinney holds sway and that he will make councils pay. Contrary to what he said in his statement, there is no agreement with COSLA on the substantive issues in the budget. If we need an example of the new relationship with COSLA, we need look no further than the wheeze that Mr Swinney has come up with to reprofile local government capital allocations. Asking our councils to raise money through prudential borrowing to fill the gap that he is causing by pushing back the capital budget to 2015-16 may have a superficially adroit air but, in reality, it is a bit like Mr Swinney booking his summer holiday, nipping next door to get his neighbour’s credit card to pay for it and giving them a verbal IOU to ease their fears about whether he will pay them back. It might have his mates down the pub—or in sections of the Scottish media, which is much the same thing—toasting his audacity, and it might give the Scottish Government some short-term breathing space on certain infrastructure commitments, but not all councils may be in a position to deploy the borrowing that Mr Swinney hopes for. He should know, because he has been told by COSLA, that some local authorities’ capital borrowing credit cards are maxed out. Where that will leave the cunning plan is anyone’s guess—and surely that is the problem. We should not leave key financial tools to that kind of fiscal juggling act. Unfortunately, Mr Swinney’s statement was short on an answer to what he will do if local authorities cannot come up with the prudential borrowing that he expects. He may not care that local authorities do not deliver on their capital programmes as long as his national priorities are met, and he appears not to have given COSLA any commitment on whether the sum he finally pays back will include the outlay costs and interest payments incurred by councils in obtaining the borrowing that he needs for his plan to work. His plan is therefore one of conjecture; it does not give the financial certainty that the economy needs at this time. Only last week we heard the First Minister, with no hint of irony at all, accuse the Westminster Government of sending a threatening letter on pension fund changes. We heard about it again this afternoon. The SNP can hardly complain about financial intimidation when it has been using the same approach to deal with local government for the past four years. Financial coercion will also be used to deliver the increasingly unsustainable council tax freeze for the next five years, so let us hope that we hear less about the bully-boy tactics of the Westminster goose when they have been good enough for the SNP gander.

I am happy to clarify that any time that Mr Hepburn wants. It was to accept the reality: the council tax freeze was already in place for the current financial year, and we accepted that. [Interruption.] If Linda Fabiani wants an explanation, why does she not listen to it? We also accepted that Mr Swinney had put in place the indicators for the second year, but we said that we would increase the council tax subsidy by another £10 million. It was not a great deal, but at least it addressed the fact that we cannot continue to freeze the figure at £70 million for nine years and expect services to remain at the same level. That is the fiscal reality that SNP members will not confront but which we faced up to. [Interruption.] They do not like the answer, but they cannot shout me down. Mr Swinney has also failed to give any signal of the provision that he has factored in to cope with the pressures that will follow the impact of Westminster’s Welfare Reform Bill. It is widely accepted that many services that councils deliver will be adversely affected and that many people in vulnerable groups will be forced to look to councils for support when their benefits are changed, cut or removed. It is par for the course for Mr Swinney to put off today what he can blame Westminster for tomorrow, but when individuals and susceptible groups can foresee the impending catastrophic impact of the welfare reforms it would be utterly inexcusable for him to play politics with the issue. The gap identified by the Christie commission between existing service demand and delivery is going to grow. Far too many vulnerable groups will find the services that they need further reduced, and the charges that they have to pay due to chronic underfunding of the council tax freeze will undoubtedly increase further. Quite frankly, as far as local government is concerned, if this is the long-awaited plan MacB, the B evidently stands for baloney.

Will Mr Mason tell us how many ordinary families will be hit by the local income tax that he hopes to introduce, given that the Government has tried to hide those figures for so long?

Although, as all colleagues did, I came into politics to make life better for those whom I represent, I confess that—unlike for a good number of fellow members of the Scottish Parliament—environmental issues were not my most prominent consideration when I first entered this place. To be honest, they are still not the most important issues for me; nevertheless, over the years I have come to realise that we generally spend too much time doing things that undermine our ability to enjoy our tenure of this rather beautiful country. Although it did not occupy much of my initial thinking, I am now firmly of the view that creating waste is both a consequence and a symptom of living unwisely. To date, too much thinking has been directed at accommodating our excesses, and we rarely consider curtailing our use of the resources that we have. For many years, rubbish was seen as a health issue and a problem to be dealt with; then it began to be seen as a resource and something of value. That is why it is important for us to have an effective, deliverable and clear zero waste management strategy. To meet the target, all our local authorities need to become zero waste local authorities. Some have done a good job of waste minimisation, but we cannot ignore the warning from Audit Scotland which, in its report from 2010 that is cited in the motion, concluded: “Collectively, councils’ plans are not sufficient to meet landfill and recycling targets beyond 2010.” Although councils such as North Lanarkshire Council easily exceeded their 2010 target, the average was simply not good enough and there is little prospect of future overall targets being met, according to Audit Scotland. There remains a reluctance to spend even the amount that councils previously spent on burying the stuff to find more productive uses for the stuff that we throw away. Where a job was done well, it owed more to the enthusiasm and passion of environmentally and socially aware officials and stakeholders, who forced local authorities to think about the long-term consequences of throwing stuff into holes in the ground. Reducing environmental stress means not only reducing the amount of waste that we generate, but changing the way we think about our use of resources. The Scottish Government’s zero waste strategy should therefore be a good launch pad, but we need more than a launch pad; nothing less than changing the culture of waste will suffice. No one should claim that that will be easy, but to those who argue that culture shift is too difficult and that we should do only what is easily achievable, we must respond by saying that we should at least expect it to be the overarching goal that underpins our activities. If we are genuinely committed to zero waste strategies, we must commit to what is necessary to achieve zero waste. The waste management hierarchy is an accepted guide for prioritising waste management practices with the objective of achieving optimal environmental outcomes. It sets out the preferred order of waste management practices from most to least preferred. The waste management hierarchy must be one of the guiding principles of the zero waste strategy, and I am pleased that the Government recognises that green pecking order. Reuse requires less energy than recycling, although factors such as the consumer desire for newness can conspire against reuse. There are many ways in which clothes, books and other materials are currently reused, even through the use of new technologies such as eBay. It is already part of our society and there are precedents on which we can build. Reduction also requires less energy, by designing out waste before it is created. We must also recycle and recover, but it would certainly be best to avoid waste. That is the ultimate zero waste challenge—the highest point on the hierarchy. To address zero waste effectively, there needs to be a move beyond recycling to the largely uncharted territory of the higher end of the hierarchy. To get to that point, we must also plan. When a local authority is asked to deliver on waste management targets, it is vital that the planning framework, based on which it makes decisions, is as clear as it can be. Local authorities that respond to the concerns of local communities cannot be left to carry the can for decisions that are made—against the wishes of local people—when their decisions are overturned by ministers. I welcome the fact that, from previous answers to me and others, Aileen Campbell is committed to recycling, to reusing and to preventing waste, and has conceded that production of energy from waste is a part of that. However, the former Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, Jim Mather—in recognising that energy from the waste process has a role to play—stated that current regulatory measures prevent the building of large-scale energy-from-waste plants. Tell that to the communities that are now lined up to oppose exactly such facilities in their areas. Regarding one energy-from-waste proposal, a current cabinet secretary even had the brass neck to state publicly—and to tell local campaigners—that his party “opposed this application since day one” despite his Scottish National Party Government having since endorsed the proposal. It must also be a huge disappointment to Stewart Maxwell that his Government has approved so many incinerators since he asked for, and received, a promise from Mr Mather that an incoming SNP Government would continue to oppose such plants.

A plant of 1 million tonnes might be of a different scale from the ones that we are talking about, but people on the Government side of the chamber campaigned against what Mr Mather said would be introduced. That is the point that I am making.

I agree, because that is the level at which Jim Mather said incinerators would be unacceptable. However, they are being approved by this Government against the promises that were made to members who asked for that commitment from ministers in the previous Government. It is not acceptable in any circumstances that there is a lack of clarity, but certainly not when it involves the planning process that local authorities have to apply and that businesses have to work to, and when it leaves local communities exploited for political ends when they need honest representation from their elected members. I concur, therefore, with Christina McKelvie, who asked the Minister for Local Government and Planning to agree that the creation of national guidance on dealing with planning applications for waste incinerators and waste-to-energy plants would help local planning authorities that are facing decisions about proposed developments, and the communities that would be affected by them. The minister has so far refused that request, but I make it again today and ask the Scottish Government to consider my request that the development of such guidance be sought so that no waste-to-energy project is approved unless it meets strict environmental justice tests. There are many issues that will legitimately divide politicians. However, I am sure that the chamber will unite in agreeing that any politician who cynically sided with local campaigners in order to gain their support at the ballot box, then reneged on the promises that were made and, indeed, failed to deliver on those promises when subsequently promoted to the ministerial office that could affect those outcomes, would be open to ridicule and reproach.

Right on cue.

The minister has clearly not been listening and makes the point for me. The minister passes the buck to local authorities for issues that ultimately rest with her. Guidance is required for local authorities. She should stop blaming local authorities for decisions that she does not like.

The minister makes the point for me. We have asked her to review the guidance and the planning laws. She refuses to do that but continually campaigns and claims that she is on the side of communities when she will not lift a finger to help those communities. I am sure that, like the minister, members who speak after me and people who join us in the public gallery might know of an example or two. What I do know is that Scottish Labour supports the ambition of a zero waste Scotland but has serious doubts about the Scottish Government’s ability to meet recycling and landfill targets. We believe that the lack of a coherent national approach to planning guidelines for waste developments has led to significant problems in a number of communities. In particular, local authorities need more clarity. That is why I have brought the debate. I move, That the Parliament supports the ambition of a Zero Waste Scotland and the waste hierarchy of reduce, reuse, recycle and recover; notes the need for an effective national framework to guide waste management strategy; further notes the Audit Scotland report, Protecting and improving Scotland’s environment, published in January 2010, which concluded that “collectively, councils’ plans are not sufficient to meet landfill and recycling targets beyond 2010”; notes the increasing number of waste incineration projects currently in the planning process across Scotland and that many of these projects are opposed by local communities and were opposed by a number of successful candidates during the recent election; believes that local authorities need more clarity on planning guidelines with regard to waste incineration developments, and further believes that no project involving biomass and waste-to-energy should be approved unless concerns such as environmental justice and the impact on wood supply have been thoroughly considered.

I make it clear that we are not asking for the scrapping of planning system. I said that I concur with Christina McKelvie in asking for a review to ensure that planning guidelines are helpful to local authorities.

I agree with the minister on that point. However, our concern is that we cannot have a situation in which a member says one thing in their locality and then hides behind sub judice in the Parliament in order not to say it here.

In August 1977, only six years after the UCS work-in, I began my welding apprenticeship. I take great pride in recalling that, on my induction day, I signed my membership papers for the Amalgamated Society of Boilermakers, Shipwrights, Blacksmiths and Structural Workers—the old boilermakers union—before I had even formally signed my contract of employment. As any tradesman will tell you, the value of an apprenticeship can be measured in more than the skills that someone obtains and the qualifications that they earn. Working every day with people who have spent their lives struggling to provide for their families is an education that no level of tuition fees could pay for. As a raw 15-year-old, there I was, working beside men who had been on the upper Clyde for many years before coming to our factory. Some of them had been involved in the work-in. Those men did not just teach me how to weld. They showed me the importance of commitment to my workmates, and I learned the importance of loyalty, collective responsibility and solidarity. In my early 20s, I became convener in the factory for what was by then the GMB. I recall well the first time that I had to lead the joint shop stewards committee into our annual pay and conditions negotiations. They did not go well, and we had to turn to our full-time officials for assistance after failing to agree a deal. The Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union official who attended the negotiations was none other than the legendary Jimmy Airlie. In one obituary I read about him recently, it stated: “His strong streak of pragmatism ... refused to let him take workers out on strike if he thought they could not win.” He said: “Workers don’t pay me or any other trade-union official to conduct a revolution. They pay me to get the best deal possible, and you only get that by ducking and diving and compromising.” I remember to this day the advice that Jimmy Airlie gave me just before we went into the boardroom, which chimes with that analysis of the man. “Listen son,” he said, “when you get into that room, you look them straight in the eye, you remember the men you are here to represent, and you tell them what you need and why you need it. You make sure they know you mean business. You bang the table and then you get up and you walk out. And if you’ve let the door slam shut behind you and left yourself no way out, I’ll boot your—” and then I recall some industrial language that brought the lecture to a close. We did okay in those negotiations, and my only direct experience of Jimmy Airlie is a good one. I enjoyed learning from other veterans of the UCS in my own union, such as Sammy Barr, in subsequent years. The lessons that I learned from them at the Confederation of Shipbuilding and Engineering Unions, or Confed, conferences and the other boilermakers events and branch meetings remain invaluable. Saving shipbuilding on the Clyde was the obvious outcome of the work-in, but the legacy of the example that they set of pragmatic but determined collective action stretches well beyond the banks of that great river and lives on in me and others who may not have been there but have learned just how important that event was in forging Scotland’s industrial and social history. I therefore congratulate Hugh Henry on giving us the opportunity to remember and honour the UCS workers and thank them for what they have given me and working people across Scotland.

I appreciate that important discussions are under way between the Scottish Government and COSLA and that it would be dangerous to predict, or speculate about, what may emerge from those discussions. I refer to discussions between the Scottish Government and the actual COSLA, not the Labour-controlled COSLA that seems to exist only in Clare Adamson’s mind. Those discussions concern serious matters that the two parties must conclude. I might not approve of what ultimately transpires from them, but there can be no doubt that local government will have a huge role to play in implementing much of the First Minister’s statement under difficult financial circumstances. It has a huge role to play in helping Scotland’s economy to grow out of the economic morass, so I expected to hear much more about local government issues than I have done this afternoon. Public services reform, particularly the shared services agenda, is an area in which I expected the First Minister to come up with more than 16 lines in his statement. With huge pressures being brought to bear on local authorities by internal necessity and Government direction to deliver efficiencies that it requires, the Government should not be standing on the sidelines while local authority after local authority walks away from the implementation of the few blueprints for the sharing of existing services. The issue should not divide local government from central Government, nor one political party from another, but a problem is emerging with the development and delivery of shared services, and the Government cannot allow it to worsen. Any outcome from the Christie commission report would be welcome as soon as possible and I welcome the First Minister’s commitment to delivering it in the near future, but I suggest that that be done in 2011 rather than later, as we must get on with that agenda. What was missing from the First Minister’s statement, but which could have been included, was new legislation or reviews of existing laws on matters for which responsibility lies with our councils. Increasing numbers of individual constituents, communities and businesses will be concerned at the lack of any recognition in the statement of a need to address the increasing problem of planning regulations and guidelines on waste management facilities, especially incinerators. Just where does the SNP stand on that issue? From answers to previous questions, I know that the Minister for Local Government and Planning has no plans to review the situation, so it comes as no surprise that the First Minister’s statement left the area untouched. However, it is becoming increasingly unacceptable that waste disposal companies that are acting in accordance with Government targets on waste management and energy from waste are met with a confusing picture because of the planning regime in that area. Planning authorities will always exhibit inconsistencies from local authority to local authority as attitudes to certain developments will always differ. It is therefore not surprising that some will always reject proposals for waste disposal plants while others are inundated with them. If the Government is genuine about its waste management targets and the solutions that it supports for meeting them, it must get serious about the planning regulations that govern the sector. If it does not, local communities will continue to war with business in conflicts that will hamper the economic viability of some businesses and the achievement of waste reduction and recycling targets. Another area in which greater clarity is needed is the planning of housing developments. Although it is bad enough that the Government has watered down its commitment to build 6,000 social rented homes, as Lewis Macdonald rightly pointed out, it is also not good enough that it is showing scant regard for the problems that are being encountered in local communities over where houses will be located. We need the right type of home in the right place but, too often, planning authorities and developers and local communities are at odds with one another because the desire for good quality and sufficient numbers of affordable private developments, shared equity homes and social rented accommodation is hindered either by nimbyism, poor planning, irresponsible development or a combination of all three. I accept that the situation could have been avoided by the better designation of land in local plans, but the fact is that we are in another unacceptable situation that highlights the need for a review of the implementation of planning legislation. I am disappointed that the Scottish Government programme has not indicated that that will happen. I will finish off on a matter that is slightly less important but still reasonably significant and worthy of comment. Where is the high hedges legislation that the former Minister for Community Safety promised last session? I know and regret that the issue could and should have been dealt with by the Governments that I supported prior to 2007. However, in September 2010, Fergus Ewing specifically briefed MSPs that Scottish Government officials had started preparatory work to enable a draft bill to be introduced shortly after the election, should any incoming Government decide to do that. Evidently, the Government does not think that there is any need for a bill and the issue is not going to be addressed yet. Indeed, the new minister has informed my colleague John Pentland in a written answer that we will not get the bill shortly after the election, as was promised, but will get it during the current parliamentary session. That could mean 2016. I assure members that the people in my constituency whose lives are being blighted by their neighbours’ high trees and hedges will be bitterly disappointed by the minister’s backsliding. There will be measures in the Government’s legislation programme that I will be able to support, but there are more missed opportunities than there should have been.

9. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to review its position on sentencing for knife crime. (S4O-00070)

Is the cabinet secretary aware that one of the many concerns that people had over his disastrous Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill was the ludicrous proposition that people who threaten others or incite hatred could receive jail sentences of up to five years, while those who carry a knife and could carry out the threat are more likely to receive community sentences? Would it not be better if the cabinet secretary, rather than trying to sound tough on football hooliganism and problems in football, concentrated on delivering what people want, which is safety from people who carry knives on their streets?

I congratulate Bob Doris on securing this evening’s debate, and I endorse the motion, which specifically asks Parliament “to develop a long-term consistent strategy for tackling sectarian-motivated behaviour”. I agree with Bob Doris that Parliament should be actively involving itself in pushing for such a strategy, but there is no getting away from the fact that what is primarily needed is a properly developed and workable Scottish Government strategy to tackle sectarian conflict rather than the sheer opportunism and crisis management that characterise the Government’s present position. Although I applaud the Government for finally making the issue of sectarian conflict a priority, we should not forget that it was not so long ago that the minister’s predecessor was informing Parliament that “we do not believe that a further strategy specifically on tackling sectarianism is needed”.—[Official Report, Written Answers, 5 February 2008; S3W-8846.] I welcome the minister to her new post and wish her well in her specific remit on sectarianism, but I cannot say that I am comfortable with her Government’s knee-jerk legislation and the haste with which it is intended to rush it through Parliament. Jack McConnell was right to raise the profile of the issue, but I have never been convinced that successive Administrations have achieved a coherent and informed approach to the problem. A war of words and chattering-class cogitation has abounded on the subject of sectarianism, but a comprehensive and discerning course of action has never been forthcoming. The First Minister’s—no doubt genuine—intention to stop re-enactments of the battle of the Boyne on our streets betrays a failure to recognise that sectarian conflict existed in Scotland for a century and a half before William met James on an Irish riverside. It certainly began more than 300 years before the first Celtic-Rangers game, so the need to have legislation in place before the start of the next football season truly baffles me. Although we will soon have legislation to address the modern phenomenon of e-sectarianism or cyber-racism, I fear that the forthcoming legislation will not, or cannot, begin to tackle the real problem. If sectarianism is not to be defined, how can it be tackled or eradicated? If anti-Irish racism is to be subsumed into strategies on sectarianism rather than treated distinctly for what it is, I hold out little hope for a solution to it. The issue is hugely complex and the means of tackling it need to be much more multifaceted than the rhetoric to which we are all too often subjected. We hear a lot about the good work that is being done on the issue by different groups, and I know that sincere efforts are being made by such bodies. However, although anti-sectarianism is the recognised label of the work of those groups, I am afraid that it could more accurately be called non-sectarianism. As one academic put it, the term “non-sectarianism” refers “to a neutral position, reflecting the fact that it is about staying in the middle”. That is what we have in Scotland. Too many people are trying to claim neutrality, sitting on the fence and proposing measures to deal with the problem based on an attitude that sees the problem as being two sides of the same coin: one lot is as bad as the other—Celtic versus Rangers. That is far too simplistic an attitude and results in people pontificating rather than taking a proactive and positive approach that is aimed at removing the ignorance that underpins sectarianism. I would prefer people to gain respect for one another’s values and place in society than have non-sectarianists monitoring the number of parades and trying to eradicate the traditions and cultures that divide us. I do not want people to stop singing the famine song because they are afraid that they will go to jail; I want them to understand why it is offensive for them to sing it, and why it is important for me to value my Irish heritage and for them to welcome the diversity that Irish immigration has brought to this country. I want people to stop singing the famine song because they appreciate the offence that it causes to people such as me, whose traditions are different from theirs. No amount of legislation will bring that about, and very little that has been done so far encourages me to think that the work that is being carried out will lead us to that positive outcome.

I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary has spoken directly to COSLA and that discussions are continuing. Have the cabinet secretary’s officials been talking to the 32 individual local authorities, too, or are all the discussions being held directly with COSLA? Are officials relying on COSLA to pass the information to the local authorities?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government remains confident in the costings for a five-year council tax freeze set out in the Scottish National Party 2011 election manifesto. (S4F-00038)

Although it is clear that the council tax freeze is a popular policy, time will tell whether the First Minister is correct or whether others, such as Crawford Beveridge, are right in saying that his policy is unsustainable, unaffordable and detrimental to the upkeep of local government services in the long run. The First Minister claims that his proposal for a local income tax is also popular, but he wants to keep everything from the taxpayer, in spite of the Scottish Information Commissioner’s ruling that Dr Andrew Goudie’s report should be made public. Will the First Minister stop wasting tens of thousands of pounds of taxpayers’ money on his own super-injunction to keep his information from them? Will he publish his economic adviser’s analysis of the cost of LIT? What lurid headlines is he afraid of and what does the First Minister have to hide?

2. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to review planning regulations regarding waste incinerators. (S4O-00002)

I welcome the minister to her new post. I did so in her absence yesterday, but I take the opportunity again today. I ask the minister to confirm whether the Government supports the production of energy from incineration and considers such technology to be desirable. Will she confirm that the Scottish Government has accepted South Lanarkshire Council’s decision to approve the incinerator at Dovesdale and will not call in that planning application? Can she explain why the Government of which she is a member has accepted the reporter’s judgment and overturned North Lanarkshire Council’s decision to reject a similar plant in Coatbridge when she was opposed to the plans for one in her own area? I ask the minister to instigate a consultation on a new national framework relating to the production of energy from waste so that all concerned will know what contribution the Government wants that technology to make and that the imposition of such plants on communities against their wishes will be prevented.

I am pleased to be making my first speech in the new parliamentary session in this debate. I congratulate all the new members who have made their maiden speeches today and I offer my best wishes to those who will make their first contributions in the remainder of the afternoon. Like most Labour members who spoke in last week’s debate and who have spoken in today’s debate, I reiterate our desire to identify areas of policy that we have in common with the Government, but also to examine the Government’s programme to ensure that it does not fail to deliver for the people of Scotland either by implementation or omission. I commend the First Minister for finally appointing a minister with specific responsibility for local government. Iain Gray gave me a specific remit on that soon after he took over as leader of the Labour Party, as he wanted to make it clear that he saw local government, which spends more than 30 per cent of the Government’s money, as a major priority. I am therefore pleased that the First Minister has followed Iain Gray’s lead. I also welcome the fact that the new minister’s responsibility includes planning, as that is another key field in which policy will play a principal role in pursuit of the economic growth and job creation that we all want to develop in the period ahead. The Scottish Government’s 100 per cent target for renewable electricity production is just one area in which planning policy will be important. Some have called the target ambitious, while others have gone as far as to say that it is undesirable. Regardless of what view we take on the promise, having made the commitment the Government will now be held to account for its delivery, both in the Parliament and outside it, by the energy generation sector and the environmental lobby. As Iain Gray pointed out last week, we need to establish what else needs to be done to deliver the required level of renewables capacity by the end of the decade. I firmly believe that we need to revisit the national planning framework to make clearer what needs to be provided and—possibly more important—where that capacity might be installed. We also need much clearer guidance on the less desirable but ultimately necessary technology for waste management in energy generation. Not to put too fine a point on it, agreement must be reached on the location of incineration and biomass plants, as well as wind farms, so that the politics is taken out of the subject in the planning process. For all our sakes, we need to end the nimbyism that, as history shows, too often skews debates on such matters, but we must also protect communities in which overprovision or unsuitable developments are proposed. Those are as much a blight on local communities as they are a bonus to the environmental benefit of Scotland. To move away from such practical planning considerations, we await the report of the Christie commission to see its suggestions for the future development of our public services in general. I am particularly keen to see what it holds in store for local government, given the general raspberry that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities blew towards the reform plans that all the parties outlined in the election. It will be no easy task to consider the suggestions for reform of public services and to implement them while retaining the confidence of those who run the services, those who are employed in them and the communities that they serve. A particular concern of mine is that too many local government employees—who, on the whole, do a great job—still do not receive salaries that are commensurate with the responsibility that they hold. They are now faced with the prospect of long-term financial restrictions, which might further prevent their terms and conditions from being raised to the level to which they are already entitled but have not yet reached. In particular, far too many female employees are affected by the fact that equal pay settlements remain outstanding in a number of local authority areas. Last week, the First Minister used colourful prose to paint a picture of a fairer society, but Scotland will not be a fairer place if public sector workers are forced to pay a disproportionate price for five years of council budget restrictions. Willie Rennie was absolutely right to mention that there is a price to be paid for the council tax freeze. We have accepted the reality of the existing settlement between the Government and our 32 local authorities, but it comes at a price. People in poor sections of our society now pay for services that they previously received for free, while MSPs, doctors, lawyers and millionaire bankers benefit from the council tax freeze. In no one’s language is that fair.

That figure of £2 per head for every person is more than the 54p or 55p—the price of a pint of milk—that the council tax freeze saved people such as the member and me. People are now paying £40 to have their grass cut and are being forced to pay for home help services for which they previously did not pay. That is the price of the council tax freeze. At some point, that price will have to be paid and the cabinet secretary will have to realise that the freeze cannot continue in the manner that he proposes. That would not be fair, regardless of what the cabinet secretary and the First Minister claim about the social wage. Overall, those who serve in our public sector need us to work constructively on their behalf so that we can help them to deliver the better services that we all want for Scotland. I look forward to doing that. I hope that figures are produced so that we can judge the Government on exactly what the people of Scotland are paying to meet the Government’s populist headlines.

When we debated the bill at stage 1, I waited until my closing speech before I thanked everyone who had taken part in the deliberations on the bill, because I was worried that there would be nothing left for me to say if at the outset I gave those people due recognition for their contributions. However worth while a bill is, there is little that can be said when everyone agrees on every aspect of it. On this occasion, therefore, I have decided to thank the clerks, members of the Finance Committee and, in particular, Duncan McNeil and other members of the Local Government and Communities Committee in my opening speech, for fear that if I thanked them at the end of the debate everyone might be asleep and miss it. In my closing speech at stage 1, I noted that during the debate committee members had raised some caveats that had been included in the committee’s report and I welcomed the fact that those issues would be considered during stage 2. I did not think that there would be much controversy, but I lived in hope that any discussion would give us new material to debate at stage 3. How disappointed I was, therefore, to learn that the three amendments that the minister moved at stage 2 passed without discussion and that the entire process lasted less than three minutes. In the time that it takes to boil an egg, the committee agreed to two amendments to address the Electoral Commission’s education function in relation to local government systems, and one that enabled the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman, rather than the United Kingdom ombudsman, to consider any issues that might arise as a result of the Electoral Commission’s work in relation to Scottish local government elections. Not even giving more powers to the ombudsman drew Alex Neil into the debate to liven it up. There was not a cheep from the ombudsman’s arch-enemy, let alone one of his dog-whistle rants. Here we are at stage 3 with consensus not so much achieved as maintained throughout. All political parties recognise the need for the bill and agree with it. We will see whether managing local government elections in the way that the bill envisages maintains that consensus, but I hope that the good will that surrounds the bill will enable that to happen. I am happy to reiterate my belief that greater and more effective management of local elections will provide for their smoother running. The proposed greater powers for the EMB should be reviewed at some time in the future to see how they are working. I am sure that that will happen and I am glad that the minister has indicated that he has a similar view. That approach should not only benefit all political parties but reassure the electorate that the system is run for their benefit, first and foremost. By passing the bill, we will show that the Parliament can learn from past mistakes. It is with some regret that I express a wish that the current Westminster Tory coalition had not ignored the lessons that we have learned and decided to press ahead with its ill-advised referendum on the same day as the forthcoming Scottish Parliament election. Let us hope that the arrogance of our UK Government does not cause us to have to address the aftermath of another electoral shambles in May. The lack of interest in the referendum may be the main reason why that will not happen. However, today is about the bill, which is to be welcomed.

I am quite pleased that the debate took the course that it did and was not as uninteresting as some might have feared. The opening speakers stuck to what was essentially a dry subject. Following that, Stewart Stevenson gave us a six-minute analysis of obscure election results from British history and then spent a couple of minutes telling us how his computer knowledge would fix the technicalities of any future election process. I agreed with one thing in Stewart Stevenson’s speech, which was that the establishment of an electoral management board on a statutory basis to supervise Scottish local government elections should assist local authorities to perform their functions by promoting best practice. We should all welcome that. Along with the extension of the Electoral Commission’s remit to cover local government elections in Scotland, that is a welcome step. I join Alex Johnstone and other members in noting the great degree of consensus on the bill’s provisions, although—as was evident from Duncan McNeil’s speech—many contentious issues were involved. Duncan McNeil is entitled to be given credit, given the range of concerns that existed, for establishing cross-party agreement and helping to sustain it throughout the deliberations on the bill. The EMB will greatly benefit many people by promoting best practice and providing information, advice and training for local government elections. The Gould report made a series of recommendations to improve electoral administration, and rightly recognised as an omission the fact that local government elections are the only elections in Scotland for which the Electoral Commission has no formal remit to provide support. The extension of the commission’s remit to include local government elections in Scotland is the correct move. The Electoral Commission indicated that the extension to its statutory remit would provide greater accountability and transparency in its role, and would cover performance standards for returning officers in local elections. The implementation of a system of international and other observers for local government elections would be another potential step. The bill is a progressive move, which I whole-heartedly endorse. There will always be issues on which one or more of the parties cannot find common ground with the rest, but we have fortunately reached a consensus on this one, and it is good that the Parliament can come together on it. The next few weeks will bring few other opportunities for agreement, so we should make the most of this opportunity while we can and unite around the provisions in the bill at decision time, just as we have throughout its passage.

Will the member give way?

The Denny area is represented by the constituency MSP who is leading the debate. The other members who are taking part are list MSPs for the area. Labour does not have the constituency or a list member for the area. There is therefore no direct Labour representation in the Parliament for the area.

I came to the chamber to pick up papers for this afternoon’s debate on the local government finance orders. There is no Labour representative in the Parliament for the constituency that Michael Matheson represents. There is therefore no interest, as an elected representative, in me being here.

When we previously debated a local government finance order, on 10 February, local authorities throughout the country were in the throes of putting together cuts that were foisted on them by the budget reductions which Mr Swinney outlined in his financial package. At the time, the cabinet secretary advised us that he would come back at a later date, as not all of our local councils had written back to confirm their annual submission to his council tax freeze blackmail threat. With the requisite acquiescence obtained, we have come back to the chamber to finish off the job. Mr Swinney will receive the usual enthusiastic support for his suppression of local democracy from the anti-local government Conservative party, but I assure the Scottish National Party Government that there is no agreement from the Labour Party that the local government financial settlement is fair or that its concomitant additional burdens are properly funded. Like many of our colleagues in local government, Labour accepts the financial deal with resigned recognition of a fait accompli, rather than with any recognition that it is fair and properly funded. As I said when the initial order was presented to members, the Government’s failure to get its priorities right and the maintenance of its coercion strategy have prevented it from working constructively and imaginatively with our local authorities to find ways of protecting jobs and services.

Mr FitzPatrick should have stayed stuck for words. We have made it absolutely clear that we have always objected to the underfunding of the council tax freeze. That is the problem. I am glad that Mr FitzPatrick intervened, as I was going to make that point. When I spoke in the debate on 10 February, I made it absolutely clear, for the avoidance of doubt, that Labour has no problem with zero increases in the council tax. I suggest that members look at the Official Report of that debate and read other debates in which we have confirmed that position. I welcome the opportunity to reiterate that view and to remind members that what we object to is the unnecessary adverse impact of the underfunding of the council tax freeze and what that has continually forced on our councils. The loss of more than 3,000 teachers in our schools lies at the door of the underfunded freeze. We should make no mistake about that. Four weeks on from the previous debate, we remain concerned about the adverse impact of the Government’s strategy, but we accept its reality. That said, we must acknowledge not only that our local authorities have signed up for the status quo for the fourth year, but that it has been indicated to them that they can expect no better in the 2012-13 financial year. It is clear to us that the SNP has broken local government finance. Its proposals for a local income tax would smash local government finance to pieces and ultimately wreck local government altogether. It will take some time for us to undo that mess. We have to accept that, when we come into office in May, we will have to begin the task of repairing local government. The cuts that have been caused by the settlement hurt the most vulnerable people: the young, the old, the poor and the disabled. They will not get the services that they need and deserve from our local councils because of the SNP Government. Local authorities and those whom they serve can only hope that the financial orders are the last ones to be inflicted on them by the current finance secretary. We will do all that we can to ensure that that is the case and that the road back to strong local government can begin when a Labour Administration is returned to the Parliament to deliver that.

Does the member recognise that, in the interim, we have had a recession and the council tax freeze? Does he accept that the landscape of local government has changed and that it would be remiss of us not to reflect that?

It is underfunded.

Some people might benefit from the freeze, but is Joe FitzPatrick concerned about people who rent small band A and band B houses from their councils and whose rents have increased by double-digit figures?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

It will take only a brief intervention to point something out to Mr Swinney. I explained the difference between what he has said and what I have said. However, I cannot do anything about his inability to understand our position.

A lot of what we do in preparation for any debate in the Parliament is based on assumptions about what we expect others to say. We are surprised, occasionally, to find that our opponents’ arguments are not what we might have predicted. In that regard, I did not expect to hear what I did from Robert Brown and his Liberal Democrat colleagues. I am a little surprised that I did not hear the normal, sometimes even rational, Liberal fear of the big state and domineering Government. However, what I heard was Robert Brown and his colleagues being, to me at least, hysterical and talking baseless hogwash. I usually consider Jeremy Purvis to be a rational communicator in the chamber, but his speech was like the reading of a screenplay from a disaster movie describing a barren wasteland where outlaws have taken over and the police have abandoned the Borders to its fate. That approach has no credibility whatsoever in a debate around an analysis of what is required at present to address the problems in our public services.

Robert Brown is simply adding to the kind of remarks that I have been describing. An analysis has been undertaken. Indeed, this issue has been under discussion for decades, never mind for the past few months since the budget cuts hove into view. Robert Brown accuses Labour of bravado. However, what we want to do has the support of senior police officers and, as James Kelly pointed out, the Fire Brigades Union. Surely when we look at our local services it would be bravado to ignore those bodies and the pressures that are being brought to bear on them. That said, Robert Brown made a fair point about the current position of the SNP, which seems to be trying to patch up its difficulties in different parts of the country. As representatives of the north, Rob Gibson, Dave Thompson and Maureen Watt will of course want to speak about the situation in that part of the country. However, it does not really help the debate to create geographical divisions by talking about where a particular headquarters should be located or what services should be run from the north rather than from the west or the south. We have to get away from that when we discuss police services. We have to get away from the kind of ludicrous, bizarre nonsense in which, when the Pope or some senior figure visits the country, a team of police officers has to sit at Harthill service station to meet those coming from the east, simply because they are not allowed to travel the extra 20 miles into Glasgow. However, I do not want to be too critical of the SNP; after all, Maureen Watt warned us not to be cynical. I cannot believe that a couple of weeks before the election a Government would discover that it wanted to look at, say, another solution for a unpopular electricity line that it had already passed but I could not possibly make such a cynical remark in a debate in the run-up to an election. I have always been of the opinion that the best defence against a commandeering Government is an assertive citizenry and that is what can be achieved in the reforms to our police service, our fire and rescue provision and our national care service that I believe are necessary. There is absolutely nothing inherently centralist or undemocratic about reducing the number of police and fire authorities, or about combining adult care services in one public sector area instead of keeping them split between the NHS and local government. Indeed, Labour’s avowed intention is that, in restructuring these services, priority setting will be devolved to the local level and that democratically elected representatives who listen to the communities that they represent will have even more of a say in the delivery of services than they do at present. The governance of local services must, by its very nature, be as local as possible. Moreover, as necessity is the mother of invention, any Government of Scotland must do all that can to shield people from the worst effects of the global financial crisis while delivering social and economic reforms. Although we must protect public services as best we can, the public sector’s structure, approach and objectives should not be immune from reform, the main aim of which must be to provide public services that are more flexible and are adaptable to individual local needs. There must be more of an emphasis on moving towards a delivery-based philosophy that encompasses a radical dispersal of power, in which people have more say over the services that they receive and front-life staff have more of an input into the services that they provide. In no way can that be described as a centralising power grab. Instead, we are proposing a diffusion of power that should and must reduce bureaucratic burdens.

Mr Rumbles’s question presumes that there is no hierarchy of decision making in the current eight-force structure. Chief constables have powers that are dispersed down to local level—

It would not matter whether the new chief constable of a single Scottish police division was based in the last house in John o’ Groats; the decisions that are made at a local level will be based on the divisional structures in the local communities. That is the important point that the Liberal Democrats appear to be missing. Public services should improve as they become more personal and cost effective while, at the same time, strengthening democratic deliberation and control in our local communities. Policing must respond to local priorities and any redirection of power must allow for leaner central Government. Local public services must change for the emerging era and deliver what people want in the way that they want them; indeed, the services for those people must be preserved in the face of all the challenges that arise in this current economic climate. Sustained investment in public services since devolution should have created a better relationship between central Government and the front line, empowered both to focus on what they do best, and, in so doing, delivered better value for money. Progress has undoubtedly been made in many areas, but the next steps of reform and the next decisions on how services will meet citizens’ expectations must increasingly be for local areas and for front-line services to respond to freely. As citizens and communities are empowered, central Government must sharpen its focus on its core role of setting policy priorities, guaranteeing national standards and building up capacity in the public services. We live in turbulent times, and Scotland is in a state of turmoil that has been caused by the 21st century neo-conservative coalition at Westminster. It ill befits the Liberal Democrats, who are one of the parties in the coalition, to hold a debate in the Scottish Parliament in which they criticise those who want to make the reforms that are necessary to deliver the best public services that can be delivered in economic circumstances that they have created.

Does Mike Rumbles understand that the areas that Cathie Craigie and I represent have divisions within Strathclyde Police and that what really matters to the people in Lanarkshire whom we represent is that a police officer is there when one is needed? People do not care where the police officer who bosses them lives.

We come to the debate as local authorities throughout the country meet to put together the biggest package of cuts in generations. We all wish that that was not the case, and we would all prefer that the banking crisis had not led to budget deficits and that there was no need to ask local government to reduce jobs and services. Labour Party MSPs would also have preferred the Scottish National Party Government to have decided to take the gun away from the heads of our local councillors, end its campaign of coercion and work constructively and imaginatively with our local authorities to find ways of protecting jobs and services rather than blackmailing them into complying with underfunded headline-grabbing commitments with drastically reduced budgets. As I have done before, I make it absolutely clear, for the avoidance of doubt, that Labour has no problem with zero increases in the council tax. What we object to is the unnecessary, adverse impact that has been forced on councils by a policy that puts the interests of wealthy home owners before the services that are needed by our vulnerable elderly, young and disabled people. When a constituent of mine can work out that it is not a good deal for her that the 14p that she saves each week on her council tax is lost because she has to pay more than £2 each week to use her local community group, where she finds support and companionship, we have to ask why the towering economic geniuses of Alex Salmond and John Swinney think that their council tax freeze is such a wonderful policy. Cuts to care and repair and supporting people funding threaten the security and care of the most vulnerable—the young, the old, the poor and the disabled—and housing associations and local authorities will not be able to deliver the services that our local communities deserve. With councils such as Argyll and Bute Council seeing a reduction of 4.9 per cent and Aberdeen City Council careering from one miserable catastrophe to another and having to get the First Minister’s spin doctor to put out messages to save it from itself, we see emerging a picture of decimation that can be traced back all the way to the decisions of the current Government. That Government is supported by Mr FitzPatrick, who wants to make an intervention.

I point out to Mr FitzPatrick that it was agreed in the budget process yesterday that there will be a council tax freeze for the coming year, and we accept that. I also point out to him that in North Lanarkshire, to make up for the shortfall that his Government has just delivered to the area, the SNP group leader suggested that rents for people such as my constituents should go up by 3 per cent. I find that totally unacceptable, because that is a much larger increase than any council tax increase would be, and it will hurt ordinary people who rent their homes from the local authority. Mr Swinney has never addressed such issues. He has shifted the burden from council tax payers to people who pay charges for local authority services, and that burden is increasing because of the underfunding of the council tax freeze. That is why, despite Mr Swinney’s token gestures yesterday, with which he tried to buy Labour’s support for his budget, we decided to join our Labour colleagues in local government and have nothing to do with the SNP’s financial package. However, we must accept that Mr Swinney’s coercion strategy has worked again, that councils have been forced to accept a tawdry settlement and that vital local services will yet again have to be cut far more than is necessary. If we were not to accept the terms of the order, we would prevent the money that is available from getting to our local authorities. It may be gruel, and they may have had their pleas for some more rejected by Mr Swinney, but it is all that is on offer to them, so they require to have it. When it comes to local government finance there is a better way and, between now and May, we will work to ensure that the return of a Labour Administration to this place will deliver it.

Will the member give way?

I am pleased to be able to take part in this afternoon’s debate. I thank the Local Government and Communities Committee and all concerned for bringing us to this point. Fortunately, this is a debate on a piece of legislation that has broad consensus. There are no major political or ideological differences between the parties on it, so there is nothing for anyone to get heated about. Unfortunately, as there is broad consensus in the debate and there is nothing for anyone to get particularly exercised about, the bill is likely to be placed on the growing list of worthy but dull legislation with which the Parliament has had to deal. However, the bill is worthy of our consideration and support—for a very important reason. No one can forget the problems that we encountered with the ballot in the 2007 local government and Scottish Parliament elections. Lessons must be learned. We must move on from those events and the scarred memories that most of us carry from the 2007 election counts, and must introduce measures to improve electoral administration in Scotland. I am particularly pleased that the bill will extend the remit of the Electoral Commission to include local government elections in Scotland and that the commission will now be required to produce an annual report. I believe that the electoral management board for Scotland—the EMB—will be of great benefit to many people in promoting best practice and providing information, advice and training for local government elections. Given the faith that those who took part in the consultation and in the consideration of the bill have placed in the future of the board, we have to wonder why it was not set up a long time ago to deal with the complex issues of local government elections. The bill creates the body to fill the gap that was identified in the Gould report, and I welcome the proposal to establish it now. Like other members, I would like the remit of the board to be extended, as the Electoral Commission has called for, although I recognise that that has to be decided elsewhere. It surely makes sense to have one board covering all elections in the future, which would provide a great deal of stability for us all. It is important to note, as the Local Government and Communities Committee did, that concerns have been expressed that the bill does not give the EMB powers to sanction those who do not follow a direction. I encourage the committee to look a bit further into that issue, to ensure that opportunities are not missed and that potential pitfalls are addressed. I am also concerned that if a direction that is issued by the EMB is followed but subsequently leads to court action, a returning officer could be petitioned but the EMB would be exempt. Surely that loophole should be considered further. I do not wish to add too much of a note of discord to what is otherwise a non-contentious debate, but this point should be made. The Gould report highlighted “the additional complexity faced in Scotland in 2007 due to the use on the same day of the single transferable vote system for local government elections and the first past the post system and the Additional Member System for Scottish Parliament elections.” We find ourselves facing the same problem with the election this May, with the potential alternative vote referendum likely to fall on the same day as the Scottish Parliament elections. I hope that Liberal Democrat and Conservative members will speak to their colleagues in the coalition Government in Westminster and remind them how difficult it was in 2007 when we had that problem. I will leave it at that for the moment, but I look forward to hearing the rest of the debate.

It is standard practice in debates such as this to thank all those who took part in the discussion of the bill at the start of the debate, when one begins to consider the analysis of the bill and the consultation that took place. I decided to leave that bit until my closing speech on behalf of the Labour Party, in case there was nothing else left for me to say. I therefore thank the clerks and the members of the Finance Committee and the Local Government and Communities Committee, who have contributed a great deal to the consideration of the bill. As I said at the beginning of the debate, it is a worthwhile piece of legislation that, in hindsight, should have been in place a long time ago. Having listened to the debate, I remain of the view that there is a valuable debate to be had around the extension of the electoral management board’s remit to cover all elections in future. However, I am pleased that, through the bill, local government elections will for the first time be managed in an appropriate way. As we have heard, all political parties recognise the need for the bill and agree with most aspects of it. However, I hope that the proposed greater powers for the EMB, which would enable it to order sanctions against those who do not follow directions, will be re-examined; I would be interested to see how that debate continues to move forward. It is important that we listen to the views of the EMB and support its requests if and when we can, as Patricia Ferguson mentioned. I understand that the committee is of the view that effective planning will result in fewer directions being given, and I hope that that is the case. I believe that greater and more effective management of local elections will provide for the smoother running of elections. That will ultimately benefit all political parties and, it is hoped, lead to greater turnout at those elections, which would be welcomed across the political spectrum. I heard David McLetchie and Alex Johnstone valiantly trying to defend their party’s decision to go ahead with an AV referendum, even though they probably do not believe in what it is about in the first place. Mr Johnstone gave us the opportunity to ponder that. John Wilson, Patricia Ferguson and Bob Doris made very strong arguments. I was reminded of the time when I was on the Local Government and Communities Committee during its consideration of the changes to the electoral system for local government elections. I was quite struck by the fact that when we looked at America, we saw that they were able to hold elections to elect the local dog warden, the local sheriff and the President on the same day without much difficulty. Having seen the evidence from Northern Ireland, where European elections, Westminster elections and local elections were all held on the same day with different voting systems, I felt confident that the people of Scotland would be able to manage two elections on the same day with different systems. However, as Bob Doris pointed out, something went badly wrong. The problem was due not necessarily to the voting systems, but to the fact that the electorate was not put at the centre of the considerations for the arrangements on the day. That is the fundamental problem that we have to address. The bill is not contentious. Other non-contentious bills have failed in the Parliament because their financial memorandums have not been robust enough, but on this occasion we cannot even look to that issue for a dispute that will divide us, because the committee has made it clear that it considers the information on the resource implications of the bill to be robust. It is useful to know that, and we can take confidence from it. In outlining all the issues on behalf of the committee, Duncan McNeil made it clear that there are some caveats in the committee’s report and that it will look at those issues further. That is reassuring. Any matters that are outstanding after stage 2 can be looked at again at a later stage. I look forward to the stage 3 debate, even though what we say then might reflect very much what we have already heard this afternoon.

Whatever differences I might have with Scottish Green Party policies, I have always recognised that their motivation is essentially optimism. Too often, I find the Greens overly idealistic and even utopian but, although I am regularly unable to agree with them, I would never criticise them for believing in a programme that is genuinely aimed at protecting what we have and bettering the lives of everyone who shares our planet. This morning, however, I fear that their idealism may have gone too far. We have spent the past four years watching the Government pick fights at every opportunity with Westminster, being aware of documents that reveal that the Scottish Government instructed the civil service to seek divisions with Whitehall at every opportunity and looking on as day in, day out the Scottish ministers play the blame game with successive UK Governments. So it is surely the ultimate triumph of hope over experience to begin any motion in the Parliament by asking the SNP Administration to “open discussions in good faith with their UK counterparts”. It must surely also be the most futile request ever put to the Administration, that it disavow the reckless underfunding of council services that it implemented in pursuit of a headline-grabbing policy instead of delivering what is necessary to protect local communities and local services. It has chosen to move away from the use of council tax towards huge increases in rents and charges for services and has reduced the availability of those services as a result. The Greens are right to point that out in their motion. Freezing the council tax is not a bad policy in itself, but coercing local authorities into agreeing to an underfunded freeze—which all the evidence clearly shows has led to reductions in services, increased charges and job losses—is horrendously bad government.

I will move away from the sterile debate about whether we should try to impose restrictions on local government. The Government’s aim of ensuring that the council tax does not overburden council tax payers is not, in itself, a bad thing, but we must be much more imaginative about how we enable our local authorities to deliver public services. Through the policies that it has pursued, the Scottish Government has centralised power and taken hold of the balance in local government finances, which is now somewhere in the region of 85 per cent central funding to 15 per cent local funding. It has completely undermined the democratic policies under which local authorities should be allowed to operate, although to ask local authorities to be careful about how they use the revenue-raising mechanisms that are available to them is not in itself a bad thing. The way in which the Scottish Government has operated in relation to local government displays the same ruinous attitude that leads to it doctoring Government reports to justify the arguments against the findings of the Calman commission. [Interruption.] The minister can harrumph all he wants from his sedentary position, but we know that he dressed up a report to make it look as though academics supported him when that was not necessarily the case. Rather than seek to work constructively with the UK Government to improve devolution through the Scotland Bill, the SNP Administration reverts to type and carps, criticises and condemns. The main reason that I cannot accept the Green motion is that it ignores the fact that implementing the measures to increase revenue in the ways that are suggested would lead to ordinary people, who are already being hammered by the disastrous Con-Dem policies, being further adversely affected, regardless of how progressive Mr Harvie’s suggestions are. The Greens are right to suggest that alternatives to the blunt instrument of the underfunded council tax freeze should be considered, especially to lift the heavy hand of coercion that Mr Swinney imposed on councils, but they are being impractical and imprudent and not offering a considered way out of the mistakes that are being wrought against Scotland by its Government and the UK Government, so Labour cannot, ultimately, agree with them. I move amendment S3M-7735.4, to leave out from first “; believes” to end and insert: “in order to ensure that the appropriate mechanism is in place for the introduction of tax-raising powers recommended by the Calman Commission on Scottish Devolution and contained in the Scotland Bill currently before the UK Parliament and believes that the Scottish Government’s continued underfunding of the council tax freeze has directly led to cuts in vital local services”.

When closing speeches are made at the end of our debates, the term “interesting” is often used euphemistically to describe the course that the debate has followed. As we move closer to the election, I am sure that a more accurate description of how debates pan out will be “predictable”. We may be just far enough away from the election for this debate to have been more interesting than predictable, but there was an awful lot of the expected in what we heard rather than anything very enlightening. I note, however, how brave and commendable it is of the Liberal Democrats to put forward an amendment and argument that remind people that they are currently in bed with the Tories and playing their part in destroying jobs and services across Scotland. What we got from the Conservatives was possibly more predictable, and it just confirmed to us all why they remain such an anathema to the Scottish electorate. Let me turn to the comments of Gavin Brown and come to the defence of my colleague Mary Mulligan. When she used the phrase “balancing the books”, she did not say that that was a bad thing. She said that it is not enough to hide behind such a phrase to follow ideological preferences. That is an important point. As I heard Mr Brown and Mr Brownlee speak, I was reminded of an anecdote that my son gave me a few weeks ago. In his place of work, a few people were sitting around, having their lunch and ruminating on the current difficulties in the economy, when one of the younger members of staff piped up, “Can you tell me who this Mary Thatcher was?” I am pretty sure that Mr Brownlee and Mr Brown were not quite the children of Thatcher, but it is clear from the way that they have expressed themselves today that they are definitely the grandchildren of Thatcher. They know exactly who she was and what her ideology was, and they are clearly attuned to it. Even having followed the Conservatives’ ideological arguments, I was amused to hear Mr Brownlee’s defence of the council tax freeze. To claim that £70 million was in fact too much to pay for the freeze was laughable—in fact, Mr Swinney found himself in difficulty in trying not to laugh as he tried to explain that away. The reality is that there are enough reports that show the opposite. Mary Mulligan referred to the report from Unison, but there are others, including from the independent budget review group, which said that the council tax freeze is unsustainable.

The member was clearly not listening to my opening comments, when I said that the policy of freezing the council tax was not, of itself, a bad thing. However, it was underfunded and it led to cuts. That brings me to Stewart Stevenson’s points. He asked who is paying for the cuts. I can tell him who is paying for the cuts: the elderly people who are charged more for the services that they require at a local government level, the children who are losing their breakfast clubs and youth facilities, and the disabled. A whole host of people are losing services and paying for the cuts, which can be followed back to the council tax freeze and the underfunding of it. Some old axioms are worth repeating in debates, and Patrick Harvie’s motion does that by rightly pointing out that the Scottish variable rate was democratically endorsed by the Scottish people. However, he could have gone further and recognised that devolution is also the path chosen for Scotland by its people. This Administration has wasted four years campaigning for something that this country does not want, rather than governing on behalf of Scotland to deliver what it actually wants. Mr Harvie is right to point out that the SNP, by simply passing on the Tory-led Government’s cuts, is undermining housing, public transport and energy efficiency. However, all those were under threat before the recession because the Scottish Government has always had the wrong priorities. All talk and no action; overpromising and underdelivering—that has been the hallmark of the Scottish Government. It has been too busy being populist, putting its party interest before the public good, and generally exhibiting such incompetence that I am left to wonder why the Greens have any confidence whatsoever in the Scottish Government’s ability to act in good faith or do the right thing on any issue, let alone work with Westminster. As others have said, there is much that can be agreed with in Patrick Harvie’s motion but, while I confirm my admiration for the Green party’s optimism, ultimately I cannot support it.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I thank the cabinet secretary for giving me an opportunity to remind him of the comments made by the director of the Confederation of British Industry Scotland this morning, who said that the Government really should not be congratulating itself given the state of the economy and the direction in which it is travelling.

Is the minister not missing the point? The freight facilities grants scheme in Scotland was much more flexible and operated in an entirely different way from the scheme in England. He continually talks about the situation in England when he has the power to continue with something that was working better here. That is his responsibility. No amount of talk from him about what happened in England will deflect from his responsibility to get his priorities right.

I begin by congratulating Cathy Jamieson on securing the debate and providing members with the opportunity to highlight the short-sightedness of the Scottish Government's decision to cut off the supply of freight facilities grants. It also affords me the chance to join Cathy  Jamieson in raising concerns about the impact that the Government's decision will have on my constituency of Hamilton North and Bellshill.

The minister makes a clever argument, but he can see the importance of his strategy—I will come on to that later—and he is undermining his position rather than making me defend the difficulties that he faces. Twenty-five years ago, in January 1986, the then Tory Government's economic cutbacks meant that the traditional Lanarkshire steel-making industry began to be closed down. Ravenscraig was under threat, and the 12 Gartcosh to London marchers set off, determined to fight against the plant's already announced closure. We all know that the steel works are no more, but what is not so well known is the fact that Bellshill, which was one of the worst-affected areas in Lanarkshire, managed to recover by exploiting its geography and transport infrastructure links to become a hub for distribution and logistics. Central to that was the development of the Mossend rail freight terminal and Peter D Stirling Ltd's Mossend railhead depot. In November 2003, the then Labour-led Administration announced the award of a freight facilities grant of £650,000 to English, Welsh and Scottish Railway Ltd for additional freight facilities at Mossend to enable the transfer of an express parcel service from road to rail. Other grants were also awarded, such as one for the then Safeway logistics depot in Bellshill to put trailers on to rail for transportation north to Inverness. Mossend was rightly identified by that Labour-led Administration as a strategically important centre for rail freight in Scotland, and those grants reflected the Scottish Executive's recognition of the site's significance in enabling the transfer to rail. However, along comes the Scottish National Party Government and its transport myopia: no Edinburgh airport rail link, no Glasgow airport rail link, delays in the M8 and Raith upgrades, and many more transport projects postponed or shelved. The Government has the stated policy, in its freight action plan, to make "the movement of freight through the entire supply chain ... efficient and sustainable"  by pursuing activities that promote modal shift to rail and shipping, and we have heard that "moving more freight to rail contributed to the Government's targets of making our transport network 'smarter' and 'greener'." Mossend is geared up to play its part in that strategy. As ASLEF has pointed out, there have been almost £70 million of FFGs in Scotland through 40 grants since 1997, which has taken 30 million lorry miles from Scotland's roads. By freezing FFGs, the Government is not only undermining its own policies, but is putting the brakes on the regeneration of Lanarkshire and the economic fightback against the cuts that started 25 years ago and which led to the fight to defend our steel industry. I ask the minister to ensure that, this evening, he sends out a signal that we will not have to look back to those days for an example of what has to be done to defend the industries that have grown in Lanarkshire out of the mess that was created so long ago. He has an opportunity to do the right thing. It is asking for money in a tight budgetary period, but the failure to deliver that money will undermine the Government's own strategy. That is the problem for the minister. He can throw figures around as much as he wants tonight, but it is the Government's problem—the Government created it and he must solve it.

I ask the minister to reflect on the fact that the public inquiry that he mentioned related to the Raith interchange. The M8 project was an entirely separate project when this Government inherited it. The public inquiry into the Raith interchange is no reason for delay on the M8 project.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many post-probationary teachers it expects to be in full-time employment at the start of the 2011-12 school term. (S3O-12390)

Last week my colleague Peter Peacock asked why the Scottish National Party never argued prior to coming to power that there was an oversupply of teachers and yet is doing so now. In response, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning spent a few minutes indulging in rhetorical verbiage—as is his wont—but did not actually answer the question. He stated that Mr Peacock had conducted an extremely effective smoke-and-mirrors job. I will ask him again: if the teacher numbers that he inherited were just smoke and mirrors, was it the smoke or the mirrors that he pledged to maintain, or was that just one more of the Government's promises that it had no idea how to fulfil and no real plan for? We cannot trust a word that the Government says about providing probationary teachers with a permanent job.

I thank the cabinet secretary for early sight of his statement. It is clearly more interesting for what it omits than what it tells us. We will study in detail his proposal on a supermarket tax to assess what damage it will cause but, regardless of what statistical trickery he employs in the local government settlement, the cabinet secretary cannot disguise the fact that it is a bad package for our local councils. As he has decided to threaten to cut budgets by 6.4 per cent if councils do not comply with his coercion, the cabinet secretary has removed the pistol that he has pressed against the heads of local councils for the past three years merely to replace it with a blunderbuss. So much for respecting local democracy. In spite of the gloss that has been placed on the funding package, we should make no mistake about its consequences: police numbers will fall and teacher numbers will continue to plummet.

The Minister for Parliamentary Business may laugh but, as we see from press reports today, social and care services will be decimated by the settlement. The cabinet secretary can hide the figures but he cannot run from them.  Councils are presented as contributors to the national purpose and five strategic objectives but no data are presented to validate those assertions. Will the cabinet secretary produce a performance report on those outcomes since 2007 so that proper assessment can be carried out? The cabinet secretary claims partnership working with councils on targets and outcomes, so will he explain why, overall, the national performance framework reports progress on only three of the 11 purpose targets and 19 of the 45 national performance indicators? No costings are provided for spending commitments on policing and teacher numbers, unlike in the 1999 to 2007 format, so will Mr Swinney explain why that vital information is missing? The table on specific grant funding has been removed. With £1.1 billion of spend, including police grant, it is essential to scrutinise the reality of the cabinet secretary’s policy assumptions. Will he now produce the table on specific grant funding?

Show us the figures.

In the short time that is available, it is impossible to consider in depth all of the issues that are raised in the bill and the wider implications of all the bill's consequences. In speaking today, I have the support of my colleagues Elaine Smith, who represents Coatbridge and Chryston, and Karen Whitefield, who represents Airdrie and Shotts. They cannot be here today, due to the inclement weather, but they would have joined me in opposing the bill at decision time. As the convener of the cross-party group on palliative care and the cross-party group on disability, I have had the opportunity to listen to a range of expertise on this matter, and can arrive at no other conclusion than that this bill should be opposed. My main concern with the bill is that its supporters say that it is "consistent and compatible with palliative care as an important part of comprehensive end of life care". Fundamentally, though, palliative care has nothing to do with euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide. It has been made absolutely clear to me that the fact that physician-assisted suicide is currently illegal allows palliative care professionals to discuss death and dying freely with patients. In fact, the question, "Have you ever thought that life is not worth living?" is one that palliative care professionals often ask, and frank discussions about such subjects are an essential part of end of life care and helping people to move past suicidal thoughts. Changing the law to legalise assisted suicide could cause patients to see such discussions as a cue to consider ending their life, and would therefore prevent professionals from providing that integral component of palliative care to patients. The bill assumes that autonomy is a generally accepted principle on which to base law. In fact, the law exists to protect us all, and often curtails individual autonomy in order to safeguard others.  Many of those approaching the end of their lives are vulnerable, but that does not make them weak. Vulnerability is part of a person's humanity. It should be respected but not exploited, and as legislators we must offer protection against the situation that is emerging in which someone could be exploited. The proponents of physician-assisted suicide constantly reference the Oregon Death with Dignity Act 1997 and cite evidence of good practice there and in Holland to support their position. However, palliative care as we know it in Scotland and the United Kingdom does not exist in Oregon and Holland. No hospice or hospital in Oregon allows physician-assisted suicide on its premises, so Oregon does not provide any evidence that physician-assisted suicide and palliative care can co-exist. That might be an uncomfortable truth for the bill's supporters, but it is the truth nonetheless. People look to doctors and nurses for a reflection of their worth. Dignity is not about physical perfection—everyone is worthy. As those who work in palliative care and with people who have disabilities are well aware, a high percentage of people have suicidal ideas, but those ideas change over time. Under the bill's proposals, if a depression diagnosis were missed, all safeguards would fail. There is a small minority of people who are currently not adequately helped by palliative care. The development of palliative drugs is very expensive, and there is a danger that money would not be spent on such development if assisted dying became an option. Just because we cannot relieve all pain does not mean that we should change the way in which doctors and nurses work. Many places think that they are providing the best palliative care possible, but they are not. Palliative care has much room for improvement, and the bill would undermine those improvements. As the cabinet secretary said, the living and dying well action plan is a positive measure, which requires our support and should not be undermined. The proposed new law is dangerous and unnecessary. Society needs to know that we cannot have both physician-assisted suicide and palliative care. In reality, we can have only one or the other.

I define it in terms of intent, just as doctors do. They know the difference, which is why they can consider the issues much  more clearly than we can. There is no grey area in the way that Margo MacDonald suggests. Intent is everything in that circumstance, but she ignores that fact. Not everyone has an articulate and forceful personality, and for those who are unable to express themselves with confidence, coercion could be a real risk. I doubt that anyone would argue that someone should have a bad life rather than a good death. What is in dispute, however, is whether allowing the legal right to choose to die at the hands of a doctor is the solution that this Parliament should give to someone who believes that they can no longer tolerate their life. We face a momentous decision, as a bill such as the one that is before us represents an irrevocable step. As a supporter of the greater development of palliative care, I hope that colleagues will choose the positive course that is available through palliation to help people to have a good death rather than the negative alternative that is contained in this bill.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

He does not want to take my response.

This weekend, Scottish football faces a crisis that was brought about because a senior referee made a mistake and lied to cover it up. Having failed in their effort to hoodwink their way out of the error, the referees have called a strike to deflect attention away from the failure of their deception strategy. Having heard the arguments put forward by the SNP to justify its deceitful plans for a one-year budget, I am left wondering whether the SNP is using the same strategists as the Scottish Football Association referees. For example, last week I was interviewed on holyrood.tv alongside Nigel Don on the implications of there being only a one-year budget. The normally rational Mr Don unfortunately resorted to reading from his central office briefing and rehearsed the ludicrous argument that we need a one-year budget because—as the SNP apparently believes—telling people what the budget is over three years or more will limit their thoughts on how to manage in the future and will prevent them from focusing on the immediate problems that the country faces. What patronising nonsense. As the SCVO said in its recent written submission to the Local Government and Communities Committee,  "if we want to really open up the sector's potential, then the setting of a one year only budget will make medium term planning over 3 years difficult." SNP back benchers may not want to acknowledge the fact that the third sector might know what it is talking about, but I certainly do. We can hardly blame SNP back benchers for talking rubbish, however, given the example that was set for them by the Minister for Housing and Communities, Alex Neil, on Sunday's "The Politics Show". Reverting to his previous role as minister for television studios and defender of the indefensible, Mr Neil attempted to mislead people, on the BBC, by claiming that the local government deal had the agreement of all the political parties within COSLA and that our local authorities were happy with their lot. Let me correct Mr Neil and assure Parliament that, although Labour-led local authorities may, ultimately, have to succumb to the SNP's blackmail and respond to the horse's head that has been placed in their budget by agreeing to the package that has been forced on them, the Labour group in COSLA boycotted the negotiations and in no way endorses their outcome. COSLA's Labour group leader, Councillor James McCabe, said that the agreement merely indicates that the SNP Government has "gone from deception to dishonesty and now dictatorship". He went on to call the deal the worst example that he had ever seen of central Government dictating to local government in order to have councils do the SNP Government's dirty work for it. On Sunday, I spoke to a local authority chief executive who told me that he feared that the best plans that he could put in place under a one-year budget may, ultimately, bring greater difficulties in the longer term because he may overestimate the cuts that are to come to certain sectors or decide that his figures are wrong, creating huge holes for later years.

All chief executives know that they must adjust budgets—that is normal practice. However, following the cabinet secretary's logic, we might as well have one-month budgets. Things can change over time and chief executives have to react to different circumstances. Their budgets must be fluid but they can be planned over a longer period. In its written submission to the Local Government and Communities Committee, COSLA itself said that a one-year budget is  "a fundamental concern for Local Government which needs greater certainty over the longer term". To say that these organisations cannot use that information effectively or need to be protected from having to deal with difficult projections until after this difficult first year is an insult to them. It is, though, highly indicative of the contempt with which the SNP Government treats the Scottish people. Labour councillors and MSPs do not and will not agree with anyone who believes that this one-year settlement serves the needs of our local authorities, which have to plan for the delivery of services on which vulnerable people, especially, depend. We know that these are difficult times, but they are times when real leaders stand up to be counted and do not play games. This one-year budget—or, more accurately, this one-month budget that takes us from April to May—is a mistake and the arguments that are being deployed to justify it will not wash. Yesterday's debate saw the cabinet secretary show regret and issue an apology. Unfortunately, on television last night, the cabinet secretary's attitude changed back to the arrogant and dismissive tone that caused the problem in the first place. I hope that, come 5 o'clock tonight, when the Parliament again makes a decision that says that the cabinet secretary is wrong, he will reflect on that, change his mind and do what is right for the country, not what is right for himself and his party. The country deserves better than this, and Labour is ready to deliver it if the SNP is not.

Will Mr Swinney take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention on that point?

Surely the cabinet secretary recognises that the council tax freeze has been underfunded and has damaged local authority services. The powers that are available to the Scottish Government are not the same as the ones that he uses to hold a gun to local authorities' heads by threatening to take away the money that is rightfully theirs in the first place to sustain the council tax freeze.

In this morning's debate, we have already heard a number of members outline a litany of the Scottish Government's mistakes, mismanagement and muddles. Given the plethora of bad decisions that this Government has made over the past three or more years, no doubt we will hear many more as the debate progresses. While the Government's financial incompetence has resulted in a catalogue of broken promises, wayward priorities and puerile policies, there has at least been consistency in the way the SNP has pursued its populist polices against all the evidence that has been arrayed against it. There has also been consistency in the way the Conservative party has always supported the Government on the budget and in pursuit of its aims in moving forward. When a Tory budget is being delivered, it is hardly surprising to find the Tory party supporting it. In spite of the evidence of the damage that has been caused to local government services by the previous three years of underfunding, and regardless of the service reductions and job losses that we have already witnessed in local areas, Mr Swinney is ignoring the conclusion of his own independent budget review and is persisting in trying to sustain his underfunded council tax freeze. I am aware that discussions are ongoing with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and that another deal might be done under which a quid pro quo will be cobbled together that will see the council tax freeze extended for another year.  Holding a gun to councils' heads may achieve the short-term populist outcome that the SNP wants to take into next year's election—

At times, being in the chamber feels like being in an episode of "QI"—we just have to say the buzzword and Mr FitzPatrick is on his feet. I am happy to hear his pearl of wisdom.

The legislation is in place for that to happen The Government's dependence on populist rhetoric to attempt to attain political advantage with the electorate has clearly blinded it to the damage that it is doing to Scottish local government. A key criticism of the council tax freeze has come from the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy, which believes that a consequence of the freeze "is that local autonomy has effectively been limited" and that "accountability has been impaired by this national arrangement." Unlike Mr Salmond and Mr Swinney, I respect the autonomy and local democratic accountability of local authorities and I share councils' contempt for the shameless politicking behind the SNP's commitment to a two-year freeze based on a one-year budget. That was outlined in last week's letter in the press from COSLA leader Pat Watters, who exposed the baloney that is Mr Swinney's two-year commitment. I fully recognise that it will be for local authorities to decide whether they accept the one-year budget that Mr Swinney proposes and whether it will include a continuation of the council tax freeze. However, regardless of the outcome of those negotiations, this question will remain for us: just how many services is John Swinney prepared to see being cut from our councils for Alex Salmond to save the price of a good curry on his council tax per month? As the Institute of Revenues, Rating and Valuation pointed out a few months ago: "the current year-on-year council tax freeze ... could not sustain the present level of service delivered by local government, even in the medium term." The freeze appears at best to have simply put off the inevitable and, at worst, to have seriously damaged local services.  The Government puts the council tax freeze before all else, even though the concordat had commitments such as support for kinship carers. Those hard-pressed grandparents are still waiting for the concordat to deliver for them. The concordat also pledged to bestow class sizes of 18, but all we got was another broken promise. Already, 3,000 teachers and 1,000 classroom assistants have gone under the agreement, along with the long-term commitment to maintain teacher numbers. It will be interesting to see the outcome of the discussions with COSLA on what further damage the teaching profession is to face. Who else will be offered up as a sacrifice on the altar of an underfunded populist policy that is unsustainable and damaging to local government? No one likes to pay more tax, and promising to abolish a tax is a popular policy. Unfortunately for Mr Swinney, he has made that promise before and has no credibility left. George Bernard Shaw once said: "For every complex problem there is a simple solution that is wrong." If the council tax is the complicated quandary, then the local income tax is the easy, but misguided, response. No doubt the SNP will try to resurrect that populist pledge for the next election, even though it jettisoned it in this session when it found out the damage that it would do. In spite of the expert opinion against the Government's position, Mr Swinney continues to ignore the facts, prefers to bury his head in the sand and ploughs on with his economic mismanagement regardless. The council tax freeze fig leaf is wilting, but a forest of fig trees could not provide enough cover to hide the Government's economic incompetence. Mr Swinney wants our councils to pay for that ineptitude but, ultimately, the Government will pay the electoral price because Scotland knows that it deserves better and will get better with Labour.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made towards implementation of the curriculum for excellence. (S3O-11743)

Although everyone remains committed to the curriculum for excellence and wishes to see its effective implementation as the cabinet secretary said, does he not agree that when major concerns are still being expressed by the very teachers who have to deliver it, he should listen to them rather than acting like the school bully and kicking them off the management board? Will he tell Parliament just what it was that the Scottish Secondary Teachers Association did or said that was so bad that it led him to discontinue its involvement in the management of the implementation of the curriculum for excellence?

That was an aggressive soundbite right there.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government plans to give local authorities a one-year budget only. (S3F-2654)

I thank the First Minister for confirming that that will be the case. Is he aware that today's edition of The Herald  includes a letter from the COSLA president, Councillor Watters, who has written in to express his frustration that the First Minister continues "to tout the fallacy that" he "can deliver a council tax freeze",  because the fact is that he "simply can't and it is outrageous that" he continues "to mislead the public." Councillor Watters also says that the First Minister was being "disrespectful" to councillors and "ultimately ineffectual". Does the First Minister agree that, given the level of cuts that local government faces, offering it a one-year budget is not good enough, especially when he sees fit to make two-year promises on its behalf? Why does his Government continue to refuse to come forward with budgets? Will he come forward with longer funding proposals, or will he persist in riding roughshod over local government and continue to tout his fallacies, his fibs and his falsehoods?

As many of the students who have gone back to school recently did, I normally look forward to the start of a new parliamentary term with a sense of anticipation. However, we are barely into the second day and my expectations have almost evaporated after hearing the uninspiring and visionless statement that the First Minister delivered yesterday, and the rather disappointing start that the cabinet secretary made this morning. Perhaps it is the optimist in me that raised my expectation levels too high, so I will bring them down to the level that the Government has set and look at the IBR in that vein. Someone once said that if all economists were laid end to end, they would never reach a conclusion. From the IBR report, it would appear that the same could be said about some Government advisers. The document is more of a catalogue than a road map leading us towards the solutions to the problems in our public finances that were caused by the global recession. If the cabinet secretary was an optimist, like me, he could view the report as being a glass half full. It is a helpful document, as far as it goes, because it challenges us to seek reforms, modernise services and deliver effective monitoring and scrutiny processes. We could use it if we saw it as a menu of options that could help us to make the decisions that we have to face. It would be understandable if Mr Swinney had taken a pessimistic, glass-half-empty perspective on the picture that has been painted by the Beveridge committee, and considered the panel's diagnosis as simply pointing us towards an inevitable and unpalatable amputation of the limbs of public services. The fact that he was 11 minutes into his speech this morning before he outlined his plans to go for another town hall tour to prevaricate shows how typically cynical the Scottish Government is. It spends its time hunting for someone to blame for taking what is missing from the glass rather than looking to do what it can with what remains. Public engagement is all well and good, but decisive action seems to be beyond this Administration when a scapegoat serves it better. Like the programme for government that was trooped out yesterday, the cabinet secretary's response to the IBR report is more noticeable for what it does not say than it is for what it does say. In addition to not proposing anything constructive to deal with the problems that Beveridge has identified, the Government has added to them by cutting 2,500 teachers and 4,000 national health service jobs while concentrating on wasteful initiatives such as the Scottish Futures Trust when its budget was growing. The mess that the  Government has made of public services as a consequence is not so much the result of hard times coming but of soft times going. We have known for three years that local authority services in Scotland have had to bear the brunt of economic pressures because of the additional burdens that have been placed on them in combination with the underfunded council tax freeze. Those further pressures have caused a crescendo of anguished pleas to emerge from our local authorities, so I had hoped that the cabinet secretary would indicate this morning that he had listened to the requests that have been made by councillors, especially the SNP ones, to end the council tax freeze, and told us that he now intends to assist our councils rather than resist them. It is disappointing that all that he has indicated is yet more prevarication.

I will answer Mr FitzPatrick in two ways.

I do not pluck numbers out of thin air, which is what some people would prefer us to do. We know from our local authority colleagues and the trade unions that operate within local authorities that the burdens that have been placed on local government have not been funded properly by the current Administration. That is a fact. Yesterday, the First Minister told us that, had the Calman income tax proposals been introduced for the start of the last spending review, the fall in income tax revenue because of the recession would have resulted in a Scottish budget for 2009-10 that was almost £900 million lower. Imagine the devastation in local government services during that same period if a local income tax had formed the basis for funding local government services. They would have been decimated. So, we will not take any lectures from the SNP, which wanted to decimate local government, has decimated local government, and now refuses to engage positively with local government other than scaremongering with the view that council taxes are going to go through the roof. There is no requirement for that to happen if the Government properly funds the services that it asks the local authorities to deliver. It is not only local authorities that have been let down by the Government. We have been told that  the SNP will now turn to the people of Scotland to get their backing for a referendum, but the fact is that the Government will not use the powers that are available to it for the benefit of the people of this country, which is what the people want here and now. The people of Scotland will not forget that they have been abandoned during the past three years and that the SNP has abdicated its responsibilities, which appears to be its continuing modus operandi. No doubt the SNP is already working on another version of the blame game that has marked its tenure in office, but when the people of Scotland bring that tenure to an end next May, the SNP will pay the price that it deserves to pay.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it remains its intention to extend the council tax freeze in 2011-12. (S3O-11058)

When the con act was set up a few years ago, the calculation was that £70 million per year would suffice to address the council tax increases that might otherwise have occurred. In the interim, there was a recession, which caused a reduction in incomes for local authorities that was never addressed or readdressed by the con act. This year, the trade union Unison has calculated that the recession had the impact of reducing local authority budgets by £300 million, causing 3,000 job losses. Can the cabinet secretary confirm that he intends to redress that?

The cabinet secretary never takes interventions.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the Minister for Culture and External Affairs has plans to meet the incoming Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs. (S3O-10591)

When the minister meets the secretary of state, will she impress on him that, although it would be inappropriate for the Scottish Government to duplicate any work by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the Department for International Development, the unique partnership in areas of special interest between Scotland and Malawi that was established by the former First Minister Jack McConnell should continue to be respected and supported?

I congratulate Malcolm Chisholm on securing this debate on an important topic. The motion correctly states that access to and provision of lymphoedema services varies throughout the country. We need a high-quality and equitable service that meets the needs of people in Scotland who have lymphoedema or who are at risk of acquiring it. My knowledge of lymphoedema comes from the issue having been for several years a standing item on the agenda of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on palliative care, and from family experience. My mother currently benefits from the services that are provided for her by a lymphoedema clinic. However, to access that necessary service—which she obtained only in the past few years, having suffered from the condition for almost 50 years—she has to travel by ambulance from her home in Lanarkshire to a hospital in Glasgow three times per week. Although I appreciate the assistance and treatment that she is receiving, I cannot help but wonder why she cannot receive the service at one of her local hospitals or health centres. The lymphoedema research report that the University of Glasgow published in 2008 confirms the information that has been provided by Breakthrough Breast Cancer—that there is inequity in provision of lymphoedema treatment in Scotland. The report states that some services actually exclude lymphoedema sufferers who did not acquire the condition because of cancer. My mother suffers from lymphoedema as a result of childbirth, not cancer treatment, but her pain is no less real than that which is suffered by my wife, who contracted lymphoedema as a result of breast cancer. However, their treatment has differed significantly, and that must be addressed. Patients with primary lymphoedema and those with lymphoedema that has resulted from causes other than breast cancer are least well served. I know of a young boy who fell from his bike and damaged the lymph nodes in his groin, which resulted in lymphoedema. He did not receive treatment for his condition, because the priority at that time went to cancer patients. The University of Glasgow study concluded that a referral to a specialist lymphoedema service provides patients with a feeling of security and assurance that their condition is taken seriously  and is manageable. It can transform patients' lives, even in cases when the condition is long-standing and less amenable to treatment. However, late referral is causing a burden for our NHS. It is amazing to see statistics showing just how far the service has to go to provide the service that lymphoedema patients require. A study that was carried out in 2008 showed that there were only three full-time practitioners treating lymphoedema in NHS boards in Scotland at that time. In addition, only 9 per cent of practitioners reported having undertaken comprehensive training to the level of a recognised qualification in lymphoedema management. The study also revealed that at that time the perception was that there was often a mismatch of skills. In some areas practitioners with limited training struggled to manage patients with complicated problems, while in other areas specialists treated fairly routine and uncomplicated patients. I seek assurances from the minister that the situation has now been identified and that it is at least substantially on the way to being rectified, with the appropriate staff carrying out the necessary treatment with the required resources. Lymphoedema is a growing problem for our NHS as the incidence of this long-term condition increases with age and there is no known cure. Therefore I urge the minister to make adequate funding available to treat all sufferers and to set out a national perspective and approach to planning. I thank Malcolm Chisholm again for giving us the opportunity to raise the issue.

I would be more than happy to join a progressive alliance if the SNP was actually a progressive party.

I congratulate Duncan McNeil and the members of the Local Government and Communities Committee on undertaking an inquiry into local government finance and on producing such a helpful document at the end of their deliberations. I also thank the clerks of the committee for steering the members through to their considered outcome. From identifying benchmarking as the best way in which to improve performance and efficiency to asking the Scottish Government what action it intends to take in relation to the Arbuthnott report's suggestions on shared services, and from recognising that there are other ways of holding down costs other than freezing or cutting pay to criticising forcefully the process of e-auctions in the awarding of contracts for social services, the report has been a worthwhile exercise. Above all, the committee has been helpful in asking for a focus on the priorities that our councils need to set in order to ensure that front-line services for our local areas and vulnerable communities' needs are not endangered. The starting point for that is a time when local government has been given a standstill budget. Although the Scottish Government's own budget is going up by £1 billion this year, the SNP's cuts are happening now. We all know that, as a direct result of Mr Swinney's decisions, jobs are being cut, charges for services are increasing and  previously eligible people are being excluded from services. On Monday's "Newsnight Scotland", however, the cabinet secretary gave a good impersonation of a deserter fleeing the battlefield, so keen was he to abandon his responsibilities for protecting front-line council jobs in Scotland. Mr Swinney may dodge the questions on "Newsnight Scotland", but everyone knows that the demands on local government have increased and there is not enough funding to meet them because of the cabinet secretary's funding allocations. We saw in his interview that the Scottish Government is in denial about the cuts that are happening now in local government and the role that it has to play in them. Rather than address the actual situation, Mr Swinney continues with the pretence that was established between the Scottish Government and COSLA in their Alice in Wonderland concordat. In spite of claims to the contrary, there is clearly a mismatch between the Scottish Government's claims that it has provided enough funding and local experiences of classroom assistants being laid off, pensioners being charged more for services and people being told that they no longer qualify for previously free services. The SNP may insist that the council tax freeze is fully funded, but even if that were true—which I contest—the Government is not adequately funding all the additional responsibilities that it has passed on to local government or taking into account the additional pressures and demands that have been created by the recession.

I do not believe that there is any inconsistency. Andy Kerr asked the cabinet secretary to be honest about the decisions that must be made now, instead of deferring them, as Mr MacAskill asked his officials to do, until a time that was more beneficial to the SNP. Aberdeenshire Council, City of Edinburgh Council, Dundee City Council, Falkirk Council, Highland Council and South Ayrshire Council have all asked publicly for the pressures on them to be eased and for the council tax freeze to be reviewed. The fact is that those who are hardest hit by the recession, and by social exclusion generally, are those who benefit least from the council tax freeze, yet Mr Swinney's response to the committee's report shows that he intends to do nothing to address that.  The Institute for Fiscal Studies has said: "the gains from a freeze in council tax are greatest as a percentage of net income for the middle of the income distribution ... The largest cash gains go to the richest households, however, as they tend to live in larger properties with the largest council tax liabilities." When I challenged John Swinney that Scottish ministers, rather than people on lower incomes, are among those who benefit most from the council tax freeze, he argued that that was fair enough as ministers' pay had been frozen. Rather than worry about poor Mr Swinney having to make do on a cabinet secretary's meagre frozen salary, I point out that the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy believes that another consequence of the council tax freeze is that "local autonomy has effectively been limited" and "accountability has been impaired by this national arrangement". CIPFA also says: "Continuation of a national arrangement to freeze local taxation undoubtedly impacts adversely on local accountability." It estimates that "the council tax freeze has significantly impacted upon the gearing effect and that the balance of funding between local taxation and Scottish Government grant is now 85% to 15%." In light of all the information that is available, when every commentator, trade union and financial expert can identify that autonomy has been eroded, and when cuts of more than £300 million are threatening the jobs of more than 3,000 local government employees because of his current budget, let alone what we may face in the future, only in concordat wonderland could the cabinet secretary argue that he has provided a good deal for local government. Mr Swinney's glib responses to the report's recommendations clearly indicate that he has no grasp of the reality facing our local authorities and no idea of how to address the problems that they face in the future.

Like the committee, I welcome the fact that Audit Scotland is undertaking a review of the achievement of efficiency savings, as we may get some hard facts on the true picture in respect of cuts and savings rather than the Scottish Government and COSLA's self-assurances and mutual back-slapping. The committee is—

I cannot let the minister get away with that. There is no contradiction between what I said and what Elaine Smith said. We represent constituencies that sit side by side and we are aware of the number of waste facilities that exist in the localities that we represent. An additional facility in the area would not be welcome. Some companies are looking to North Lanarkshire because of refusals in other areas. We want everyone to take their share.

Last week, at rural affairs and environment question time, I put a question on waste management to the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment. I was pleased to hear Richard Lochhead outline the progress  that has been made since devolution in 1999. The cabinet secretary rightly highlighted the excellent contribution that local authorities have made thus far. The purpose of my question last week was not to obtain a list of statistics about where we are at present in respect of waste management, but to highlight the concerns that companies that seek to be involved in waste management in the years ahead have put to me. Having identified the role that they can play in meeting the Scottish Government's waste management targets, the companies have set about proposing to councils how they can do so, only, in certain council areas, to be refused planning permission. I am not asking the Scottish Government to take away planning powers from local authorities to ensure that such proposals are delivered—the companies I am talking about are not Donald Trump companies—but for the Government and our local authorities to take a joined-up approach. That would ensure that we not only reduced the amount of waste created by both the domestic and non-domestic sectors, but had the means to dispose of the waste and the funding to achieve the goals that we had set. If we are to reduce further the amount of waste that is treated in Scotland, the Scottish Government will have to face up to its responsibilities to reduce the amount of waste that is created and secure the availability of appropriate waste management facilities. Some councils cannot be allowed to duck what is required; they are using the concordat to avoid taking their share of the responsibility. Our local authorities have rightly embraced zero waste strategies, with some already having made a good start at waste minimisation but, when it comes to waste disposal, many appear to want to leave it to other councils to do their dirty work for them. Waste is a consequence and symptom of the type of lives that we live. The challenge is not only to come up with grand plans for living our lives in ways that do not contribute to resource depletion, but to find practical ways of addressing what we waste and dealing with waste where it happens. It is not enough to ask all the right questions and have good targets, we must also will the means to deliver on the strategy. We must go beyond doing the easy things. It may not be low-hanging fruit that we are after, perhaps it is low-lying waste, but we have to deal with the bigger issues and not just tackle the headline grabbers. All local authorities must be made to address the planning permission problems that they are creating so that waste is processed throughout Scotland and not transported around the country for disposal. We must avoid the situation whereby some local authority areas become dumping  grounds at a time when others refuse to accept their responsibility to plan for waste management facilities in their areas. The business of waste management has to be the business of both the Scottish Government and local authorities. The main requirement from both is commitment. That said, if we are genuinely committed to a sustainable future, we have to commit to the kind of planning decisions that are necessary to achieve that end. The word on the matter that we are hearing from the Scottish Government and our councils is unequivocal. That is to be welcomed. However, the evidence shows that their commitment is, at times, less than full.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making on meeting its targets on waste management. (S3O-10392)

Has the cabinet secretary heard the expressions of concern that have been brought to my attention by companies that seek to be involved in the management of waste at local authority level? They are continually being refused planning permission to operate in the waste management field. Although it is always a good idea to wash one's hands after handling waste, surely it is not a good idea for the Scottish Government to wash its hands of ensuring that local authorities work with those companies and deal with the planning permission problems, so that waste is processed throughout Scotland and some local authority areas do not become dumping grounds when other local authorities refuse to accept the facilities in their area.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

My brief intervention is to give Iain Smith the opportunity to correct what he said at the start of his speech. He said that, having listened to me, he understood why the Labour Party opposes electoral reform. He sat on the Local Government and Transport Committee with me and heard me making those arguments. Will he retract his accusation?

From speeches that I have made in Parliament before, members will know that I have always wanted electoral reform. In previous debates on the subject, over the years, I have supported the basis for my position by quoting one of my Labour heroes, Aneurin Bevan, who said: "The purpose of getting power is to be able to give it away." I have also pointed out to colleagues previously that Labour was founded to break the established electoral system, as a modern, pluralist society requires that we reconcile the needs and desires of different sectors of society. In this morning's earlier debate, Elaine Smith rightly referred to James Keir Hardie and the principles on which he founded the Labour Party. As the MSP for the constituency in which James Keir Hardie was born, I am proud to share his conviction in and support for electoral reform. Just as Elaine Smith was right to highlight Labour's views on the pay and dignity of working people, I agree with the words of the Labour Party in 1913, which stated that "no system of election can be satisfactory which does not give opportunity to all parties to obtain representation in proportion to their strength." To me, that is a matter of principle, and there is much about the outcome of PR systems that is flawed. For example, we have never been told what shady deal was done behind closed doors to get Patrick Harvie his convenership of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee. However, every now and again we get indications of the outcome, and this debate might well be one of them. Tricia Marwick says that she is getting withdrawal symptoms through the lack of discussion of the subject. Why has it taken three years from the first STV elections in local government for the issue to be raised again, especially since all of the pro-reform triumvirate opposite told us that the new system that had been introduced was insufficient to meet their demands and the principles of proportionality? Why have we never been asked, in the three years of this parliamentary session, to look again at the new local government system? I well remember the cries of the oh-so-principled parties opposite that we needed six and seven-member wards in local areas for STV to be acceptable to them. Yet, now that the new system has delivered SNP and Lib Dem councils all over the country and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities is weighted in favour of the SNP, they have all gone  quiet. Because they now have the power that they wanted, the new system suits them just fine. They are doing well enough for the issue to have disappeared from the radar screen until now. I cannot agree with Murdo Fraser that the debate is welcome. The timing of the debate, in the middle of a general election campaign, and the abandonment of a chance for the Greens to discuss environmental issues, for example, expose it for the opportunistic backroom deal that it clearly is. I suggest that Robin Harper and Patrick Harvie would have been better analysing the failures of the SNP on climate change rather than helping it out as part of their backroom deal.

The Greens could have used their time this morning to do that—it was not their debate a couple of weeks ago. This is their time, this morning, and neither of their two choices has been to debate climate change or environmental issues. They have clearly brought to the chamber a debate that suits their partnership with the SNP Government. I would have thought that, in the middle of a general election, the Greens would have wanted to talk about the environment in at least one of their subject debates. That just goes to show that, if we really want to hold the Government to account on its failings on climate change, we must look to Sarah Boyack and the Labour Party for a genuine commitment on the subject. I thank Patrick Harvie for giving me the chance to say that.

Will the minister take an intervention on that?

I thank Christine Grahame for making that point, but the point that I was making was that people expressed concern throughout the bill's progress that the bill could criminalise them. I was not saying that that would be the impact of the bill but that that concern had been expressed.

We can legislate for aspects of many issues that we debate in the Parliament, such as problems with alcohol, diet or antisocial behaviour, but resolution of the problem will mostly lie with the degree of responsibility that we as individuals take. The same can be said for the behaviour of dogs. It is self-evident that some dogs are more dangerous than others, but all dogs can be potentially dangerous. Various breeds can be considerably stronger and larger than a person of average size, and some breeds are more aggressive because of years of breeding. However, whatever type of dog we are discussing, we know that effective training, socialisation and proper care can make a significant impact. Owners who do not properly socialise their dogs and individuals who are engaged in criminal or risk-taking activities and who keep powerful dogs as a status symbol or an accessory to their own aggressive behaviour are more often the problem than the type of dog that is being considered. We should never lose sight of that, even if we think that some breeds are problematic in themselves. There is evidence of a growing trend for gangs to have aggressive dogs as weapons, and genuine concerns exist among some dog owners that the bill will do nothing to affect the criminal element that is most likely to keep dangerous dogs. They are concerned that we are in danger of criminalising law-abiding dog owners. I think that there are good enough safeguards in the bill to ensure that dog owners will not be subjected to unwarranted action against them, and hope that concerns that some people might have will ultimately prove to be unfounded when the bill's provisions begin to take effect. There is some justification for arguing that the current law on possession of banned breeds is not being enforced, but that could be down to flaws in the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991, which we expect to be addressed by passing the bill. There is no doubt that the current legislation on banned breeds is ineffective and difficult to enforce, but I am confident that the new legislation will create the potential for a better system. Moving away from breed-centred legislation will help us to move towards improving public safety, provided that financial resources are provided to make the provisions work. Throughout the passage of the bill, it has been clear that the real issue is responsible ownership. While people remain too lazy to give their dogs the tender loving care that they deserve, we will continue to have a problem with out-of-control dogs. I doubt that the bill will be a magic wand that is capable of dealing with all the issues relating to dangerous dogs—indeed, I am not sure that it was  ever intended to be that—but it is entitled to our support nonetheless, and it will have it at 5 o'clock.

Given statistics showing a 160 per cent increase in the number of dog attacks between 1999 and 2007, it would be a real surprise if no one wanted to address the situation. Faced with that information, it is right that we have had the opportunity to look anew at the prevailing laws on dangerous dogs, particularly as the data that have been presented appear to indicate that the existing legislation has not addressed the problem that led to such a huge outcry in the years before the turn of the century. I therefore congratulate Alex Neil on his initial work and Christine Grahame on introducing the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill and giving the Scottish Parliament the chance to consider how we might improve on the measures that are available to our local authorities and police to tackle this increasing problem. I also congratulate NEBU and the Local Government and Communities Committee on assisting the bill's progress. As has been widely recognised and supported, the bill started out, rightly, by addressing the fact  that the current law's focus, which is mostly on dangerous dogs and particular breeds of dogs, is wrong. It is difficult, though, to establish hard and fast statistics on the extent of problem dog ownership in Scotland; indeed, that has been one of the discussion points about the bill. I do not think it unreasonable to accept the estimate in the bill's supporting documents that there are around 550,000 dogs in Scotland. If the percentage of out-of-control dogs in Scotland is similar to that in London, at around 0.12 per cent, there are likely to be about 650 dogs whose behaviour needs to be addressed. However, given that in 2007 there were 623 reported dog attacks that resulted in injury, never mind the number of incidents of behaviour that would cause a reasonable person a degree of alarm, we might actually be underestimating the scale of misbehaviour in our communities. I think that I have been barked at by about 650 dogs already in this general election campaign, and I have been hospitalised on three occasions because of dog bites. Of course, that might just say something about my own relationship with dogs. In any case, if we accept that the number of control notices can be expected to be close to 1,200, we begin to get to the issue that most concerned me during the passage of the bill and which I highlighted at stage 1: the bill's cost implications. Information from local authorities indicates that the level of staff employed in the control of dogs is, at best, mixed, and that the expected burden on our councils is going to cause many of them difficulties. At a time when we are losing teachers, social workers, home care workers and other necessary front-line staff under the current local government financial strictures, it stretches credulity to be asked to believe that dog wardens and other costs associated with the bill's implementation and application will be immune from the cost pressures that are afflicting other essential services. As many councils have repeatedly flagged up, even if we accept that administration costs will be fairly minimal, the fact is that staff costs will not be so low. That is the main issue confronting our local authorities, and no amount of wishful thinking or positive gloss by the bill's supporters will eradicate local authorities' genuine concern about the financial burden that the legislation will place on them. That said, given the abject failure of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to defend councils from the Scottish Government's cuts, I am a little surprised that it has been so exercised by the legislation's impact. So, along with the majority of those who have commented on the bill, I will be looking at its positive aspects and overlooking COSLA's concerns. Improving the control of dogs, preventing dogs from becoming dangerously out of control,  ensuring that owners are responsible for controlling their dogs wherever they are, including on private property, and improving the care and treatment of dogs are all worthwhile objectives and good enough reasons to support the bill, whatever the misgivings about the finances. I look forward to the remainder of this debate and hope that we will get the expected outcome when we vote at the end of today's business.

In 1977, I began an apprenticeship as a welder. Like many of my friends, neighbours and peers in the steel and coal communities of Lanarkshire, I appreciated the importance of training and skills and the opportunities that they provide. By the time I became a time-served craftsman in the early 1980s, I had begun to witness the decimation of both the steel and coal industries and the trades that were associated with manufacturing and construction. It was to fight against the damage that was being done to our traditional industries at that time that I became active in the Labour and trade union movement. That is why I place such great store in the Government's role in invigorating the construction and manufacturing sectors and investing in skills and training programmes to give young people the same opportunities that I had when I entered the workplace.

It is always regrettable when jobs are lost. It is when we look at why the problems exist and what is being put in place to address them that we start to see the wider picture. Not addressing the problem is the biggest issue as far as we are concerned. We can identify all the problems we want. The important thing is whether we have the attitude and the endeavour to address the problems that are encountered. That is why I am angered by the Scottish Government's failure to provide the capital infrastructure projects that would have built on the legacy that we bequeathed to it and enabled us to fight against the impact of the global recession. That failure is the reason why we need to have this morning's debate. The Scottish Government's failure is the reason why 150 apprentices in Lanarkshire have lost their jobs in the past year. They include young potential  tradesmen such as Nicos Lambrou from Uddingston in my constituency, who was made redundant with a redundancy package of less than a week's wages as he approached the end of his third year as an apprentice joiner with a large well-known building company. He was allowed to finish his advanced craft and design course at college, as it was already paid for, but, one year on, he is still unemployed and is in the predicament of being neither a fully qualified joiner nor an apprentice whom companies would be able to employ. The commitment to continuing support for apprenticeships and all the other schemes is greatly welcome, but the reduction in the maximum age for support to 19 means that that young man is in no position to take advantage of any support networks that are available to allow him to complete his apprenticeship. As time ebbs away, he is losing touch with a career for which he spent a significant amount of time training. What a waste—and what an indictment of ministers, who should be straining every sinew to provide every young person with the right to high-quality training and to finish the training that they started. We have heard how important the construction sector is, and no more so than in Hamilton North and Bellshill, which is home to more construction workers than other constituency in Scotland. Traditionally, Lanarkshire has also been the focus of the Scottish steel industry. The demolition of the Ravenscraig steelworks has bequeathed the area the largest brownfield site in Europe. It is vital that redevelopment of the site progresses, to provide the thousands of new employment opportunities that have long been promised there, but the Administration has been found wanting yet again. It has reduced the project from a national to a regional priority and has deprived it of millions of pounds of Government investment as a result. Only the Dalzell plate mill and the heat treatment section at Clydebridge remain of Motherwell's once thriving iron and steel industry, but the Scottish steel industry retains a highly skilled workforce. The industry has been in a slump of late, as have many other industries—manufacturing has been badly hit—but the industry's work is cyclical. It is vital to retain the workforce's skills to take advantage of the upturn when it comes. The Scottish Government can help to create stable and growing demand for skills by preparing a route map of national infrastructure investment, but the Scottish Futures Trust is not achieving that. Whatever else it might be doing, it is not delivering projects that will put people into jobs. Manufacturing is the cornerstone of any successful and balanced economy. The events of recent months should have shown us that we can no longer rely on the financial sector to prop up  the entire Scottish economy. It is essential to retain our traditional industrial base. As the Association for Consultancy and Engineering says, the Scottish Government needs to take an integrated approach to making the business environment conducive to construction and manufacturing. We need to encourage private sector investment in construction projects. We need clarity about and consistency of funding, rather than the misbegotten Scottish Futures Trust, which whiles away the hours while schools go unbuilt and road projects go unstarted. Given that construction projects can deliver about £2.50 in return for every £1 that is invested, a continued slow-down in capital projects will increase costs and diminish returns for Scottish taxpayers and have a detrimental impact on Scotland's construction industry. Scotland needs a dynamic Government, not a dogmatic one that strangles the industries on which we depend when it should draw on all the capacity that is at our disposal to breathe life into our economy. It is not good enough to have warm words; we need action. What we have seen from the Scottish Government has resulted in people such as my constituent being left behind, being disappointed and having no prospect of progressing the career to which they were entitled. I benefited from Government support when it was necessary. It is time that the current Government stepped up to help people like me.

I congratulate Nigel Don on bringing to the chamber a debate on the 450th anniversary of the reformation, and ask to be excused if I appear to be more of a poison in the punch bowl than a concelebrant of what some observers have described as a visionary—indeed, utopian—blueprint for what religion in Scotland should be. Although it is difficult to argue that the motivation behind what John Knox and his colleagues drew up in 1560 was the establishment of a better society, I have to say that any judgment on that outcome is a very subjective matter. Everyone has a different perspective on the impact of the reformation; I am told that my great-great-great-grandfather died at the battle of the Boyne—an event that is one of the more contentious aspects of the history and development of Protestantism in the British isles. Apparently, my ancestor died because he was camping in the field next door and was killed when he went over to ask them to keep the noise down. I often make light of such things as the battle of the Boyne and its on-going celebrations, because it is often the best way to address the consequences that often accompany the divisions  that persist in the wake of the reformation and its birth pangs. I would like the anniversary of the reformation to be recognised because it provides us all with an opportunity to look anew at what it delivered, where it has taken us and what type of Scotland it has shaped, especially for those of us like me whose history and background is not within the Protestant faith but is clearly affected by it. I believe that it is vital that the Catholic church in Scotland should officially take part in celebrations to mark the 450th anniversary of the reformation. Its involvement would help to address any concerns that may exist—rightly or wrongly—that celebrating the reformation would result in Protestant triumphalism. Whatever view one takes of faith, it is incontrovertible that the reformation is one of the most singularly important events in the history of Scotland. It undoubtedly altered the nation's Christian heritage, and created the structures that shaped our schools, universities, democratic institutions and laws. Catholic countries have all those institutions too, and they are also shaped by the predominant church in those countries. However, I often sense that the Church of Scotland is almost apologetic about the impact that it has had, while the church of Rome glorifies in its impact. That should not be the case, but one wonders why the Scottish Government has not done more to promote the positive side of the recognition of Scotland's Christian traditions. Perhaps it is in thrall to the secularist tradition that now permeates society. All Christians, and all Scotland, should recognise the reformation in order to appreciate Scotland's Christian heritage. I would welcome the minister telling us tonight that the Scottish Government will throw off its self-imposed shackles and take forward a much more positive agenda to help the Church of Scotland to celebrate its birthday.

When people are having to go without, it would be perverse for anyone to consider the assistance that is being provided and say that because it is insufficient to address the problem entirely it should not be provided at all. Let me make it clear from the outset that Labour will support this afternoon's vote on the order on that basis. Although we consider that what is on offer is insufficient to meet the needs of local government, the moneys that have been made available by the Scottish National Party Government to fund the council tax freeze are all that is available, and it is better to have the money in the coffers of our local councils than not to have it. Unison's research makes the plight of our local authorities abundantly clear. The union has uncovered cuts of more than £300 million across local government, with planned job losses of more than 3,000. Audit Scotland has also confirmed that the SNP Government is responsible for a real-terms cut in council budgets, and the recent budget round provides all the evidence that we need that that is the case. That is why, when councils were considering their budgets this year, East Ayrshire Council looked at cutting the number of community wardens and introducing charges for music tuition in schools; the City of Edinburgh Council looked at cutting funding for community groups; Dumfries  and Galloway Council looked at charging disabled drivers for blue badges; East Lothian Council looked at increasing burial charges and raising the price of school meals; and Fife Council looked at increasing charges for community alarms. The litany of decimation goes on. Dundee City Council tells us that, although it will receive £1.76 million as its share of the £70 million grant for the council tax freeze, it has to find additional cuts of £5.8 million if it is to achieve the freeze. That is the reality of the order. The cuts that will result from it will affect every community in Scotland and will often hit the poorest and most vulnerable people the hardest. It is simply unfair and unjust that schoolchildren and the elderly are being asked to pay for the SNP's underfunded council tax freeze. It must also be recognised that, whatever difficult budgets must be delivered in future, this assault on local government budgets is happening at a time when the Scottish Government has nearly £1 billion more to spend than it had last year. It is regrettable, therefore, that the SNP prefers to ensure that Alex Salmond and his ministers receive hundreds of pounds of savings on their council tax, while forcing our councils to lose jobs and make service reductions. The Scottish Government is not responding to the recession. To sustain the discredited concordat, it has not made the necessary changes to local government finance that would enable local government to handle the recession. The SNP got its way with the budget, and the die is cast on the issue. The truth is that the SNP intends to continue to help the wealthy, while cutting services that are used by the poor. That is to the SNP's eternal shame, but it has not gone unnoticed. We will ensure that the responsibility for the consequences of the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 are made clear, so that the price that must be paid is not just for the poor, the disadvantaged and council workforces but for the SNP, politically, for the damage that it has done.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made on the getting it right for every child programme. (S3O-9720)

Is the minister aware of the concerns of the Scottish young carers services alliance, which is highlighting the fact that Midlothian Council and Highland Council are reducing their services and the fact that the Moray young carers project is facing significant funding issues? That is just one example of what is being put at risk due to local authority funding cuts. With young carers already facing poorer outcomes in health, due to additional stress in their lives and the fact that they have to balance care responsibilities with going to school, how can the minister be confident that he is getting it right for every child when young carers projects are being placed in the difficult situation that I have described?

Will the minister give way?

Stanley Baldwin once said: "A platitude is simply a truth repeated till people get tired of hearing it." As platitudes go, this afternoon's motion is one of the best examples of the hackneyed truths that Baldwin must have been thinking about when he made his observation. The Government motion contains nothing but platitudes. Fortunately, the debate has shown that the issue under discussion is hugely important and cannot be hidden, even under the banality of the motion. I share Cathy Jamieson's view that the minister's opening speech indicated a clear commitment to regeneration. I concur with others that the introduction of the town centre regeneration fund was a good way of helping our hard-pressed town centres. It highlighted the demand in our communities for such assistance. As I said to the minister in my intervention, our question on the fund is why it was a one-off,  despite the evident demand for more funding. As the minister highlighted, there were 202 unsuccessful applications for the TCRF, totalling £139 million. That demonstrates the real need for regeneration in our town centres—a need that is not being met. In the communities that were left out, people have to wonder why the SNP did not commit to on-going support for our town centres. Perhaps, like the Glasgow airport rail link and the downgrading of Ravenscraig from a national to a regional priority and other such examples, it comes down to the short-sightedness of this Administration.

Because budgets are not about single issues. The budget that the Government put forward, which it was not prepared to discuss sensibly with us as an Opposition, did not merit our support. I am not saying that the Government has got it wrong on absolutely everything, but it cannot discuss regeneration without also focusing on the adverse impacts of the failure of the Scottish Futures Trust to build anything, the result of which is that development and regeneration plans have, at best, been delayed if not put on ice. Twenty-eight thousand construction jobs have been lost in Scotland, yet the SFT has not laid a single brick. Twenty-two members of staff and a salary bill of £1 million may be many things, but it is not a regeneration project. As ever, the shadow of the concordat looms large over the potential for economic and social regeneration. Single outcome agreements are expected to show how community planning partnerships have agreed the strategic priorities for their local area and yet the SCVO claims that many local authorities "continue to exclude voluntary organisations in planning and delivering public services." The SCVO has make it clear that in most areas, the third sector is represented in CPPs, but it also notes that being at the CPP table does not guarantee good involvement in the community planning process. That is simply not good enough. As the minister and others have said, whether or not the approach is bottom up is irrelevant if community groups are not at the table when deals are made. Ross Finnie was spot on when he highlighted the fact that so far we have not got that right. The Scottish centre for regeneration has expressed legitimate concerns about the end of ring fencing of the fairer Scotland fund. That money will be used to fill gaps in local authority  departmental budgets, for example in education. Although the majority of SOAs contain details of how FSF moneys are being used, the fact that 10 SOAs contain no statements of that kind is a glaring omission that undermines the Government's ability to engage with local communities in effective regeneration projects. Serious action is required in that area. It must be more than an aspiration or a good idea to have decision-making structures at neighbourhood level that bring together key players to develop a regeneration strategy, based on an assessment of community needs. Such structures must be seen to work, and evidence of the proposals must be tangible. Access to knowledge and expertise, sufficient powers to facilitate the development of networks and the effective implementation of projects are a must, but so far we have heard little beyond the platitudes in today's motion about how the Government intends to make that happen. In all probability, communities will take different approaches to achieving the right balance of physical regeneration, training, job creation and community building, but there must be some standardisation of the overall process; at present, that is missing. Ross Finnie, Johann Lamont and others were right to ask for the issue to be addressed. In this period of economic downturn, community-led renewal will be a vital aspect of how we climb out of recession. The current economic situation could stimulate a rethinking of the way in which we do regeneration. As we try to deal with the multitude of problems that face our localities and neighbourhoods, new approaches will need to be developed and strengthened. The resources that are available from government, both central and local, need to be used smartly to maximise positive outcomes for local people and to create virtuous cycles of education, employment, equity, civic pride and community cohesion. Third sector, community and voluntary organisations must not only be seen as a valuable additional resource but be put at the heart of the regeneration process. Often they are a mine of knowledge and increased capacity at local level, with a successful track record of action that makes a real difference to local communities. Taking a positive outlook, the potential for community development to fill the resource deficit and offer other locally appropriate and sustainable solutions to local regeneration is an exciting prospect. Government must create the space and capacity to assist communities in regenerating their areas. As Johann Lamont explained, the planning framework is central to that. Communities do not just need access to discussion forums for their areas; they need access to funds to help  them to regenerate those areas, bringing derelict properties and waste ground into productive use, promoting community engagement, and creating local jobs and training opportunities in the process. The minister is correct to say that regeneration is not just about paying for new buildings—it must increase social justice and quality of life by overcoming poverty and disadvantage and producing more inclusive, equitable and sustainable local areas. As Jamie McGrigor correctly pointed out, there must be a place in regeneration strategies for community enterprises, credit unions, co-operatives and housing associations, among other community-based organisations. The member was right to list the areas that have benefited from additional funding but, like Karen Gillon, I wonder whether he really believes that signs in Thurso can make up for the devastation that was caused by the pulling down of the towers of Ravenscraig in Lanarkshire.

The bottom line is that we cannot talk about the need for regeneration and praise the role that local authorities and the third sector play while slashing the housing, regeneration, enterprise and tourism budgets yet claiming—as the Government does—to have sustainable growth as our purpose. We will support the motion tonight, but its platitudes are not enough.

That very important point raises the question why, when there is so much unmet need, the tap has been turned off.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many general practitioner practices it has taken action against since May 2007 for having broken their contract with NHS Lanarkshire. (S3O-9604)

Is the cabinet secretary aware that the MacAlister GP practice in Uddingston, which operates from two separate buildings, decided towards the end of last year to close the Old Mill surgery in Uddingston, which serves almost 2,000 of its patients, in order to consolidate its services in a single surgery at the Viewpark health centre, which would serve all  9,000 of its patients? NHS Lanarkshire says that the proposed change is within the GP's contract and that no breach of contract is involved. Does the Scottish Government intend to look into that situation? Does it plan to reopen negotiations with GPs on that aspect of their contracts? Does it intend to find a way to force GPs to keep open all their facilities once they have been established in a community?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress there has been in community planning. (S3O-9482)

Is the cabinet secretary aware that a recent case study by the Scottish centre for regeneration highlighted concerns about a lack of community engagement in community planning and about the future use of the fairer Scotland fund after the removal of ring fencing? Will the cabinet secretary assure us that he will take steps to improve community engagement and to prevent fairer Scotland funding from being used to prop up mainstream budgets, which are increasingly under pressure?

We have listened to the Government tell us that we have a local government finance order that represents a good deal for our local authorities and public services. Jeremy Purvis was right to point out that the cabinet secretary's remarks on the order were delivered in a much more subdued manner than usual. The cabinet secretary is regularly held up by his leader and his back benchers as some kind of financial wizard who has overcome the financial deficit that was imposed on him from London to deliver a favourable package of funding to our councils. I do not know whether Mr Swinney dabbles in magic, but he has certainly conjured up the loss of 3,000 jobs with his funding package. No amount of magic will hide the fact that in education, staff cuts will affect teachers, classroom assistants, janitors, workshop technicians and cleaning staff. Local authorities have already made that clear. I do not know what tricks the cabinet secretary thinks he can deploy to hide the impending reductions in library opening hours, in grass cutting, in recreation centres and in grants to voluntary organisations, or what sleight of hand he intends to use to make the cuts in road maintenance, resurfacing, salting and gritting and other parts of transport budgets appear to vanish. A cloak of £5 million will certainly not hide them. The settlement that has been announced today will hamper economic recovery, because it will result in the loss of jobs and services when the situation demands that we do what we can to protect jobs and services in order to avoid further recession. Local government finance has become another victim of the Scottish Government's inability to respond to the recession. Since the signing of the concordat in 2007, a global recession has occurred, but the SNP has not changed local government finance to take cognisance of that fact. At the same time as being hit by an upturn in demand for the services that they provide, local authorities have experienced a loss of income.

If Mr FitzPatrick had spent any time in the chamber listening to the debate before he made his intervention, he would have heard that explanation. He can read it in the Official Report . More and more local authorities are publicly stating that the council tax freeze is increasingly unsustainable, but today's settlement continues the underfunding of the concordat, so further job losses, service reductions and increases in charges will result. As David Whitton said, the finance secretary's claim that he has protected front-line services is therefore extremely hollow. The evidence is clear. Cuts have been made in front-line service budgets, as well as in back-office functions and bureaucracy, that go well beyond the assumptions that the minister made in setting his efficiency targets. The reality is that councils report that they are having to make reductions in excess of £270 million simply to balance the books and deliver the council tax freeze. As was reported in our newspapers this week, that freeze will allow someone like Alex Salmond to make a saving of £316 and someone like Nicola Sturgeon to make a saving of £336; Mr Swinney will make a saving of £272. At the same time, pensioners across the country face increased charges for services.

Glasgow City Council made sensible decisions. It balanced its budgets and has other ways of doing things. It will do that again in this financial year. The reality is that local authorities have had it impressed on them by the concordat that the flexibility that they require in order to make judgments in their local areas has been removed from them. Glasgow City Council did not need the concordat to freeze the council tax. It made sensible decisions prior to the Government's coming to office. I know that Mr Brownlee wants to get back in. I would be happy to let him do so, but I have made my point, which he cannot answer. In almost every debate, Scottish National Party back benchers have been dragooned into action armed with their central office briefings and their blind loyalty. This afternoon, they have gone into battle to defend their Government, regardless of evidence that shows that they should do the contrary. We are talking about the only deal that is available—that is probably the only thing that I agree with Mr Allan about. Local authorities cannot be denied the available money, even if we fundamentally disagree with the budget that has been set for them.  No amount of sophistry from the SNP can hide the fact that Scotland's local authorities are making real cuts. They are Mr Swinney's cuts. Labour will spend the next year ensuring that every pensioner who has to pay for their services, every council employee who loses their job, and every young person who is denied an opportunity to reach their potential knows that the SNP Administration is to blame for that reality.

Does Mr Brownlee accept that we do not expect it to come from anywhere, because the Government already has it? There is an extra £1 billion in the Government's coffers this year, but it has chosen not to spend it on the right priorities.

If ever a speech from a Government minister confirmed the impression of many on the Labour benches that the Government operates in a parallel universe, we have just heard it from Mr Swinney. Here in the real world of Scotland in the third year of a Scottish National Party Government, The Herald  newspaper can run articles for a whole week exposing the effects of the £270 million-worth of cuts that it has identified are being forced on our local authorities. In today's Scotland, our biggest public service union warns us of the dangers of the cuts that are being imposed on our front-line services because of the  £305 million-worth of reductions in council budgets that it has identified. The reality for many Scots as we move into the second decade of the 21 st century is that local authorities are taking community wardens off our streets and reducing library opening hours and roads maintenance and resurfacing. In education, further cuts are planned in the number of teachers, classroom assistants, janitors, workshop technicians and cleaning staff. That is all at a time when the Scottish Government has nearly £1 billion more to spend than last year and greater resources than any previous Administration had. That is the reality in today's Scotland, yet over in the alternative realm of concordat land that is inhabited by the SNP, all is well. In concordat land, the SNP can claim, despite all the evidence to the contrary, that its budgets have been cut while the funds that are available to local authorities are on the increase. In concordat land, the cabinet secretary wants us to believe that he has delivered a bountiful sufficiency of funds and that local government has been given the flexibility that it needs to respond to local needs. He wants us to share his view that the concordat creates greater flexibility, when the reality is that it restricts the single most important mechanism of financial autonomy that is available to local authorities: the council tax.

Because the reality is that what is being counted has gone up, but the actual funds have not. The cabinet secretary has added funding streams to his calculations. His letters to the Scottish Parliament information centre show that there is no like-for-like comparison between the figures when we were in Government and his current calculations.

What the cabinet secretary is counting has increased, but the actual amount of money has not. Freezing the council tax is not in itself the problem, but the way in which it is done under the concordat is Tory capping by another name. It is little wonder therefore that Mr Swinney's acolytes in the Tory party are always eager to support his  budgets. Probably the only thing on which Labour agreed with the Tories about Mr Swinney's budget was that it was a Conservative budget.

Because we want to retain the ability to protect local people. That is not the same as using the power when local authorities are being reasonable and responsible. Last month's budget was not alone in being supported by the Conservatives as a Conservative measure. The fact is that we have merely arrived at a position that Labour forecast would happen under the terms of the concordat when it was set out in the spending review of 2007. As far back as that, the underfunding of new spending commitments, the unachievable doubling of efficiency savings targets and the loss of flexibility through the council tax freeze were evident and their consequences were inevitable. For the past two years, we have predicted the impact of the fiscal squeeze on councils and argued that, contrary to the efficient government agenda, budget savings were being made in front-line services. While the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities sucked on the lollipop of de-ring fencing, under the concordat individual councils were being forced to cut services to achieve their savings targets over three years. Cash efficiencies were to be made through reducing back-office costs and bureaucracy, better procurement and better asset management. The concordat states that such savings should be redeployed "against ongoing pressures and address local priorities." Falkirk and Stirling Councils have both made savings in procurement and Glasgow and East Dunbartonshire have delivered some of their savings through property and asset management. In all authorities, however, the cuts will be deep and the impact on jobs and services will be severe. South Ayrshire reported that it needs to achieve a significantly reduced expenditure in employee costs by reducing the workforce to help find savings of £7 million and it has also agreed a 6 per cent rent increase. Highland has set a savings target of £11.45 million in education and £5 million in social work. Michael Forsyth would be glowing with pride that his party has worked with the SNP to pursue the decimation of public services that he once dreamed of. Every community in Scotland will suffer because the SNP has done a deal with the Tories to launch the biggest assault on local services since Thatcher. The cuts will adversely  affect jobs and services at a time when the economic recovery would benefit from retaining them. I look forward to the rest of this afternoon's debate, but I fear that when it is over, some of us will be left to wonder whether we inhabit the same world as the cabinet secretary and the rest of his party.

As was the case during the Local Government and Communities Committee's deliberations on the bill, there has been an understandable consensus on the aims and general principles of Christine Grahame's bill. The proposal to focus on deed not breed and to establish an administrative regime to influence the behaviour of dog owners has widespread support. Requiring a dog owner to keep their dog on a lead, among other things, does not appear to be a particularly onerous requirement when the safety of individuals and our wider community is at stake, so it is hardly surprising that the bill's measures have found support.  However, we cannot ignore the concerns that emerged during stage 1 scrutiny of the bill. Earlier, I raised the issue of the cost to local authorities of the bill's provisions. Those fears have not quite abated as the debate has unfolded. Even the Scottish Government considers that the financial estimates on the establishment of a DCN regime may be on the low side. We must be careful not to burden our councils with measures that have resource implications that are not properly provided for. Most of the local authorities that gave evidence expressed concern about the bill's cost implications. Scottish Borders Council specifically asked for central Government to make additional funds available to pay for the impact of the bill. Christine Grahame has repeated her comparison between her bill's potential financial impact and the impacts of the Dog Fouling (Scotland) Act 2003 and the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 to argue that costs will not rise, but I remind her that councils have rebutted that comparison and called it "disingenuous", among other things. They have pointed out that her bill will place a duty on them to act and to monitor compliance, and that that will have considerable costs. Concerns have also been expressed about the increases in costs that will be incurred by the transfer from the police to councils of responsibilities for dealing with stray dogs. It was claimed in evidence that was provided to the committee that the costs to local authorities would soar, because they do not currently provide 24-hour cover and out-of-hours working, and do not have the facilities or the funds to do so. It is also worrying that no discussions appear to be taking place between the police and local authorities on the transfer of budgets to cover any shift in responsibility. In such a short debate, it has not been possible for me to cover all of the bill and to consider the implications and merits of provisions such as those on a Scottish dog control database or the opportunities that could have been missed in not seeking to amend further the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991. I am pleased that other members have focused on those issues, which can be considered at stage 2. We can look forward with confidence to the committee dealing with those concerns and others that must be addressed at that stage. In the meantime, we will give the bill a fair wind, as others have asked us to do, and encourage the bill's progress. I will be happy to support its general principles when we vote this afternoon.

I congratulate Christine Grahame on introducing the bill and on all her efforts since June last year, when she picked up the baton that was passed to her by Alex Neil, who pursued the issue originally. I thank the members of the Local Government and Communities Committee and their clerking team for their work in scrutinising the bill since being designated the lead committee. I also thank NEBU for its efforts to ensure that the bill could be discussed today. I pay tribute to those who gave evidence on the bill and highlighted a variety of pertinent issues, some of which remain outstanding this afternoon and have already been outlined. Whatever issues remain outstanding, the starting point of the bill is right. The Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 was much criticised at the time, as it was viewed as a knee-jerk reaction to a distressing problem. The spate of horrific dog attacks that preceded that legislation were not acceptable, and the issue required to be addressed. However, the haste with which that legislation was passed prevented effective analysis of the causes of the problem and a proper determination of the necessary measures to address it. Christine Grahame is therefore accurate in her assessment that the current legislation on dogs is piecemeal, and has tended to focus on breeds of dogs and dangerous dogs rather than on why dogs become out of control and on what has to be done to tackle the dog owner who fails to control their pet. Shining the spotlight on the act that takes place instead of on the type of dog involved is eminently more sensible, and it is hardly surprising that the Kennel Club and the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals support the bill as a result. Nevertheless, Labour members are concerned about aspects of the bill. The bill primarily aims to create an administrative regime that seeks to influence the behaviour of dog owners and to promote responsible ownership, but the measures that are outlined to achieve that will require a sizeable injection of cash into local authorities, especially to  provide for the administration of dog control notices. Christine Grahame has argued that the officers who would be involved are already employed by local authorities, which must deal with dogs, and that the new duties in the bill would be subsumed into existing duties. However, although the Scottish National Party Government has tried its best to deny the consequences of its budget, the reality is that local authorities are cutting staff by the thousand and that cuts are falling in areas such as community safety and are affecting community wardens and other people who deal with responsibilities in relation to dog fouling and dog-related antisocial behaviour. The evidence that was presented during the consultation is a year old, but even a year ago local authorities were advising the Parliament that they would need to recruit additional staff to implement the proposed DCN regime. If the regime would have been a problem for councils in 2008-09, it would be a bigger burden on councils this year, given the fiscal constraints that they face and will face in the future. Issues that have been raised about corroboration are of equal concern. The validity of corroboration is a complex issue, which requires much more scrutiny. The definition of "out of control" is an issue, because judging what it means is subjective. The formulation of a test that applies across a range of situations is a major concern.

That argument has been made, but the issue still requires scrutiny, because what frightens one person might not concern another. The "how long is a piece of string?" approach to the definition is not good enough, and assertions of validity are not sufficient. We need to be confident that the bill would be effective. I look forward to the rest of the debate. I hope that members raise the financial and technical issues that were identified in evidence at stage 1, and I hope that answers that alleviate our anxieties will be provided.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government's position is on reports that local authorities are considering cutting back education budgets in order to find savings of £270 million in 2010-11. (S3F-2196)

I thank the First Minister for his bluster. Does he not recognise that the reality of what is happening in our local authorities is being exposed by councils such as Scottish National Party-led Dundee Council, which tells us in its provisional budget projection that, although it received £1.76 million as its share of the £70 million grant for the council tax freeze, it had to find an additional £5.8 million of cuts to achieve the freeze? Is he aware that each and every local authority in Scotland is having to reduce services to pensioners, children and vulnerable communities because of his Government's discredited concordat with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, which has resulted in the inadequate resourcing of our local councils? Will he now accept that responsibility for the £270 million cuts reported by The Herald lies squarely with his Government's concordat funding shortfall and its failure to provide adequate funding for the council tax freeze? Will he now take his historic concordat and consign it to the dustbin of history, or will he simply continue to bluster in the face of the reality facing our local communities?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has discussed with the Minister for Housing and Communities proposals  to change its guidance explaining ministerial priorities for the fairer Scotland fund. (S3O-9295)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, regardless of what guidance exists and what priorities he might ever have had for the use of the fairer Scotland fund, he relinquished any ability to ensure that the fund was used for its intended purpose when he removed its ring-fenced status? Will he accept that the proposals that some local authorities are considering to use the FSF to replace core funding gaps are entirely down to his decision and his failure to fund local government adequately?

It is fair to say that most recent debates in the Parliament have been conducted in the context of the difficult financial circumstances facing the country. It is not surprising, therefore, that this debate on issues facing local newspapers has also been contextualised by the wider economic climate. Now more than ever, it is important to remind ourselves of the value of local newspapers to our local communities, as members have done in abundance throughout this morning's deliberations. Local newspapers boost the local economy, both through their advertising and their news coverage. They showcase communities, local issues, local people and local businesses. They are needed now more than ever, at a time when  our local areas need to retain shops and investment in communities that protects local jobs. Our local newspapers provide a forum for expression, allow readers to make their voices heard and enable ordinary citizens to deliberate on the future of their community. They encourage civil issue-orientated discourse and they often set the stage for it. Many community newspapers serve as watchdogs that hold elected representatives accountable. They shine a light on local government and keep the local electorate informed. Throughout this debate, members have duly recognised the publications in their own areas as examples of how that activity is conducted. I certainly know that the Bellshill Speaker , Motherwell Times and Hamilton Advertiser perform that role in my area, where they are ably assisted by the freesheet Lanarkshire Extra and The HUB . I know that Hugh O'Donnell will be familiar with those titles, so he might want to add those to the tally that—in his thoughtful speech—he said he was keeping.

Perhaps the strangest thing about this debate was that Christopher Harvie's meanderings through Germany were trumped by Cathy Jamieson's perusal of The Himalayan Times . That probably does not happen very often. I might add that Mr Harvie's grandfather's Motherwell Speaker title might not have continued for very long because the Bellshill Speaker and Motherwell Times already existed. It is worth noting that most journalists who work on local newspapers live in the communities that they cover. They understand the community that they write for because they are part of it. With Scotland facing a never-ending stream of bad economic news, it is right for us to recognise the decline in newspaper circulation across the country. Local newspapers have been taking a financial beating. They tell us that these are dark days for their industry, as we heard at yesterday's lobbying event. Amid uncertainty over the economy, the role that local newspapers play is more important than ever, so we must do what we can to address that situation when we make decisions that directly affect them, such as when we consider a Scottish statutory instrument that will result in local government turning off the tap that allows local papers to benefit from the advertising revenue that accrues from public information notices.

I concur. Many SNP members' speeches this morning have suggested that the Government has a closed mind. Clearly, in pursuit of ensuring that the despicable con act—sorry, the historic concordat—is kept in place, SNP members have insisted that they are acting on behalf of COSLA. However, I think that COSLA will be disappointed when the draft order falls. The Government will need to explain to its back benchers why it has let down local government if SNP members genuinely believe what they have said in their speeches this morning. The newspaper is one of the oldest forms of mass media and it holds a number of distinct advantages over other types of media. A newspaper can be read by nearly everyone and in almost every type of condition or location. Although we are undoubtedly moving towards a situation in which the majority—if not almost everyone—have access to their media electronically or digitally, we are not there yet. The vast majority of people in this country still look to their local printed newspaper as the source of local information. Their number far outweighs the number of those who access their information via the internet. The world of technology is undoubtedly changing the newspaper industry, and will continue to do so. Increasingly, newspapers are moving their services online and are slowly moving to integrate the internet into every aspect of their operations, as many members have noted. Local newspapers may have been slower in doing that than some of their national counterparts, but they are doing so, and some newspapers are preparing for the day when they will publish their work only online. We can even start to consider seriously the endless amount of news blogs on the web. It is a pity that Mike Russell, who has just joined us, is no longer responsible for the media portfolio, given his expertise in developing networks of bloggers, but Fiona Hyslop will just have to fill his shoes as best she can. She may share her predecessor's enthusiasm for the internet as a vehicle for information dissemination, but she must reconsider her Government's reckless rush to use the web for public information notices. Her failure to do so will have disastrous consequences for our local newspaper network. I am quite sure that the people who attended the conference at Glasgow Caledonian University that is mentioned in the Conservatives' amendment did not expect that, a year on, they would be offered a summit. They want action. Jim Mather gave us yet more of his PowerPoint and gobbledegook expertise and very little in the way of action.  The argument that if local papers go bust there will be no coverage of what happens in local government is not scaremongering. A vast amount of academic research points to the importance of an independent local press in disseminating hard-to-get information, mobilising the public and putting pressure on government and business for the public good. That point was made by Iain Smith in an unusually entertaining speech and was rightly highlighted by Robin Harper. It appears from this debate that the Scottish Government wishes to ignore the important role that an independent local press must play in scrutinising our democratic institutions. There are some who argue that the internet will empower ordinary people to do the task themselves and do it better, but I and my Labour colleagues are not so sure. Even if we recognise that it is inevitable that that day will come, it has not come yet, and the Government's draft order is far too premature. Our local papers are virtually the only media that scrutinise local politics. Putting their existence in jeopardy in the belief that the internet will enable citizens to become better informed is too high a risk to take in pursuit of the relatively small amount of money that can be saved from local government coffers. I believe that local papers are a civic asset and that our democracy needs the local information that we get from them. As Hugh Henry and David Whitton correctly said, the pursuit of cost savings cannot be allowed to undermine our local democracy. Today's economic climate demands that political leaders work with the media to help create economically viable ways for local journalism to prosper. That should just make us more determined to ensure that come 5 o'clock, Parliament, by supporting Labour's motion and the Conservatives' amendment, sends out the signal that we know what the right thing to do by our local papers is, even if the Government does not. People will look back to 11:38 and 34 seconds on the morning of Thursday 28 January, when I predicted that the Government's proposal would not come to fruition.

I totally agree with that point, given which, does the minister agree with Sandra White that the best place to take a petition on the issue is to the Public Petitions Committee of the Scottish Parliament? That is an important aspect of the democratic process, but would a petition not be better taken to South Lanarkshire Council?

I take part in this evening's debate in place of the local member, Karen Gillon, who is unwell and therefore unable to participate in the debate as she would have liked. She appreciates the concerns of some sections of the community. I hope that Aileen Campbell will not be too critical if I make some technical errors about the local facilities in Lesmahagow, as my knowledge of the town is fairly superficial. I have visited Lesmahagow on only a small number of occasions—in my early adulthood, when I was a football referee who officiated at matches in the Lanarkshire league games that took place there. For that reason, I will try to be brief, which I am sure will also not disappoint Aileen Campbell and cause her no unnecessary delay in sending out her press release—if she has not already done that. Although my knowledge of Lesmahagow itself is not extensive, my understanding of the general nature of the issue is. The decision behind the debate highlights what I consider to be the very judicious manner in which South Lanarkshire Council—and most other local authorities—generally deal with budgetary constraints. Although we would all prefer to conserve buildings that play significant roles in the life and heritage of our local communities, and which have added value in our rural communities, the financial realities of sustaining public facilities within budget allocations mean that difficult decisions must be made in the pursuit of cost effectiveness. From the cursory knowledge that I have of the situation, it is clear to me that, although Lesmahagow might well suffer the loss of a much-loved public building, the town will benefit from significant public investment. The council's financial input will ensure that any loss of the Jubilee hall would be compensated for through the refurbishment of the Fountain building, which will have a main hall with sound and lighting equipment and a demountable stage, a multipurpose room, two other large public rooms, a fully fitted kitchen plus storage and a fully fitted bar plus storage, as well as a children's soft play area, which will be created on the floor above the Bank of Scotland offices. Additional public facilities will also be provided when the town obtains the new-build Woodpark primary school and the new-build Milton primary school, which have completion targets of May 2010 and July 2011 respectively. Access will be provided to sizeable gym halls and dining rooms for community use. In addition, community facilities are available in the town's new high school.  I regret that Lesmahagow may be about to lose a much-loved public amenity, but it is only fair to say that South Lanarkshire Council is planning to ensure that current and future generations in the town are well catered for in the years ahead. If the debate is to be about more than giving Aileen Campbell a press release, I look forward to hearing how the minister will provide additional resources to the local authority to meet the cost of preserving the Jubilee hall or facilitating a community buyout.

I thank the cabinet secretary for providing an advance copy of his statement and I welcome his decision to pay the financial support for police and fire officer pensions directly from the Scottish Government. We look forward to seeing more details about that. I had hoped that the cabinet secretary would have surprised us and shown that he had been listening to individual local authorities, voluntary sector bodies and service users, but he has, regrettably, confirmed what we all know: that he proposes to deliver a bad deal to local government. His failure to take us any further forward on transitional relief and tax incremental finance will also perplex the business community. Mr Swinney's statement clearly reinforces the fact that he intends to be responsible for an assault on local government finances at a time when his own budget is growing by £600 million. No amount of bluster and assertion can disguise that. The statement underlines the reality that, during a time of recession, when local authorities should be getting their fair share of increased  Scottish Government resources in order to protect local services, Mr Swinney has decided to pick their pockets. In the face of increasing reports about the scale of local council cutbacks and public anxiety about the extent of impending service cuts, does the cabinet secretary genuinely believe that local authorities have been provided with the resources that they need to meet the Scottish Government's manifesto commitments? Does he seriously continue to expect that all local authorities will be able to deliver his commitment on a council tax freeze next year when they are faced with having to cut services because they have been underfunded by the Scottish Government? Faced with COSLA's "fury"—I am quoting COSLA—at his proposals for funding teacher retirements, and the widely held view among local councillors that the real problem for local government is the Scottish Government, does he believe that the concordat has been exposed for the con that it is and that his statement marks the beginning of the end of the concordat as it currently exists?

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution last visited Brussels. (S3O-8195)

The minister's international relations budget is rising by 25 per cent, his major events budget is tripling and his budget for the big blether—what the Government euphemistically calls civic participation—is being maintained. Surely the Scottish people do not want to see that happen, particularly at a time when this Government is proposing to squeeze budgets on housing, regeneration, education and health? As we heard earlier, the minister's department is seeing cuts in the cultural collections budget. Does he not agree that the priorities for the people of Scotland are housing, regeneration, education and health? Instead of focusing on those priorities, why does he prefer to use his position to gallivant across Europe, seeking to undermine the constitution of the UK?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether any pupils will be taught in schools announced as being in the initial phase of its school rebuilding programme in the current parliamentary term. (S3O-8149)

I think that it is possible to take that answer as a no. In the false prospectus that the Scottish National Party put forward as its election manifesto, the SNP made a commitment that it would match Labour's school building programme "brick for brick". Does the cabinet secretary genuinely believe that the parents and pupils of Scotland will be fooled by her Government's disingenuous attempts to assert that its pledge is being achieved, in the face of a programme that will deliver only 14 schools by 2013 and the fact that some local authorities might perhaps build some schools by 2011? In this morning's debate, SNP speaker after SNP speaker rubbished public-private partnership schools, but the cabinet secretary claims those PPP schools. Does she agree that claiming Labour's schools "brick for brick" is not the same as matching Labour's achievements brick for brick?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

The cabinet secretary pointed out that only one single status agreement was reached in five years but that that figure rose by 25 in the following couple of years. Does he accept that that was because the previous Scottish Executive intervened and got people together in a room to talk about the issues?

I place on record my thanks to the Local Government and Communities Committee—particularly the convener, Duncan McNeil, and Susan Duffy and her clerking team—for providing Parliament with a comprehensive report on this significant matter. It is vital that those of us who are honoured to sit in the chamber do all that we can to ensure that all individuals in Scotland are treated equally, no matter what their gender, sexual orientation, race, creed or occupation. It was, therefore, with a real sense of discomfort that, when I met a group of home care workers from North Lanarkshire recently, I heard how let down they felt by the inability of politicians and unions to end the iniquitous situation that sees them paid so much less than their fellow public sector employees. For all that I could tell them about what had been done to address the problem—there has been some movement—the reality was that those workers felt undervalued and underrewarded in spite of the essential service that they provide to deserving individuals in our communities who need support and care in their homes. Since the implementation of the single status agreement in 1999, which was designed to end discrimination of this nature, a lot of progress has been made to ensure that the terms and conditions of workers are the same no matter what job they do. Single status and equal pay are now inextricably linked. That is only right and proper but, in implementing that policy, we knew that local authorities would need help to meet the financial pressures that were being placed on them. Unfortunately, as a result of things like the historic concordat—or the infamous con act—local authorities face shortfalls in their budgets to deal with single status and equal pay. In fact, in scrutinising the Government's draft budget for 2009-10, the Finance Committee conducted an inquiry into this issue, such was its concern for councils that have a number of claims outstanding. It is good to know that, by next year, all 32 local authorities will have implemented the single status agreement, but it is estimated that the number of  outstanding claims might cost local authorities hundreds of millions of pounds. We have heard many suggestions of what that figure might be but, whatever the figure is, it does not include the financial implications of the Bainbridge judgment, which John Wilson eloquently outlined. The most worrying aspect of the committee's report was that there seems to be no conclusion in sight to the outstanding issues that are faced by councils in relation to outstanding judgments and what those decisions could mean for future judgments. As the committee's report says: "there appears to be no end in sight and ... as soon as one set of problems is resolved another set arises". I understand that, at the time when the report was being drawn up, COSLA had not issued guidance on final judgments, including the Bainbridge judgment, but it was in the process of issuing something. We must see more progress in that regard. The wait for guidance has meant that claimants who are waiting for their case to be resolved face a greater risk that they will miss out on their claim due to the five-year limit. That cannot be acceptable. As the cabinet secretary said this morning, the Scottish Government believes that all local government agreements should be achieved without its intervention. The previous Administration, too, took that position but it also stated that it would be willing to facilitate discussions between all interested parties whenever possible, if such a need arose, and those meetings took place. Given the circumstances that are outlined in the report and the lack of direction from COSLA, I ask the cabinet secretary to look at this matter once more and to call a meeting between COSLA, the trade unions and all other interested parties to discuss the serious outstanding issues. I seem to recall that, around 18 months ago, the First Minister intervened to provide independent expert arbitration when there was a dispute at the oil refinery in Grangemouth between a private company and private sector employees. Why can that approach not be taken to the problem in the public sector that we are discussing today, which has been going on for more than 10 years? That could help matters to reach a conclusion much more quickly. In saying that, I recognise that responsibility lies ultimately with local authorities, but it strikes me that the matter of single status and equal pay has stagnated and we urgently need the involvement of everyone concerned. It is time for the Scottish Government to say what it will do to assist local authorities in order to resolve the existing cases and any future cases as soon as possible so that all workers can have equal status. We on the Labour benches have  been striving for that for many years. The constituents whom I met recently deserve no less, because they are not worth less than their colleagues. Once again, I thank the Local Government and Communities Committee for allowing us the time to re-examine this important issue.

I, too, congratulate Rhoda Grant on securing this important debate. Like many others who are present this evening, I have made blood donations and know how vital the service is. I encourage any company that is thinking of supporting blood donation to do so. I saw the service in action when I worked as a welder for 17 years at Terex in Newhouse. During that time, I was able to give blood regularly because the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service came to the factory and we were all given time off from our daily routine to do so. It was then very easy—much easier than it is now—to find the time to make blood donations. I welcome the opportunity to support Rhoda Grant's call for workplace donations. When preparing for the debate, I was shocked to learn that the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service requires 1,000 donations every day to meet demand from patients. Some patients have other needs. In October last year, my constituents Robert and Jessie Colson submitted a petition to the Parliament's Public Petitions Committee on behalf of their son Richard, who at that time needed a bone marrow transplant because he suffers from severe aplastic anaemia. Thankfully, Richard received a transplant earlier this year and is making progress back towards good health. However, Richard's parents' petition remains under consideration. They are still calling on the Scottish Government to recognise and promote the life-saving impacts that bone marrow testing and donation can have on people who have life-threatening illnesses. For that possibility to be expanded, the Government must provide adequate funding for the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service to support bone marrow services and to encourage more donors. That can be done only by getting more blood donations. As we know, the Scottish Government funds the SNBTS, which recently announced that it was entering into a collaboration with the Anthony Nolan Trust to improve recruitment of potential bone marrow donors. Again, that must follow additional blood donations. The criteria for joining the Anthony Nolan Trust register are similar to those used by the SNBTS, of which ScotBlood is a part. The only difference is in the age of donors. The age range for the Anthony Nolan Trust is 18 to 40, whereas that for the SNBTS is 18 to 50. Earlier this year, ScotBlood and the Anthony Nolan Trust released a statement in which they said that they were joining forces to encourage more Scottish blood donors to join the Anthony Nolan Trust register. As was mentioned in the two previous speeches, we must find ways of  encouraging people to give blood. It has been suggested that people be paid to do that. Recently, I accompanied Robert Colson to a meeting with officials from the Anthony Nolan Trust, ScotBlood and the Scottish Government, at which we learned that in Germany people who make blood donations are asked to pay to be added to the bone marrow donor register. The idea is that, having invested in getting on to the register, they will remain committed to bone marrow donation. Rather than being paid to get on to the register, people are invited to pay to do so, and the system works very effectively. I am sure that members will be aware of ScotBlood's recent initiative, which involves asking people who give blood whether they wish to put their names forward as potential bone marrow donors. People are only asked and encouraged to join the Anthony Nolan Trust register in that initiative—there is no commitment on collection. The Anthony Nolan Trust recruits donors at their workplaces. I know that Rhoda Grant has been championing the idea of getting more blood donations at the workplace, and the benefits are obvious. Members may be aware of the links that the trust has developed with firms such as Virgin Media, which has a facility in my constituency, and which organises similar visits to those that allowed me to give donations at my former workplace. I hope that such links can be developed over the coming months and years. I thank Rhoda Grant for bringing the issue to Parliament today. It has allowed me to inform others of the hard work of the Colsons and of others who have done so much to develop a relationship between blood donation and bone marrow donation. I thank her for this opportunity.

To ask the Scottish Executive what organisations it consulted before changing the code of practice in relation to part 5 of the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 and whether those are the same organisations that it consulted when the original code of practice was drawn up. (S3O-7930)

I would like to thank the cabinet secretary for her response, but I am not sure that I can, given that a number of organisations, especially the Catholic Church and the care not killing alliance, were not included in that consultation, even though they were in the original consultation. Does the cabinet secretary remember the debate in 2000 before the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 was passed and the importance that faith communities and other stakeholders placed on the need to prevent euthanasia by the back door? Does she recall that she was so concerned that safeguards were needed that she voted for an amendment at stage 3 that sought to put the necessary protection on the face of the bill? Will she therefore tell members and, more importantly, Scotland's faith communities and pro-life groups why she removed  that carefully worded safeguard that was personally agreed between Iain Gray and Cardinal Winning? Having voted at the time to have the necessary protection put in the bill, will the cabinet secretary pledge today to return to the act's code of practice those words exactly as they were set out and inserted nine years ago in order to provide the same reassurance today as was provided when the act was first made?

Does the member recall that when the Parliament discussed Brandon Muir's sad death, he shouted, from a sedentary position, that that had happened under a Labour Administration? Does he regret doing that? Is that not a political insult?

In 2006, the previous Labour-led Executive published a draft children's services (Scotland) bill. Regrettably, the Scottish National Party decided to abandon that bill because it believed that more had to be done before changing the way in which information is shared by different agencies. It is three years since that draft bill was issued, but little has been done—at least, there is no evidence of much being done—and a bill has yet to see the light of day. The Government has published only one draft bill that relates to child protection—the children's hearings (Scotland) bill—but it had to drop that, before resurrecting it, so inept is the team of education ministers. If that is an indication of how seriously the SNP takes the matter, we should be alarmed for the future safety of children in Scotland under this Administration. If the SNP genuinely believes that its e-care framework or the vulnerable persons system for Scottish police services meets the provisions that were envisaged in our proposed children's services (Scotland) bill, we really are in trouble. That is why Labour, but in particular Iain Gray, has stated on several occasions that we would support a children's services bill if the SNP introduced it. A recent report showed that 90 per cent of child abuse happens in the home. It is therefore essential that we do everything that we can to protect vulnerable children in a place where they should feel safe and free from harm. The Scottish Government's website states: "Scottish Ministers are committed to improving the protections offered to children and young people in our communities. We recognise that the best way to do this is by taking appropriate, proportionate and timely action to support those children who need it."  Those are absolutely the right words and they indicate the action that we would expect to see from the Government, but how much time does the SNP need before we see that action?

I am always happy to take an intervention from Mr FitzPatrick, but I have found it to be a waste of time on every occasion. I am not politicising the debate but highlighting the need for the Government to take decisions. Any criticism of the Administration is used by the SNP to say that we are carping and complaining. Our job is to hold the Government to account. Mr FitzPatrick must accept that we need to say it as it is: we cannot accept a cosy consensus that is a false consensus. We should not really be surprised by the situation, given that the SNP prefers to spend time on the national blether. Would it not be better to put that on hold for a while? So far, the SNP Government has wasted £700,000 of taxpayers' money on its national conversation instead of using that money to fund services to protect our children. What type of Government prioritises a referendum bill over the need to address the serious issue of child protection? The seemingly endless review of child protection services is a poor substitute for the action that is needed. Our children deserve better than that. No member would want to see any other child's life ended in the way that Brandon Muir's was because of an inability of child protection agencies to share information with each other. Under this Administration, we are asked to accept a situation in which the majority of inspection reports mark our local authority child protection services as "satisfactory", which means that strengths just outweigh weaknesses in meeting children's needs. From the briefing that was issued yesterday, it is apparent that the Association of Directors of Social Work is happy to accept such low standards. That should worry us all. I am pleased that such low standards are not good enough for the Labour group in the Parliament. The children's charter that was developed under the previous Labour-led Executive pledged that children and young people who are at risk of neglect or abuse would get the help that they need when they need it and that professionals would use all the powers available to them in order to help such children. We also pledged that those involved with helping such children and young people would share information to help to protect them and to work effectively on their behalf.  I am still 100 per cent committed to those pledges. I am disappointed that the current Government clearly does not share that commitment.

We have had a good debate, which has demonstrated how highly MSPs value the public petitions process. It has also demonstrated that, in debates on issues on which a lot of consensus exists even before we start, it is a good idea for members to leave something out of their opening speech if they know that they will be required to wind up. I agree with colleagues who rightly noted the system's positive aspects. John Farquhar Munro outlined the hard work that the committee has undertaken on engagement. It is right that we should thank the clerks whenever the opportunity arises for their hard work in ensuring that MSPs have the opportunity to undertake that engagement. Bruce Crawford mentioned the absence of a requirement for the involvement of MSPs in our system, which is unlike the petitions system at Westminster, where MPs must be involved. The committee took that important step some time ago, as it was found that too many petitions reflected the desire of an MSP to exploit a local situation to grandstand, rather than help a local community engage in the policy process. Nanette Milne and Jim Hume highlighted the range of petitions that the committee has addressed and rightly looked forward to consider how we can give access to people so that they raise even more issues for consideration, even if that creates greater consternation for Marlyn Glen. Marlyn Glen identified an important issue in the report and argued that, if local authorities were to set up petitions systems, the petitions that come to the Parliament might be more focused. Tricia Marwick and Bruce Crawford helpfully outlined how the SPCB and the Government intend to help expand public engagement, which is welcome. Nigel Don addressed the process of consideration and investigation and made valid points about the danger of making rods for the committee's back and about getting the balance right in meeting the public's needs without  overburdening the petitions system. That point was driven home by Bill Butler who, typically, put the interests of the public to the fore in considering where that balance should lie. John Wilson proved beyond any doubt that the willing horse gets the most work. My fellow business managers and I appreciate it whenever we find a member who is willing to volunteer and take on responsibilities. Helen Eadie talked about change and referred to how John McAllion changed from being a Labour MSP. I am not sure that I welcome that particular type of change through the petitions system. Anne McLaughlin raised the important point that we need to take each petition on its merits, even if the source is narrower than we would like. She is absolutely right that we must focus on taking the Parliament to the people. We agree on the positive aspects of the report and the petitions system, but we must recognise that flaws in the system remain and have not been addressed adequately. The main flaw that was highlighted in a report that was produced during my convenership of the committee is that the system is used mostly by people who are already politically active and that the typical petitioner is male, white, middle class and well educated. Several members rightly pointed to that. However, the fact that the issue has not been resolved should not lead to despondency; instead, it should make us all aware of how much remains to be done to make the process genuinely inclusive. The consultative steering group identified that the Parliament must engage with groups in Scotland that are too often excluded from the democratic process. The petition that Young Scot lodged in June 2007 was therefore apposite in calling for the use of social media, online technology and other methods that should generate greater involvement with at least one of those groups—the important one of young people in Scotland. During my time on the committee, I always enjoyed considering petitions from young people, especially school students. It was no accident that the 1,000 th petition came from All Saints secondary school in Glasgow. That petition was heard as part of a civic participation meeting in one of the city's most deprived areas, so it is hardly surprising that the subjects that were covered that day related closely to the concerns that impact most on such communities—health, crime and financial support for hard-pressed families. That the committee had to get out of the Parliament building and physically meet in the midst of a deprived community to hear those petitions is perhaps indicative of the committee's problem in reaching groups in society that feel distant from our proceedings.  As paragraph 88 of the report notes, the innovative approach that the Parliament sought from the outset "has perhaps been lacking". That part of the report relates to the use of information and communication technology, but it could just as well refer to the Parliament's general difficulty in encouraging hard-to-reach groups to engage. The debate has shown that the Public Petitions Committee is well aware of that challenge. The test for the rest of the Parliament is to support the committee's efforts on public engagement and social inclusion. The report contains good proposals for the use of social networking sites and web technology and on how to develop further the outreach strategy. We rightly continue to pride ourselves on having been at the forefront on civic participation since 1999, but we must now look forward, and the report will stand us in good stead in our efforts to do so. Once again, I commend it to the Parliament.

I thank the Public Petitions Committee for providing us with this opportunity, through producing its report, to consider how far the public petitions system has come in the first 10 years of devolution. The most important aspect of the committee's latest report is that it shows us that we are not content to believe that Scots have access to the policy-making process purely because we assert that that is so. In asking Dr Carman and Ipsos MORI to look again at our petitions system, Frank McAveety and his colleagues have taken the lead in showing that Parliament is not prepared to rest on its laurels. When I am asked—as we all often are—what makes the Scottish Parliament different from Westminster, I invariably use our petitions system as the prime example of the central difference that exists, which is that we here are enhancing civic participation in the parliamentary process. Having had the privilege of being convener of the committee throughout the second session of the Parliament, I am particularly proud to have been involved in the introduction of the e-petitioning system. I believe that it enhances access to the policy-making process, which the petitions system was created to achieve from the outset. Petitioning of Parliament dates back to the Magna Carta, so our system is far from being unique or novel. However, the way that it operates and the way in which the committee handles petitions make it innovatory. I can testify that the ability to submit a petition to the Parliament electronically was an innovation that intrigued e-democracy exponents from throughout the world when we discussed it in Brussels. The Parliaments of many countries told us at that conference that they use information and communication technology to engage with the public, but we showed that Scotland led the way with discussion forums on our e-petitions system, which bring the world into our deliberations. One thing that has been confirmed through Dr Carman's analysis is that it is difficult to gauge the level of attainment of the public petitions system, because assessment of the success of a petition depends on our knowing what the expectations of the petitioner were at the outset of the process. Logic tells us that the degree of anticipation will vary from one person to another. For some petitioners, the mere opportunity to bring their issue to Parliament will be considered a success, whereas for others, no outcome short of hearing total agreement with their views will suffice. Some petitions have had an impact on public debate. Some, such as the petition on institutional  child abuse, have led to debate in the chamber and have brought about policy change. Others have resulted in changes in the law, such as when Parliament legislated in 2003 to prohibit the spreading of raw sewage on agricultural land. More recently, the inquiry into the availability of national health service cancer treatment and the debate on knife crime, which were mentioned by John Farquhar Munro, have clearly enabled members of the public to have a direct input into the political process. The committee's report serves to confirm that our public petitions system has developed appreciably since 1999. Dr Carman's report in 2006 identified that some petitioners felt that they were not well informed abut the progress of their petition. It is good to note that the current committee has addressed that situation by providing extracts from each meeting at which the committee considered the petition, information on decisions that the committee took, and links to the Official Report and to Scottish Parliament information centre briefings and the written submissions on the petition that were made to the committee. The inquiry shows that there is still a lack of knowledge about the Scottish Parliament's responsibilities and that people are generally unaware of the opportunities that are available for engagement with the petitions system. It has also exposed the fact that, although it has been innovative on e-petitioning, the Scottish Parliament is not maximising the use of modern information technology. We showed that we were miles ahead of Westminster on petitioning at the outset of devolution in 1999, and we moved even further ahead in 2004 with our e-democracy, so it is disappointing that, by 2008, Westminster had established a dedicated YouTube channel and was experimenting with Twitter before the Public Petitions Committee had generated its own blog and Wikipedia page. That blog and page will now permit greater interaction between the committee, petitioners and interested members of the public and are welcome additions to the petitions process. We must acknowledge that, even with our best efforts so far, there remains a gulf between the Parliament and the public. More work needs to be done, but it is clear that Frank McAveety, his MSP colleagues and the clerks know that their response to the report provides evidence that the petitions system is continually and gradually closing the gap. The report and the implementation of its recommendations will ensure that the gap between the public and the political system will close further and I thank the committee for bringing the report to our attention.

Is the First Minister aware that my constituency has suffered one of the highest rates of increase in unemployment in Scotland and that the scale of the problem was exemplified last week when almost 6,000 job application forms were issued to people hoping to obtain one of the 400 jobs that will be created when Tesco opens its new store in Bellshill? Is the First Minister also aware that the number of clients seeking careers advice at the Bellshill careers service has doubled in the past year? If so, does he agree that Skills Development Scotland's decision last week to  close the service is madness? Is he as concerned as I am that SDS has chosen to abandon one of the hardest hit areas in Scotland to save the £100 a week that it costs to rent the office of the local Mosshill Credit Union? Will he join me in calling on SDS to reverse this ludicrous decision, or does he agree with the organisation that the unemployed workers and young people of Bellshill and Viewpark are not worth £100 of his Government's money?

Will the member give way?

It has been pointed out, this morning and in other places, that the writing on the Scottish Parliament's mace includes the word "compassion", reflecting one of the principles that should guide our deliberations as MSPs. However, in a timely reminder, the Rev David Cameron said this morning that the words "wisdom", "justice" and "integrity" are also engraved on the mace, indicating the range of qualities to which we, as elected representatives, should aspire. However vital it is, compassion cannot be and is not enough. Given all the values that are written on the mace, Mr MacAskill has no right to claim that he had to release Mr al-Megrahi to return to Libya. In his misguided desire to show that the SNP treats the values of Scotland as its personal property—rather than to show that we are a  compassionate country—he abjectly failed to follow due process and ignored the fact that alternative options were available if the Scottish Government had only had the wisdom, the sense of justice and the integrity to pursue them.

Yes, I do. Instead, what we had from Mr MacAskill was an entirely predictable situation. The Government created the circumstances that allowed the Libyan regime to embarrass our country as it jubilantly welcomed home a convicted bomber with Scottish flags. There is no point in Christine Grahame or Patrick Harvie trying to retry the case this morning—that is totally irrelevant to the fact that Mr al-Megrahi was released as a convicted bomber. The sight of saltires being waved on the tarmac at the airport in Tripoli has shamed Scotland, and it will take years for us to recover from the harm that has been done. We should make no mistake that the Scottish Government's decision has damaged Scotland. The fact that that outcome was abundantly foreseeable indicates that Mr MacAskill was lacking in wisdom. There was a clear case for providing Mr al-Megrahi with compassion, but allowing him to be welcomed back to Libya as a free man should not have been the option that was chosen. Palliative care standards in Scotland are of the highest anywhere, and such care can be delivered in a variety of settings. Hospice care does not have to be provided solely within the confines of a hospice building. If Greenock prison was found not to be a suitable location in which to deliver the care that was required, a suitable secure location should and would have been found elsewhere in Scotland had the matter been properly considered. We are required to ensure that justice is served against those who harm others—not retribution, nor vengeance, but fair punishment for the crime that has been committed. I firmly believe that Mr al-Megrahi was entitled to have the best care possible in his illness but, given the fact that he served only 11 days in jail for every victim of the Lockerbie bomb, I do not believe that Mr al-Megrahi was yet entitled to clemency. Equally important was the need for integrity in deciding whether compassionate release was warranted. Unfortunately, the entire handling of Mr al-Megrahi's release has been typified by media briefing, leaking and spin from the Scottish Government. Honesty and truth have been lost in  the decision-making process in this case. As has been pointed out, the Scottish Government has, among other things, misrepresented the medical evidence. Even more serious, it has manipulated the opinion of Strathclyde Police to create the impression that keeping Mr al-Megrahi in Scotland but outwith prison was not a viable option. There is also the matter of Mr MacAskill's bizarre reference to the involvement of "a higher power", by which we must presume he means God. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice claimed that his decision to show compassion was made on the basis that God had intervened to inflict a terminal illness on Mr al-Megrahi. I hope that I would never be so arrogant as to claim to have more compassion than anyone else. I would certainly never claim to have more compassion than God. It is offensive to suggest that a person who develops cancer has had it inflicted upon them by God for some crime. It is also unworthy of a Scottish Government minister to make that suggestion merely in order to send an ill-judged message to a stereotypical demographic across the Atlantic. I do not know what "higher power" Mr MacAskill believes in, but I am confident that my God is not such a callous one. It is important to me that Mr al-Megrahi was seen to be treated with humanity, and it is absolutely right that he should be allowed to see out his days with the dignity that was not afforded to the 270 people who died when Pan Am flight 103 was brought down. Mr MacAskill may argue that his decision was based on compassion, but it should also have been a wise, just and honest one—it was not. The Scottish Parliament must now try to repair the damage that has been done, and MSPs must do all that they can to make it clear that the decision was not made by the people of Scotland and that it certainly does not have their endorsement.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Murdo Fraser not only for taking my intervention but for exposing the fact that a Tory-SNP alliance brought down the previous Labour Government. Murdo Fraser has agreed with Michael Russell on a number of points. Does he agree with Michael Russell that those who pass legislation should encourage people not to pay their taxes?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

When I first learned that the Conservatives had, rather than hold the Scottish Government to account, chosen this subject for debate, I was disappointed but not surprised. Over the past two years, we have witnessed ever more examples of the strengthening of the tartan Tory alliance, which first emerged in the late 1970s, when the SNP and the Tories combined to bring down a Labour Government, heralding in the Thatcherite destruction of Scotland's economy. [ Interruption. ] Regardless of how many members in other parties might try to refute that, those are the facts.  As my Labour colleagues have argued this morning, the Tories could have used their time today to highlight the SNP's dangerous plans to end six-month sentences, they could have debated the state of Scottish schools, and they could have forced the issue on hospital-acquired infection, or the increasing problem of home repossessions. Instead, given the outcome of a similar debate yesterday in Westminster, they are indulging in a pointless debate in order to join with their tartan twins, not to argue for any high moral ideal, but for base political self-interest. Even if they are not prepared to hold the Scottish Government to account, we might have found some value in this debate—I agree entirely with Mike Rumbles on this—if our opponents had used their time to outline the policies that they would bring to a general election. However, not one policy idea has been forthcoming. We are left to wonder what the purpose would be of a general election now, as our opponents are clearly devoid of any policy ideas on which they would fight a campaign. The Tories have told us, however, that they cannot wait to get started on their campaign. I am sure that we will see David Cameron's fake concern for our disadvantaged communities soon enough. It would appear that he will be visiting as many people with no hope and no money as he can, to learn from their experience. His first stop will be Nick Clegg's office. The debate has helped to expose yet more of the contempt with which the First Minister treats this place. Alex Salmond would prefer to pop off to Westminster to attempt to repeat history and vote down a Labour Government, than to take part in important votes on sexual offences legislation. I appreciate that he cannot vote in two places at the same time, even though his Westminster expenses claims indicate that he may have the capacity to eat in two places at the same time, but how telling it is that he hates Labour more than he cares for the victims of crime. Alex Salmond has never been able to make his mind up about whether he prefers Westminster to Holyrood. I was going to suggest that he should take a long, hard look in the mirror, but there is no point—he admires himself so much that he will be doing that anyway. The debate has provided us with the opportunity to remind the Scottish people of the 18 years of Thatcherism. Scots remember Ravenscraig, the demolition of the Scottish mining industry and the Tories using Scotland as a guinea pig for their hated poll tax. The tartan Tory alliance claims that we need a general election so that we can restore trust and confidence in Parliament and politicians, but the motion merely exposes the SNP's desire to join forces with the Tories in order to defeat  Labour. The fact is that the next general election will be a two-horse race between Labour and the Tories. The SNP's support for an election now, as it was in 1979, is calculated to help to put a Tory—David Cameron—in office. The SNP wants not an election but a Tory Government. It knows that Scotland dislikes the Tory party and hopes that the election of David Cameron would drive more Scots towards supporting independence. No matter how good it thinks that that strategy is, it should consider the results.

I could not disagree more with Margo MacDonald. We need more time to remind people of what the Tories did when they were in office; that the Labour Government delivered the Scottish Parliament when it promised to do so; that it introduced a minimum wage that the tartan Tories opposed; and that there are other great benefits of the Labour Government. We are in a recession and we must, although it is a difficult time, remind the people what Labour Governments have done for Scotland. I would never give up the opportunity to do that. Scotland and its people are far too important to be treated as pawns in the SNP's obsessive constitutional game. Labour is down, but it is certainly not out. The Labour Government led by Gordon Brown will lead us out of the recession, and Labour and the UK economy will be stronger for it. That is why the tartan Tories want an election. The debate has been an utter waste of Parliament's time. The Tories will win the vote tonight, but they will not get what they want and will not get the result when the election comes.

I congratulate Patrick Harvie on securing the safe passage of his bill. As the convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on disability, I have been made very aware of the view of organisations that take forward issues on behalf of disabled people—like those who take forward issues for the LGBT community—that the bill is of huge significance to them. With the passing of the bill, we will send a clear message to Scotland that hate crime, no matter what form it takes, is unacceptable. However, let us not forget that, although they have always existed, hate crimes of any sort have never really been acceptable in Scotland, either to the majority in society or in Scots law. The bill will introduce no new offence or sentencing measures, but it will bring greater and welcome consistency to the handling, recording and sentencing of hate crime. That is why I support it. Unfortunately, as with our attempts to legislate away race hate and sectarianism, nothing in the bill says to me that our society will be freer from hate crime just because we pass the bill. Perhaps I see the situation as a glass that is half empty rather than a glass that is half full, as my colleague Bill Butler sees it. That is because, although our police have had numerous additional powers given to them by the Parliament on a range of issues, such as sectarianism and antisocial behaviour, there is little evidence that the police and our courts are using those powers in proportion to the occurrence of the crimes that they exist to tackle. For example, a few months ago, I witnessed two inebriated men outside Central station in Glasgow singing "The Famine Song" at the top of their voices. Two police officers were asked by a few people to do something about the racist chanting that they were being subjected to, only to find that the officers were not really interested in tackling the incident. I can therefore only hope that the police will reflect on that, given the decision that is likely to be taken today to pass the bill. There is no point in having the law if our law officers do not act on it. As I said, all disability organisations welcome the bill, with Inclusion Scotland calling on us to ensure in particular that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and the police are equipped to recognise hate crime against disabled people for what it is. I hope that we can achieve that, but if the police's recognition of anti-Irish racism is anything to go by, I have my doubts. The bill was introduced as a recommendation of the "Working Group on Hate Crime Report", which also recommended doing 13 different things in  addition to the bill. I therefore hope that all the other recommendations can be acted on as quickly as the call to have legislation enacted was. Again, though, I have my doubts about that. In 2004, Capability Scotland conducted a survey that showed that nearly 50 per cent of disabled people had experienced some sort of hate crime in their lives. I was horrified to learn that some disabled people indicated that they accepted hate crime as part of their daily life because of their impairment. That situation is utterly unacceptable and I am pleased that the Parliament has sought to address it, but we should not let people believe that the bill will be an end to the matter. We must continue to address this serious problem in the future, because, as important as the bill is, it is not a panacea. I do not believe that Patrick Harvie believes it to be that; he said that the bill was not a silver bullet. The bill should be the starting point of the Parliament driving forward an agenda to address the concerns of the LGBT community and disabled people, and all those minorities who are affected by hate crime, which has not been acceptable and will not be acceptable. We must all encourage the agencies involved to drive forward an agenda that will ensure that hate crime, where it exists, will not be acceptable and will be dealt with, and that Scotland will become a better society because it is the will of the Parliament that it should be so. For that reason, I support the bill.

Does the First Minister recognise that the families of the 14 elderly residents who perished in the fire at the Rosepark nursing home in Uddingston in my constituency have been waiting more than five years now for justice and answers in the wake of the tragedy? This week, the latest attempt by the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service to bring charges against the owners of the nursing home failed. It now seems unlikely that the families will ever receive justice, because of the Crown Office's mistake in serving the original charges on the company that owned the home at the time rather than on the directors, who subsequently dissolved that company and created a new one to run the home. Will the First Minister assure me, other members and, most important, the bereaved families that a fatal accident inquiry, or another form of public inquiry, will be held to ensure that answers are found and that lessons are learned from the tragedy? Will he also assure the people of Scotland that the legal loophole that allowed the company to avoid being charged will be closed—using the legislative opportunity that is provided by the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill—so that no individual director or corporate  entity can escape justice in the future by using that loophole?

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the economic implications for Glasgow and Scotland of any Scottish football clubs playing in the English Premier League. (S3O-6736)

I am somewhat surprised by the cabinet secretary's response. If an engineering company, an electronics company or a financial services company that wished to expand into an English market met with the same inactivity from the Government, we would question  the motives behind the Government's inaction. Given the fact that both Celtic Football Club and Rangers Football Club have made it clear on several occasions that they believe that they have outgrown Scottish football and that, to expand further, they require to find a new marketplace, will the Government give a commitment to assist both those football institutions to expand into the English Premier League if that becomes a viable proposition?

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the public meeting that took place in Bellshill on Tuesday evening? The parents of students at Orbiston nursery school and Lawmuir and Sacred Heart primary schools came together to oppose North Lanarkshire Council's proposal to close Orbiston nursery school in order to relocate provision within the two neighbouring primary schools, thereby removing the opportunity to reduce class sizes as envisaged. Is the cabinet secretary aware that the information technology room at Lawmuir primary is to be relocated to an open space, which she and I would probably call a corridor, in order to accommodate the provision of new nursery places at the primary school? Will she tell me who she thinks is responsible for such a ludicrous situation?

When the Vestas plant in Campbeltown, the Inverurie paper-mill and the NCR plant in Dundee announced either a closure or major job losses, ministers were falling over themselves to make it clear that the Scottish Government would do everything in its power to help, and quite rightly so. What a pity, therefore, that, when Vion in Cambuslang, Freescale in East Kilbride, Corus in Mossend, in my constituency, and too many other Lanarkshire companies made similar announcements, that same rush to offer direct assistance was missing. Why should that be? I believe that it is because Lanarkshire does not attract the same interest from the Government as those parts of Scotland that favour the governing party. For more evidence of that bias we need look no further than the strategic transport projects review, which clearly favoured projects in other  areas of Scotland over those in the west of Scotland. At a time when unemployment levels in Scotland's traditional heartlands are on the increase, it is nothing short of shameful that the Government's concerns for those areas are diminishing. Only yesterday the latest figures revealed an increase to 5.7 per cent unemployment in my constituency. It would be wrong to blame the Government for the demise of many of the companies that have failed as a result of the worldwide economic downturn, but we can ask the Government where the investment is that is urgently needed to alleviate that adverse economic impact. For example, Terex, in my constituency, has made more than 100 people redundant in the past six months. I met representatives of the management there a few weeks ago. I used to work for that firm as an apprentice, and I have a vested interest in seeing the company continue. I asked managers what they needed to happen, in this economic climate, for the company to return to being the thriving business that it once was. They made it absolutely clear that they needed more infrastructure projects. The company makes earth-moving equipment to lay the groundwork for roads and houses, and other capital infrastructure projects. We need investment in that area to allow companies such as Terex to make a comeback. In Lanarkshire, we know from our experience of previous recessions that the road network, which centres on my constituency, with the M8 and M74 just 2 miles apart, and with the M80 and major trunk roads in close proximity, forms the basis on which we can combat some of the economic problems that we face. The area has become synonymous with distribution and logistics, which, in the past, have helped to attract numerous major employers, corporate headquarters and inward investment to locate in the many excellent commercial locations across the county, such as Eurocentral. However, rather than the major works that are in the pipeline being advanced, there are signs that they are being subjected to delays. Those projects would benefit from the type of intervention that that the Government pledges to its favoured areas. The M74 link is now under construction, but the equally vital upgrade of the remaining section of the A8 to motorway status concerns many people in my area. One company in particular, which seeks to build a connecting road to the existing A8, has brought to my attention the fact that a decision on the road, which was expected in the autumn of 2008, is still no nearer. The key junction upgrade at the Raith interchange needs to be completed as quickly as possible to secure the full economic benefits of  forthcoming schemes and to eliminate unnecessary congestion. Local knowledge is telling us that the timetable for the underpass work at the Raith is slipping. I urge the minister to tell us what he is doing to progress the matter. Delays will bring huge cost to the taxpayer and will mean that people will continue to get caught up in traffic jams at the Raith interchange every day, especially at peak times. The jams can stretch back dangerously far from the roundabout, on to the inside lane of the southbound M74. In addition, there are delays to the Ravenscraig development, mostly due to the development's having been downgraded from a national project to a regional project. The biggest brownfield development in Europe is no longer regarded as a priority by the Administration, in yet another sign of anti-Lanarkshire bias. The subsequent shortfall in investment has delayed the dualling of the A723, which connects Ravenscraig to the A8 via Holytown. Time does not permit me to go into detail about the many consequences of the Government's continuing failure to invest in transport infrastructure projects in the west of Scotland. I have been able only to scratch the surface of the problems that are being caused by this Government's applying of the brakes to our transport projects. I urge the minister to get investment into the fast lane and to start applying the accelerator.

Throughout my time in the Parliament, I have had to do a lot of thinking about antisocial behaviour. I have had to deal with the issue in one part of my constituency or another on a permanent basis since 1999. My constituency takes in two local authority areas, South and North Lanarkshire, which have different attitudes to dealing with antisocial behaviour. Much has been made of South Lanarkshire Council's initiatives regarding young people, but is it not striking that that council, which is held up as an example, has actually used the measures that are available in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 more often than North Lanarkshire Council? North Lanarkshire Council's strategy was introduced in 2005 and was entitled, "Building Better Neighbourhoods". The main aim of the strategy was to make North Lanarkshire a place where people want to live, choose to work, do business and have a fair chance in life; a place where children and young people are safe, respected, responsible and included. If we compare that strategy with the SNP Government's framework, we note that the Government has set out a similar objective. It is hardly surprising, therefore, that Councillor Harry McGuigan, COSLA spokesperson for community wellbeing and safety, said: "I wholeheartedly endorse this new Antisocial Behaviour Framework", given that he is a councillor in North Lanarkshire. For me, the key word in that quotation from Councillor McGuigan is that he believes the Government's framework to be a positive "new" approach, but it cannot be new if the council that he serves was marked out for the antisocial behaviour pilot in 2004. It had the same objectives then as the SNP-COSLA alliance want to con us with now. I know only too well the plight that antisocial behaviour can cause my constituents, and I understand their frustration at what can often be a lack of progress when they try to persuade the local authority to use the existing antisocial behaviour legislation. The minister spoke about Councillor McGuigan listening to local communities. I well recall the meeting at which almost 100 residents of the Jewel scheme in Bellshill pleaded for support from the local authority and the police to take action to end the blight of antisocial behaviour in their area. On that occasion, I shared a platform with Councillor McGuigan. If he heard the same message that I heard that night, I am surprised that he could put his name to the Government's document. The difficulty of securing ASBOs is no reason not to use them. I know that Kenny MacAskill  believes that youths in our community treat ASBOs like a badge of honour, but how can he explain his comment when, up until March 2008, only 14 ASBOs had been issued on young people between the ages of 12 and 15? On that evidence, ASBOs do not appear to be as popular a symbol as he would suggest. If they were de rigueur, surely more young people would seek to have them. A great deal of work is done with young people to prevent the need for an ASBO to be served, so the fact that only a small number of them have been used is more of an indicator of the success of intervention than of a failure in the use of ASBOs. It would be a failure to serve ASBOs on hundreds of young people whose behaviour had not been corrected. That conclusion does not sit well with the soft-touch attitude of this Government. ASBOs relate to the prohibition of an individual and are intended to prevent further antisocial acts. They are an intervention and are not designed to be implemented as a criminal punishment. The SNP complains that ASBOs are costly, but the cost to a victim of antisocial behaviour goes way beyond the financial. The justice ministers in this cynical Administration clearly know the cost of justice but not its value: to victims, a few thousand pounds is a small price to pay in exchange for an ASBO if it goes all, or some, of the way to positively affecting someone's offending behaviour. Until now, people on the receiving end of unacceptable behaviour could rely on an ASBO to go some way towards stopping that behaviour. Any person or group that has been on the receiving end of antisocial behaviour will realise only too well how frightening and distressing it can be.

We have not tried to use ASBOs to the extent that is required. The reality of the situation is that the SNP does not want to use ASBOs; it is trying to take the soft option and to cut costs, which will not serve our communities. The members of those communities can be forgiven for feeling that someone who inflicts antisocial behaviour on them or their community deserves more than they will get as a result of the soft-touch approach that the SNP-COSLA alliance is to adopt.  The launch of the Scottish Government's framework, which is supported by its COSLA partners in the nexus of neglect, has got me thinking about how I will tell my constituents that, unlike the previous Labour-led Executive, this Administration simply does not care about them or about how antisocial behaviour impacts on their lives. I look forward to the SNP being held to account for its abandonment of our communities when the time comes.

I am delighted to take part in the debate. On behalf of the many disabled people who will benefit from the bill, I thank Jackie Baillie for introducing it. I share others' sadness that she is not here today to see the bill being passed,  given the hard work that she has put in. I am not sure that she would agree with Dr McKee's representation of her. I am confident that Karen Gillon, who is a fellow Lanarkshire politician, would not agree with the suggestion that a stiletto would be among the armoury that we would use on our political opponents—that is an insult! [ Laughter. ] As the convener of the cross-party group on disability and the father of a disabled daughter, I know only too well the problems that disabled people experience when they try to find a suitable parking space. Not only do they often have a battle to get a car that suits them in the first place, but they then have to battle to park it—something that so many of us take for granted. I have yet to meet a person who will admit to using a disabled parking bay to which they are not entitled, but the problem is widespread. As Duncan McNeil and John Wilson said, the baywatch campaign found that one in five disabled parking bays in Britain are used by drivers who do not have a blue badge. I believe that people who misuse disabled parking bays know that they are doing something wrong but do not want others to think badly of them, which is why they are reluctant to confess to their inconsiderate behaviour. Passing the bill is the right thing to do for its own sake, but if the bill also makes people take note of the impact that their selfishness has on others, and on disabled people in particular, it will be a success in more ways than one. We have all seen the selfish driver parking in a disabled spot outside the supermarket and jumping out of their car without putting a blue badge in the window. We all know that the space should be used for the benefit of the disabled, who are rightly entitled to park there. As others have said, it is regrettable that we have to legislate to enforce the necessary consideration that everyone else takes for granted. There are more than 1 million disabled people in Scotland, of whom more than 225,000 are blue badge holders and 96,000 are wheelchair users. Nearly a quarter of the total population of Scotland are disabled and yet they have to fight their way into a parking space when carrying out a daily chore, such as visiting the supermarket. We know that the blue badge scheme can be abused. However, people who use a blue badge might not be the stereotypical disabled person that we would recognise. I am sure that we have all made a comment or two about the selfish driver who parks in a disabled parking bay, but I urge everyone not to be too quick to judge. We must always be careful to look at the disabled person. I concur with the personal perspective that Bob Doris outlined. I have lost count of the number of  disabled people who have told me that they are often glared at if they park in a disabled bay because they can walk unaided. Equally, the available figures tell us that not all disabled people use the blue badge scheme, but they do not tell us the reasons for that. Some disabled people say that they have not applied for the badge because they do not want to use it to take the space of someone more deserving. My daughter, who drives a Motability adapted car, does not have a blue badge, because she believes that the space that she could use should go to someone more in need. That does not make her any less disabled; it indicates her independent judgment on the issue. For some disabled people, their car is their lifeline; it is not something that they use as a status symbol, as so many people do. Too often, public transport is not an effective option for disabled people. Leonard Cheshire Disability found that 70 per cent of disabled people state that they cannot rely on public transport. For them, the car is the only way that they can access what we take for granted. The Parliament must continue to address that issue, but, for now, we should support the only bill that promotes the rights of disabled drivers in Scotland. I commend Jackie Baillie, and all the disabled groups that have fought so hard, for making the bill possible.

I am sure that the First Minister will agree with me that, in the current recession, any redundancies are regrettable. I bring to his attention two particular cases in my constituency that were announced this week. Just this morning, E.ON announced the closure of its retail service call centre in Tannochside in Uddingston. Will the First Minister assist the various trade unions that are trying to talk to Scottish and Southern Energy, which in Cumbernauld is recruiting people who operate in the same sector? Will he bring his good offices to bear to get E.ON and Scottish and Southern Energy together with the aim of transferring to  Cumbernauld the jobs that will be lost at Tannochside? Is the First Minister aware of the decision by Corus on Monday to close the steel stockholders plant in Mossend with the loss of 78 jobs? That is a particularly difficult issue, because the plant is viable and efficient and is making profit, but it is to be asset stripped, with machinery being taken to a plant in England. Will the First Minister support the campaign of the Community union, which is fighting to save the plant by having it sold as a going concern so that, as happened with a company in Teeside that Corus previously owned, it can go into the market and compete in its own right?

If the Conservatives found town centre regeneration so important, why did they vote against that opportunity when it was presented in last year's budget? I have watched "Celebrity Big Brother" over the past wee while and seen Mini Me; will Derek Brownlee stop being Mini Swinney and address the Government's budget?

As Derek Brownlee is running out of time, can I invite him to talk about the SNP's budget, which is what today's debate is about?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made towards implementing the wheelchair and seating services modernisation draft action plan. (S3O-4714)

Does the cabinet secretary share the concerns of disability groups that several recommendations in the 2006 report, "Moving Forward: Review of NHS Wheelchair and Seating Services in Scotland", which are critical to the success of the modernisation plan, have been omitted from the action plan? Those include the establishment of a single national structure, which would enable uniform development throughout Scotland; the monitoring and evaluation of standards; and the removal of the eligibility criteria, which are used to restrict access to resources. Does the cabinet secretary believe, since almost one quarter of the original recommendations in the report do not appear in the action plan, that the expectation of wheelchair users and disability groups can be met by what remains of the modernisation plan?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Bruce Crawford for that information, but I ask him why, if it is so important, he did not make it available to the bureau yesterday? Rather than Mr Crawford clarifying the situation, he has introduced something else into it, which makes us even more suspicious of the motivation behind the arrangement.

Few people would disagree with the view that all patients who are reaching the end of their lives and who require a palliative approach to treatment should be able to get it regardless of their condition. That seems to me a fundamental human right. However, the unfortunate reality is that, for many conditions, especially non-cancer ones such as lymphoedema or Parkinson's disease, palliative care services are limited and do not reach many of the people who need them the most. My motion focuses on advanced heart failure, which fares particularly poorly in relation to palliative care services. Premature mortality from heart disease has fallen significantly in the past 10 years. That is great news, which shows the impact that improved lifestyles, combined with new technological developments and well-organised national health service services, can have. However, one consequence of the decrease in premature mortality from heart disease and the fact that we have an ageing population is that more people than ever before are living with conditions such as heart failure. There are at least 5,500 to 6,000 new cases of heart failure each year in Scotland, but few of those patients receive adequate palliative care support.  There is a lot of misunderstanding about what heart failure is, so it is important to say a little about that. Advanced heart failure is a debilitating and life-threatening condition for which there is no cure. Just like any other muscle, the heart can be damaged by trauma such as that which is sustained during a heart attack. Heart failure is the term for when the heart is damaged to the extent that it cannot pump blood round the body properly. Heart failure patients often have distressing symptoms and a worse prognosis and quality of life than many cancer patients. Some patients say that the condition makes them feel as if they are drowning. Studies have shown that heart failure is associated with worse long-term survival rates than bowel cancer in men and breast cancer in women. Half of patients with advanced heart failure die within a year of diagnosis and half of the remainder die within five years. In all settings, a significant issue is that many patients with advanced heart failure die suddenly and without having discussed their wishes and needs, as often they have not been advised that their condition is fatal. Heart failure needs to be embedded in all initiatives for patients with chronic conditions. Advance care planning for all those with life-limiting illnesses is imperative in all care settings, and closer, collaborative approaches to planning a patient's journey result in care that is appropriate to the stages of their illness. Despite symptoms that are highly distressing for patients and carers, the vast majority of advanced heart failure patients do not get access to palliative care, partly because the likelihood of sudden death makes it difficult to predict individual prognosis. Before the summer recess, the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on palliative care discussed the contents of the Scottish Partnership for Palliative Care report "Living and dying with advanced heart failure: a palliative care approach", which was part-funded by the British Heart Foundation Scotland. One question that emerged was why the palliative care needs of patients with advanced heart failure were often neglected. One reason was health professionals' uncertainty about the condition, especially with regard to the point at which a patient enters the terminal phase. The fact that that point is much more difficult to predict for heart failure patients than it is for those with other conditions, especially cancer, can leave health professionals unwilling to enter into the discussions with patients that are needed at the end-of-life stage. As in many other areas of health care, good communication is absolutely critical. Another reason why so few advanced heart failure patients get palliative care is that services have traditionally focused on cancer patients'  needs. However, that expertise can be used to develop appropriate services for end-of-life care for non-cancer conditions. There are some great examples of such work already, especially in the voluntary sector. Indeed, as convener of the CPG on palliative care, I have been made aware of the fantastic proposal by the British Heart Foundation and Marie Curie Cancer Care to establish a centre of excellence in Glasgow that will provide a comprehensive palliative care service for advanced heart failure patients and their families. The organisations' combined expertise will not only create a gold standard in palliative care for advanced heart failure, but pioneer a model of care for patients in Scotland and throughout the United Kingdom. With Marie Curie's expertise in palliative care working in tandem with the BHF's cardiovascular expertise, that comprehensive service will benefit not only heart failure patients at the end of life but their families, especially in the west of Scotland, where the problem is prevalent. The Scottish Government has acknowledged that the palliative care needs of patients with conditions other than cancer are not being adequately met. The Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline 95 on heart failure specifically recommended that a palliative approach be adopted at the early stage of the disease and the recent consultation that was published on the coronary heart disease and stroke strategy has stated that the palliative care needs of advanced heart failure patients still require attention. As a result, I warmly welcome the new palliative care strategy, especially the ring-fenced £3 million of annual funding. New approaches to palliative care will need to link up with established managed clinical networks, particularly those that work well for coronary heart disease and stroke services. Such an approach will permit continuity of care with, for example, the specialist heart failure nurses funded by the BHF, who are already working with many of these patients in every health board area. However, as the Royal College of Nursing has pointed out, that will pose a real challenge to the commitment of health boards and services in community, acute and care home settings to release staff for training. Although the University of the West of Scotland provides nurse education for most of the health board areas in the west of the country, shortages in the clinical area mean that nurses cannot be released for education and, as a result, many classes lie half empty. I welcome the focus on non-cancer conditions, particularly organ failure, and the approach to care that is person centred and based on patient and carer needs rather than on diagnosis or prognosis. It is crucial that we maintain that focus, because  there is a danger that the new money could be diverted into cancer-specific services, where pathways are well established, when the most urgent and pressing need is a focus on non-cancer conditions such as advanced heart failure. If ever there was an issue on which there should be a consensus across the political divide, it is this one. I hope that we all agree on one simple point: regardless of the diagnosis, everyone who needs palliative care should get it.

On having two ballot papers, did the Scottish National Party not expect that those who voted SNP on the constituency ballot would also vote SNP on the list?

We should welcome the fact that the Local Government and Communities Committee's report on the 2007 election has once more given us the chance to debate an issue—the method by which we select a Government—that exercises many a political anorak and academic. It is worth acknowledging the fact that since May 2007 I have not had to deal with one piece of constituency work relating to the issue; in fact, I have received no local correspondence on electoral systems in the nine years for which I have been an MSP. However, the matter is important, even if the electorate do not get as animated about it as we do. As members have pointed out, the democratic process is a vital component of an orderly society. Those who participate in the process must be assured that the system is just and will result in an outcome in which they can have confidence; whether people write to us in the aftermath of any problems that arise is not the issue. Although people must have a chance to have their say on the issues that emerged last year, I hope that this morning's debate will be the last time that we have  to discuss them. Surely it is time for us to move on from what happened last May and to concentrate on introducing the recommendations that members of the Local Government and Communities Committee have made. I agree with many of the committee's recommendations, but I am not entirely convinced by the view that there should be decoupling of Scottish Parliament and local government elections. I say to Mr McLetchie that if this were a show trial, I would be heading to the gulag. I accept that I have lost the argument on decoupling, but my concerns about the decision remain. Many colleagues in the chamber and in local authority chambers across Scotland agree with decoupling, because they believe that it will enable the public to distinguish clearly between the work that is done here in Holyrood and the work that local authorities do. I am not sure that the Scottish Government will always welcome decoupling as warmly as it does now, given the problems that it has created for local government through the partnership that it has established with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities—the famous hysterical concordat. Decoupling will allow us to give closer scrutiny to what local authorities have or have not done with the reduced funding that the Scottish Government has provided. I wonder whether the hysterical con will stand up to that scrutiny. I add a note of caution on the recommendation. We should not forget that turnout at local elections was on a downward trend before 1999. Many people believed that the reason for the decline was that the first-past-the-post system discouraged voters from turning out; they tried to convince us that putting in place a proportional representation system would help to overcome the problem. However, we cannot trust that simplistic analysis. If having a PR system encourages voter turnout, turnout in the proportional elections to this Parliament should be higher than in the first-past-the-post elections to Westminster, but we all know that that has not been the case. There is a real danger of reduced turnout in local elections. I wonder whether the situation will change when local elections are again held separately, as that would be to the detriment of our local authorities. For me, the most important recommendation in the committee's report and in the Gould report is that the administrative side of Scottish Parliament elections should be passed to the Parliament. I am in favour of such a move, but I do not believe that total control of those elections should be passed to the Parliament—I am pleased that the legislative part of the process will remain at Westminster. If the Labour Government, which introduced devolution in Scotland, still holds to the position in which it believed in 1996 and 1997, a quick response from the new Secretary of State for  Scotland to reiterate its opinion is in no way a knee-jerk reaction—it is a restatement of a view that the Government has held for 10 years.

I do not think that that would have mattered, given that he was restating a 10-year-old policy that the Government has no intention of changing. I could have told the member what Jim Murphy's response would be yesterday, today or tomorrow, because it is a restatement of the Government's position. It surprises me that the member is so surprised about it. Given that the SNP has introduced so little legislation in the 18 months since the election, I understand that it is desperate to find issues on which to legislate, but this is a devolved Parliament and I believe that it should remain so. I welcome the fact that parties will no longer be able to manipulate voters in the way in which some did last May by their use of the list system. Never again should such a thing happen. People should not be able to use the list system to massage the overinflated egos of their demagogic leaders. The Parliament and those who are elected to it should be respected once the outcome of an election is known. There can be no repetition of the episode that took place last May; that was not good for our reputation. I welcome the debate, but it is now time for us to move on. I am sure that the general public wish to see us debate issues of much higher importance. If the interest that my constituents have shown so far is anything to go by, for all that the issue matters to them we could be debating whether Mars bar cake should be on the menu in the tea bar. The issue is important, and I am glad that we are having today's debate, but we should move on from here.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It is normally understood that, as a courtesy to both constituency and list members, when a minister visits a constituency or makes an announcement from a constituency, those members are advised of that occurrence. The Labour and Liberal ministers previously had failings in that regard and it is understandable that, on occasions, the current ministers will make similar errors. However, when previous failures occurred it was regarded as an oversight rather than as a deliberate slight. Parliament's standing orders require courtesy to members and the ministerial code of conducts requires more—that both MSPs and MPs be treated with courtesy in such circumstances. This morning, an announcement was made by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning. I am advised that the constituency MSP and the MP were told, but I know for a fact that the Labour list MSPs were not told. In the circumstances, it is difficult to understand how an oversight could have occurred, as some members were advised of the visit but others were deliberately not advised. Presiding Officer, can you advise me whether the matter falls under the Parliament's standing orders or under the ministerial code of conduct, so that this discourtesy towards members may be addressed?

Some members may be surprised that I am taking part in this debate—some of our front-bench members certainly are—but I hope that my colleagues from rural parts of Scotland will not mind my intruding on their territory. I remind them that foot-and-mouth disease is not solely a rural problem; it can and has affected other parts of Scotland, such as the area that I represent in deepest Lanarkshire.  I welcome the Scudamore report, and record my thanks to Professor Scudamore and his team for carrying out the review. The report is a wide-ranging and comprehensive analysis of the problems that foot-and-mouth disease can bring to urban communities as well as to rural communities. My constituency of Hamilton North and Bellshill is home to only four small farms, which make up little of the local economy. More than 1,500 jobs rely on fish processing in my constituency, which puts the scale of farming in it into context. However, those jobs give me as a representative of a landlocked urban constituency more than a passing interest in rural affairs. My area is synonymous with logistics and transportation; it is also home to one of the largest rendering plants in Scotland. Therefore, when a foot-and-mouth problem emerges, my constituency—particularly the community of Newarthill—becomes central to addressing one of its outcomes. I fully understand the importance of abattoirs and rendering plants because of that and commend their work in general terms. However, more attention must be paid to the impact of those businesses on the communities in which they are established, particularly during periods of crisis. The extensive use of the Omoa works in my constituency when animal culls were necessary highlighted several issues. As the plant is some distance from where the animals involved are reared, the carcases are transported hundreds of miles to it. Many of us will find it hard to remember a hot summer in Scotland, but when a local plant exudes nauseating odours into the air around urban villages even in the dead of winter, members can imagine the level of the problem that a little heat can add to the already abhorrent smell that comes from the plant. I assure those who are not familiar with that smell that it is one of the most awful smells that anyone has the misfortune of experiencing. I grew up in Newarthill. Like others in the village, I had to live with the smell day in and day out. I am in no way suggesting that rural communities should suffer the smell just because they produce its source. I am saying that the regulation of such plants must be stringent, so that, wherever an abattoir or rendering plant is located, it has no adverse impact on its surroundings. I am not suggesting that the plant in my constituency needs to be closed. I welcome the jobs that it provides, but I urge a drive to make abattoirs local. Positive aspects of that would be employment opportunities for local people and the obvious reduction in carbon emissions. Had the previous owners of the Omoa works remained in place, I would have argued for the plant's closure—I argued for that in the past. At  the time of the foot-and-mouth crisis, the plant made great play of the fact that it was indispensable, so it was above the law. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency had a terrible problem in trying to make the company comply with odour emission regulations. The company had a strong bargaining position and knew it, so it felt under no obligation to respect the community. In that period, the emissions that affected local communities increased beyond the serious existing problem. However, the plant is now under new ownership and is operating in a manner that locals accept is greatly improved. That is clear evidence—if it were needed—that rendering facilities are not a problem in themselves. For practical reasons, it makes more sense for dead animals to be transferred to a facility that is close to the area where they were killed. That would mean that the smell that is generated is not as strong as that which my constituents experience all too often when dead animals are transferred from places such as Aberdeenshire and beyond and are left to putrefy in lorries while waiting to be rendered, having decayed as they travelled hundreds of miles. Abattoirs provide a useful service, but the sector should have more competition, so that communities are not blighted by selfish companies such as that which operated in my constituency. I urge the Scottish Government to develop more local abattoirs to help the farming industry first and foremost, and to give us a more effective and competitive system when disposing of animals during crises that diseases such as foot and mouth cause.

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it is giving to local authorities to enable them to provide joint facilities for waste recycling. (S3O-4412)

The cabinet secretary's response is some way short of providing any reassurance that existing targets can be met in the present circumstances. We do not want to get into an argument about ring fencing or otherwise, but can the cabinet secretary tell the chamber how he can ensure that local authorities know how much money is available, what targets they must meet and what commitments they are required to give in single outcome agreements? Without any reassurance on that, there will be no commitment; there will be only hope and crossed fingers that local authorities will be able to deliver in the  manner that he wants them to deliver on everyone's desire for more efficient waste recycling.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making on the one Scotland, many cultures campaign. (S3O-4314)

The minister will be aware that in March 2004, Margaret Curran, the then Minister for Communities, initiated a strategic review of local race equality work in Scotland and that that review was carried out between June 2004 and January 2005. Recommendations for a way forward were presented for consideration in November 2005 and we got a response to those recommendations at that time. One of the outcomes was the establishment of the race equality, integration and community support fund, which was worth £2 million over two years. What was the take-up of that specific fund? How much funding, in whatever guise it is now delivered, is available to meet the recommendations of the review? For how long will that funding remain available? Has it been assessed to determine whether it has been distributed on a pro rata basis among minority ethnic communities?

To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made on renewing school buildings. (S3O-4214)

I thank the minister for her very detailed response. However, I must point out that, like the Government's previous responses and claims, it causes confusion about the exact number of schools that this Government has been entirely responsible for building. Therefore, in an effort to remove any doubt, I ask the minister to tell us the number of schools that this Government is entirely responsible for initiating, starting, beginning, commencing or instigating—call it what you will—and which were not already being built under capital programmes in local authorities and had not been negotiated by the previous Government. When can we expect one of these schools to be built?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. We need some clarity on the process that has allowed us to arrive at this point. This is the second time that the Government, when it has faced defeat in a vote in this Parliament, has asked to withdraw its motion rather than allow Parliament to take its decision. The Government surely cannot be allowed to deploy that tactic to avoid facing the shambles that it has brought before the Parliament. Secondly, the financial memorandum was criticised in the committee report. The Parliament has raised the issue through its committees a number of times, even to the point of advising the minister and the Government that it had concerns over the financial resolution. Why is it that, when it comes to a vote being taken on the financial memorandum at decision time, the motion is being withdrawn? That surely cannot be an acceptable  way for Parliament to make decisions on such matters.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In the circumstances in which the matter has been brought to the Parliament, would it not be better that we do not vote on the motion on stage 1 of the bill, or on the motion on the financial resolution, and that we bring them back next week for the vote?

The First Minister may think that his ministers have answered 7,000 questions in six months, but I ask him to answer at least one question this afternoon. I agree with the comment in his statement that  "Parliamentary accountability is a vital aspect of the ministerial code" and I welcome his commitment that the independent panel should respond to or even appear before parliamentary committees. However, does he seriously believe that Parliament can have any confidence if it has no responsibility whatever for deciding who should form the independent panel?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions about its proposals for future investment in Scottish infrastructure it has had with representatives of European Governments. (S3O-3746) The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth (John Swinney): We published our plans for current and future investment in Scottish infrastructure at the end of March in our “Infrastructure Investment Plan 2008”. There were no specific discussions with European Governments over that plan, but the financial partnerships unit keeps in contact with several European Governments over methods of delivery and funding of infrastructure. Michael McMahon: Will the cabinet secretary take the time to visit the Irish Government’s public-private partnership website, which provides guidance on its PPP process? He will find there details of the new PPP projects that the Irish Government is taking forward, such as the Waterford bypass, the new criminal courts complex and five new secondary schools. Has he had any contact with the Nordic PPP forum, which provides a comprehensive analysis of infrastructure financing and developments in Sweden, Norway, Finland and Denmark, with advice from companies such as KPMG, PricewaterhouseCoopers and Ernst and Young? Could that effective use of PPP be one of the  reasons why the aforementioned countries form the SNP’s celebrated arc of prosperity? John Swinney: Mr McMahon will be aware that self-governing countries are free to take decisions as they choose. This Government simply wants Scotland to be a self-governing country. If Mr McMahon has had a road-to-Damascus conversion, he is welcome to join the Government in its aspiration for Scotland to be self governing. As Mr McMahon is an enthusiastic follower of everything that I say in Parliament on infrastructure matters, he will know that I have set out in committee, in a statement to Parliament and in a debate the ambitious infrastructure investment programme in which the Government is involved. As part of that programme, projects are under way in every part of Scotland. In close proximity to Mr McMahon’s parliamentary constituency, the development of the M74 is taking place, and there are school and hospital developments in every part of Scotland.  Mr McMahon should not worry about whether there is a lack of infrastructure investment activity. Through the Scottish futures trust and our infrastructure investment plan, the Government has put in place ambitious plans to invest in Scotland’s infrastructure, and we will take those plans forward. Andy Kerr (East Kilbride) (Lab): In relation to the point that was made in response to Mr McMahon’s question, I wonder what makes the Scottish Government’s strategy different from the strategies of the nations in the arc of prosperity, about which we hear so much in the chamber. Those nations are following the PPP route. I also wonder what makes the Scottish Government different from local government, the financial sector, the banks and the construction industry in Scotland, all of which think that the Scottish futures trust has no future. John Swinney: With questions like that, we all know that Mr Kerr has no future in his aspirations to get back in Government. I have made it clear to Parliament on numerous occasions—and have marshalled in “Infrastructure Investment Plan 2008”—the Government’s determination to invest in a significant £3 billion per annum strategic infrastructure investment programme that is making an impact in many parts of the country, not least in Mr Kerr’s constituency. We are determined to use the Scottish futures trust to aggregate projects and to develop the non-profit-distributing model to ensure that we retain expertise and leverage out more value for money for the taxpayer. That is what the Administration is about: it is determined to deliver maximum value for money for the taxpayers of Scotland, and that  is what we will deliver for the people of this country.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise for not giving you prior notice of this point of order, but the matter was brought to my attention during the votes this afternoon. Although we understand that members occasionally have business outside Parliament that requires them not to be here to take part in votes, the First Minister is not here today because he has chosen to take up his role as an MP at Westminster. I ask you to reflect on the fact that the First Minister, who should be accountable to this place, has chosen not to be here because he would prefer to take up another of his three jobs and go to Westminster rather than participate in the business that he was elected to be here for. That is an entirely different matter from a member being away from here on business that relates to the Scottish Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to encourage recycling in the private sector. (S3O-3642)

The minister is aware that SEPA consulted widely with business in March 2007 and introduced the business waste framework to assist businesses with recycling initiatives. The overall aim was to reduce the amount of business waste from premises by at least 200,000 tonnes and save businesses in Scotland £7.5 million a year through waste minimisation and diversion from landfill. How is that work progressing, and are the targets that the minister outlined being met?

To ask the Scottish Executive what the shortest average waiting time has been for central heating installations since the introduction of the central heating programme in 2001. (S3O-3347)

I thank the minister for his response, but I am bitterly disappointed that he continues to claim that at no point since the programme's inception in 2001 has the average waiting time been less than five months. In April 2007, the average waiting time was 113 days, which is actually less than four months. Does the minister intend to continue to claim that, in 2007-08, a record total of 14,377 central heating systems were installed and that the comparable figure in 2006-07 was 10,238? In fact, the total number of installations—not just those that have been carried out in private homes—was 16,788 in 2003-04, 15,207 in 2004-05 and 16,002 in 2005-06. Will the minister finally admit that he is attempting to mislead us with his claims and that the total number of installations was higher and waiting times lower under Labour?

I am convener of the cross-party group on disability and people regularly express to me concerns about the lack of consultation before changes are made to Government policy or practice. Is the minister aware that during the past few months I have asked a number of parliamentary questions in respect of those concerns, the answers to which have not satisfied disability groups in particular? Will he at last say what consultation took place with national organisations that represent disabled people and ethnic minorities on the closure of the fair for all disability and fair for all race projects before—not after—the establishment of the equalities and planning directorate in NHS Health Scotland?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The minister completely avoided answering my question, which I asked because my parliamentary questions have not been answered. I specifically asked the minister to say what consultation had taken place with disability and ethnic minority groups prior to the establishment of the equalities and planning directorate in NHS Health Scotland. The minister refuses to answer that question. Can you advise me on how I can get the minister to answer the questions that I ask rather than the questions that he would like me to ask?

If any student of the Parliament is looking for a case study of the different approaches to debates taken by the Government and the Opposition, today is a good example. This morning, we debated a detailed Labour Party motion on housing. In stark contrast, this afternoon the motion before us asks us to welcome "the opportunity to debate proposals to deliver better public services", but it does so in the now traditional manner of the Government, because the rest of the motion consists of nothing more than prosy sentiments aimed at getting away with the perception that the Government is doing something substantial without telling us how it is going to do anything at all. The motion asks us to support the reduction of "duplication, bureaucracy and overlaps in the public sector". Who would disagree with that aspiration? Unfortunately, we are then subjected to the usual Matheresque bunkum about "the aim of achieving greater focus and alignment with the Purpose of Government". The motion then goes on to ask us to look to "the outcomes set out in the national performance framework" for the evidence of what the Government is about to do. Unfortunately, I am none the wiser for having done so. The "Scottish Budget Spending Review 2007", which contains the framework, presents us with buzz words, managementspeak and meaningless baloney, all aimed at telling us that the Government's economic strategy aims to do this or that. However, there is nothing in the  framework that even hints at how those aspirations are to be met. We are to have "high level Purpose targets" and "Five Strategic Objectives support delivery of the Purpose". We are informed that "The whole of the public sector will, for the first time, be expected to contribute to one overarching Purpose". However, nowhere are we let in on the secret of how the Government intends this so-called purpose ever to be achieved. Based on the Government's record up to now, we can conclude only that, in short, it intends to pass the buck. The historic concordat comes to the rescue again. It is dragged out every time the Government is asked how something will be achieved—"It's in the historic concordat," we are told. There is no need for any explanation of what exactly we are debating this afternoon, because it is not for this Government to explain anything. The debate before us, therefore, amounts to a request for us to keep our fingers crossed, let the Government take the credit for what our public sector does right and blame the public sector for what might go wrong, even if it cannot admit, despite the growing evidence, that things are going wrong. Quite simply, that is not good enough. Scotland's public services are crucial to the fabric of our country. Our people value services such as education, health care and public transport far too much to leave them to chance. Modern and efficient public services lie at the very heart of a productive and fair society, which is why Labour believes in our public services and the people who deliver them. Yes, public services must improve their productivity, efficiency and performance. Service users and taxpayers have a right to expect that their hard-earned money is being spent on the right things and that public services are getting value for that money. Service users and taxpayers have to be confident that what is available is being used to best effect. What really counts is what people get for what is put in from the public purse. That is not a responsibility that this Government or any Government can abdicate, but, unfortunately, that is what this Government wants to do. The Government needs to tell us how it will tackle the variations in performance across our public services and bring all services up to the standards that are presently achieved by the best. Differences in performance are too marked at present and could get worse if single outcome agreements are not tight enough.  No one should be against local flexibility, but wide variations and postcode lotteries are not acceptable either. How will the Government address variations in the cost of services between authorities? What will the Government do to help us spread more effective and efficient practice throughout Government? The Government could have used this afternoon to answer those questions. Instead, we have had yet another insubstantial motion that tells us nothing and a debate that the Government hopes will allow it to skate around the issue. The motion confirms that the Government stands for spin over substance and perception over reality. It believes its own spin and has entered a delusional world if it thinks that the motion is good enough for the people of Scotland. Unfortunately, if we look through the document for examples of what we could be debating this afternoon, we find, on biodiversity, that the Government is going to "increase the index of abundance of terrestrial breeding birds". I do not know whether that means that it will try to count penguins or explore the possibility of breeding in midair. We have to know exactly what that means. That is no more meaningful than the objective to "Increase the proportion of adults making one or more visits to the outdoors per week", which leaves us with a vision of wardens going around our local communities, dragging people out into the street to ensure that that is what the Scotland of the future will be. That is not efficient Government; it is baloney. It is not good enough. The Government should not pretend that that is what Scotland is looking for from the Parliament.

When I had the privilege of being convener of the Public Petitions Committee, two of the most harrowing petitions that I encountered, from Enable and from the family of a fatal accident victim, sought amendments to the Fatal Accident and Sudden Deaths Inquiry (Scotland) Act 1976. As others have noted, Enable's petition arose from its concern that an FAI is not mandatory when people die in hospital care and that the outcomes of FAIs are not legally binding. The other petition  arose from the family's desire for fatal accident inquiries to be mandatory in the case of road deaths caused by careless driving. At the moment, a fatal accident inquiry following a road crash is held only at the discretion of the Lord Advocate and is mandatory only if the driver has died while driving in the course of his or her employment. The driver who caused the accident on the A725 Bellshill bypass in my constituency had travelled from Preston to the accident site in two hours and five minutes. For someone complying with the speed limits, a journey over that distance should take more than three hours and 10 minutes. The outcome of the subsequent court case led the victim's family to question why it is possible for someone to be tried and convicted for driving with such speed and carelessness that their actions led to the ending of a life yet for that death not even to be acknowledged by the judicial system. How can lessons be learned from road accidents if no inquiry follows them? The family had to come to the Public Petitions Committee to put pressure on the Crown Office into granting an FAI to answer the family's questions because the current system had so obviously failed them. As Margaret Smith pointed out, Enable lodged its petition primarily to address concerns about the implementation of the recommendations of fatal accident inquiries. It seems an almost incredible set of circumstances that an outcome of an FAI should have no legal force and that the sheriff's determinations and recommendations can be ignored. When such recommendations are made, should there not be some means by which they are monitored to ensure that they are acted on? Should they not be dealt with in an arena in which individuals or charities such as Enable are not required to pursue the implementation of the sheriff's recommendations? Those are fundamental questions, which I hope and am confident that Lord Cullen will address. I believe that FAIs should be inquisitorial rather than adversarial. They should get at the answers rather than provoke conflict between those asking the questions and those responding, who may be defensive because of the type of questions that are asked. I think that the current arrangements lead to defensive responses. That does not help us to get to the truth of the matter, nor does it help to prevent the situation from happening again. We certainly need a wide review of the purpose of fatal accident inquiries and the circumstances in which they are held, but there should also be a recognition that families and victims should be at the centre of such inquiries. There will be great merit in Lord Cullen's review if he can consider those issues. It would be worth considering having a presumption in favour of holding a fatal accident  inquiry for all road deaths because of the lessons that can be learned. If the Crown Office is concerned that families may not want an FAI, let the matter be judged on the basis of whether the family has asked for there not to be an FAI. The current presumption against holding an FAI forces families to come to the Public Petitions Committee to get the answers that they rightly seek and to which they are entitled. Would it not be preferable to assume that an FAI should be held unless the family would rather that the issues surrounding the loss of their loved one were not brought into the public domain? When the committee took up the issues, the previous Lord Advocate stated that families' views are sought on whether there should be a fatal accident inquiry. However, I wonder how proactively that is done and, indeed, why such action is taken at all, given that families' views are not the decisive factor in determining whether an inquiry should take place. The fundamental question that arose when we considered the petitions was who decides what is in the public interest. Should the Crown Office make that determination, or should those who are affected by the death of a loved one have more input and emphasis than those who seek to judge from their, dare I say it, detached position on the events that led to someone's death? If Lord Cullen's review provides an answer only to that fundamental question, it will have been a worthwhile exercise. From my experience of the demand for and the process of FAIs, and from the information that the committee received, the process has left far too many members of the public dissatisfied with a system that was created for the public and which is supposed to operate in the public interest. We must put the public at the heart of the system. I am sure that no one in the Crown Office wants to be seen not to do that, but the experience of the committee when we considered the issue was that what happens seems to be the converse of what the system is supposed to achieve. Lord Cullen's review must address that. I am confident that, if he addresses that fundamental question, he will get to the root of the dissatisfaction that people feel with the system.

I commend Jeremy Purvis for securing the debate. Although I profoundly disagree with the member on every aspect of his argument, it is admirable that in the face of continuing and overwhelming opposition from colleagues here, the medical professions, numerous voluntary sector carers groups and even his own political party—the members of which voted against his position at the Aberdeen party conference—he continues to plough his futile furrow. In the short time that is available to me it is not possible to rehearse all the reasons for opposing the motion. With the overwhelming evidence and array of concerns about Mr Purvis's intentions, it would entail a difficult debate, and it is difficult to know where to start on his position on euthanasia. He can call it whatever he wants—it is euthanasia. I could use religious or ethical arguments, but I have neither the theological nor the ethical knowledge to expound on those in any great detail. I appreciate, however, that in June 2006, when doctors voted overwhelmingly against legalising physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia, the BMA made it absolutely clear—as mentioned in the briefing that was sent out to members of the Parliament in anticipation of this debate—that properly resourced palliative care makes euthanasia unnecessary. Euthanasia is a desperate, negative and ultimately fruitless method of dealing with the issues that affect the terminally ill. It might be a cost-effective way to treat the terminally ill, but it will undoubtedly discourage the search for cures and treatments and it will undermine the motivation to provide good care and pain relief for the dying.

Those who participate in palliative care would argue that there is effective palliative care for every condition. Euthanasia is an inherently selfish concept that ignores the danger that vulnerable people will come under pressure to end their lives. Elderly and sick relatives will be coerced by selfish families, or face pressure to free up medical resources. Patients whose families believe that euthanasia is the only solution will be abandoned.  Palliative care can be enough to prevent a person feeling any need to contemplate euthanasia. A sick person matters to the last moment of their life. Medical professionals can help someone to die peacefully, but also to live until they die. They key to successful palliative care is to treat the patient as a person, not as a set of symptoms or a medical problem. As the World Health Organization states, palliative care "affirms life and regards dying as a normal process; it intends neither to hasten or postpone death ... it provides relief from pain" and suffering, and it "integrates the psychological and spiritual aspects" of the patient. Good palliative care is the alternative to euthanasia. If it were available to every patient, it would certainly reduce the desire for death to be brought about sooner. Mr Purvis used the example of Oregon, as do most people who support his position, but the reality is that comparing Oregon with Scotland is comparing apples with oranges. The hospice movement and palliative care in America are not the same as the hospice movement and the palliative care service in Scotland. Ending a patient's life by injection is quicker, easier and cheaper than palliative care and many people fear that introducing euthanasia would reduce the availability of palliative care, because health systems would inexorably veer towards the most cost-effective ways of dealing with dying patients. Providing palliative care can be very hard work, physically and psychologically, and it is dearer than euthanasia. If we concentrated our efforts on ensuring that palliative care and the hospice movement were adequately resourced, positive and effective end-of-life care could become more widely available throughout Scotland. Proper palliative care makes euthanasia unnecessary. I urge Jeremy Purvis to divert his efforts into fighting for the positive palliative route towards a person's death and away from his negative and destructive solution.

In every parliamentary democracy, there is a healthy tension between the Executive and Parliament. This morning's debate aims to prevent the relationship between this place and the current Administration from unnecessarily becoming more strained than it already is. Any incoming Government is entitled to try to fulfil its manifesto commitments, but it cannot ignore Parliament in its attempts to do so. A weak sense of responsibility to this place does not weaken the fact of such responsibility. We expected today to hear—as we have heard—criticisms aimed at Labour and claims that we are taking a different view from the one we took when we were in office. That is simply not the case, no matter how much Murdo Fraser and Keith Brown might try to make it so. Mike Rumbles was correct—he is a good example of a member who, like others, raised issues over the ministerial code in the previous Administration. Such questions are more effective when they come from one's own back benches.

The code was changed and reviewed periodically.

It was changed, which is the important aspect. Derek Brownlee was right when he said that the issue is as much about how the code is applied and tested as it is about what it contains—that was a very important point.

There is much accuracy in what my colleague says. We are asking Parliament to strive continually for the highest standards of accountability. Democracy is dynamic, and we make no apologies for asking the new Administration to do what was expected of us when we were in Government—that is, to look at the Scottish ministerial code and seek ways in which to improve it. In response to the questions that have been raised in the debate, I recall at least one occasion on which the First Minister at the time asked a Labour minister to come back to Parliament to apologise for misleading Parliament—in a matter of a culinary nature—without any intervention from Parliament itself. Rather than accusing us of having double standards, the SNP should accept that changes in the Administration mean that the relationship between the Executive and the Parliament must be considered anew. Murdo Fraser was right to make that point. The convention of ministerial responsibility predates the modern party system. As democracy and society have developed in Britain, so too has the requirement continually to enhance ministerial accountability. We believe that the convention of ministerial responsibility is a mechanism through which the Parliament can control ministers. Responsibility must focus on the minister, with a clear line of accountability to the Parliament. In today's debate, we seek to ensure that we in the Parliament adhere to that ideal. As Jackie Baillie said, if the SNP wants to be seen as a modern and progressive party—not that it is—that should be its perspective. Counter to that ideal is another historical perspective that favours executive control. Its main proponent was Sir Robert Peel, who wanted ministers to be supported by a loyal party that tried to prevent Parliament from interfering in the workings of Government. In that context, the executive inverts ministerial responsibility and  seeks to diminish the role of the Parliament. Based on the arguments that we heard this morning, it could easily be said that that is the attitude that the SNP Government and its slavishly devoted back benchers have adopted. I give Joe FitzPatrick and Keith Brown as perfect examples. In particular, Joe FitzPatrick did his impersonation of a political lava lamp—he used an awful lot of energy but did not shed much light on anything. We have to accept that, as society evolves, new challenges and responsibilities are placed at the doors of ministers. However, one thing remains constant. Parliament matters, and in the balance of power between the Executive and the Parliament, the Parliament must remain the primary institution. Errors are inevitable in Government, and George Foulkes and Hugh Henry quite eloquently pointed out where errors have been made. The mark of a good Government is not simply to be found in how it overcomes the problems that errors create; the real test is whether it acknowledges and takes responsibility for them. Good government is certainly not to be found in refusing to recognise them, as the First Minister has done again and again. The First Minister is the guardian of the Scottish ministerial code, by which ministerial responsibility is tested. We in the Labour Party believe that the record so far shows that Alex Salmond cannot be trusted to apply the code. As a result, we must re-establish the authority of Parliament over ministers. If, as we suspect, the Government regards itself as the primary institution in the political framework in Scotland, ministers are deluding themselves, and they must and will be held to account by the Parliament. It is clear that the First Minister, in his actions, is not applying the code effectively. Surely he would prefer transparency over ambiguity and accountability over accusation. We merely ask him what he has to fear from giving us the results of the review that he told us he was going to have. Bruce Crawford said that the First Minister is bomb-proof. I conclude by asking him to come out of the bunker and face independent oversight. That is what our motion calls for.

Will Bruce Crawford give way?

Rather than pontificate on his own innocence, would it not be better for Bruce Crawford if an independent assessment was made  of his position in regard to the Beauly to Denny transmission line?

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government is doing to mitigate the impact of the latest increases in gas and electricity prices on the most vulnerable people in our society. (S3F-509)

I am sure that the First Minister is aware that Scottish Power has ended backcharging for customers in other areas of the United Kingdom and that he shares my view that that is unfair on Scottish customers who will continue to be in debt through no fault of their own. His Minister for Communities and Sport, Stewart Maxwell, agreed to meet Scottish Power to discuss the issue. Has that meeting taken place? If so, what was the outcome? If nothing has changed, will the First Minister intervene personally to address this urgent problem?

I am sure that the minister will be aware that the previous Public Petitions Committee brought this issue to the chamber and that that has ultimately led to today's statement. As I convened that committee, I take a particular interest in the petitioners' position. I know that Tom Shaw's review group involved the petitioners, but will the minister tell members what discussions he has had with the petitioners? Have the petitioners indicated which issues remain outstanding and how will they be involved in developing the report's recommendations?

Will the member take an intervention?

Is the minister aware that, for some months, North Lanarkshire Council and South Lanarkshire Council have been concerned about delays to their Lanarkshire waste management procurement project? The uncertainty that has been introduced in the funding for the provision of waste infrastructure to deal with residual waste cannot remain unresolved in Lanarkshire. The project is not some impulsive Las Vegas-style public investment gamble, but a well-constructed local authority environmental collaboration. Both the councils hoped that today's statement would end the indecision that is impacting adversely on the LWMP project. As he made no specific reference to that project, will he confirm definitively where it stands in light of his statement? Specifically, who will pay if Lanarkshire does not meet its targets because of Scottish Government delays in funding decisions on that proposal?

In 1961, John F Kennedy announced a far-sighted programme that would see man walk on the moon within the decade. President Kennedy made it clear that to look into the future, we had to see scientific progress take place "in an age of both knowledge and ignorance." So much of a visionary was Kennedy that he might even have anticipated the SNP Government's energy policy, given that, in the debate in Texas in 1961, he said: "The greater our knowledge increases, the greater our ignorance unfolds." The Government tells us in its motion that it "believes that Scotland can have a secure, low-carbon, non-nuclear energy future." We may well be able to have that in future, but at the moment, much more research and development in renewables is required before anyone can make such a bold statement with absolute certainty. It is no more than an aspiration.  However, this Government is no stranger to making promises that it knows it cannot guarantee to deliver. Perhaps if we harness the energy from its cheek power we could end the search for more renewable sources now. Undoubtedly, science helps us to move on. A decade after Kennedy's speech in 1961, Greenpeace was founded as a result of concerns about the development of nuclear power generation. Thirty years on, its founder Patrick Moore is now telling the environmental movement that it needs to update its views as nuclear energy may just be the energy source that can save our planet. He is not saying that it is the answer but that it may be part of the solution. He says that because scientific knowledge has increased, raising questions for those who have closed their minds to a future role for nuclear power generation. The Government might not wish to acknowledge it, but nuclear power is a large-scale, cost-effective energy source that is proven to reduce carbon emissions, and we know that it has the ability to satisfy a growing demand for power. It is absolutely right that we should talk about reducing demand for power, but we do not know that that will be achieved. While such uncertainties remain, we have to look at all possibilities to deal with the future demands that we are going to face. I am happy to join illustrious environmentalists such as Moore in arguing that one way of reducing fossil fuel emissions from electricity production while ensuring that future demand is met securely could be through a balanced programme of renewable energy sources, which could include nuclear power. Patrick Moore is not alone in changing his mind on this subject. The British atmospheric scientist, James Lovelock, now believes that nuclear energy could help us to avoid catastrophic climate change. Stewart Brand, founder of the Whole Earth Catalog , says that the environmental movement must embrace nuclear energy to wean ourselves off fossil fuel.

Mr Gibson misses the point that I am making. The British Government has not said that it believes that there should be no new nuclear energy plants; it has recognised the views that have been expressed in this Parliament and the fact that the Scottish Government does not want nuclear power. That is not to say that UK Government agrees with the Scottish Government, and it has devised the UK Energy Bill to address the concerns that I am speaking about, which include all aspects of renewables sources. My point is that key environmentalists have said that we should not close our minds, and I am asking Mr Gibson not to close his either. Let me give another example. The late Bishop Hugh Montefiore, founder and director of Friends of the Earth, was forced to resign from that group's board for writing a pro-nuclear article in a church newsletter after having looked at the scientific evidence. All the people whom I have mentioned have recognised that all options must be explored, for good economic and technological reasons. Not all forms of new renewables technology have been shown to have anything beyond the potential to be economically feasible on a large scale. Equally, no current storage technology exists on the scale required. Carbon capture has been mentioned repeatedly this morning, and the basis for looking at carbon capture and sequestration were outlined by my colleague Lewis Macdonald. However, carbon capture is no more than a prototype technology at best, and there are no guarantees that a gas pumped under the sea at several times ambient pressure will not leak. Will the minister tell us what environmental assessments the Government has done to quantify the possibility of such leaks happening and their impact? We can all give good examples of where new technology is being used to take us forward in positive and commendable ways. In my constituency, Argent Energy established a biodiesel plant, which has rightly won awards for its innovative technology. However, the reality is that the plant draws its source from the abattoir and rendering plant next door, which lacks the capacity to deal with the demand for the by-products that allow the biodiesel to be produced. It has just had its licence from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency withdrawn because of the odour emissions that it creates in the local community. There is a downside to almost every technology—there are pluses and minuses, and we should consider them all in the round. President Kennedy was right: knowledge of renewables is increasing, but much remains for us to learn before we know for sure what will be required to meet Scotland's future energy needs.  Until we do, nuclear power has to be considered as a viable and reliable future technology. It is as simple as that.

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it is providing for organic food production. (S3O-1657)

Is the minister concerned that the Food Standards Agency currently believes that scientific evidence does not support the view that organically produced food is more beneficial than other food? Can he assure Parliament that the Scottish Government will do more to support organic produce, given that the European Union-funded quality low input food study showed that there were substantial benefits from organic produce?

He was never a nationalist.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made on modernising medical careers. (S3O-1546)

In common with other parties, the Scottish National Party endorsed the direction of travel that was outlined in the Kerr report on modernising the national health service in Scotland. That report focused on the development of specialisms in the NHS and said that primary care needed to be given greater priority. Will the cabinet secretary reaffirm her support for the Kerr report's conclusions? Will the development and improvement of expertise among palliative care specialists be ensured through appropriate support for and resource allocation to palliative medicine?

I thank the minister for responding to the Equal Opportunities Committee's request for a debate by lodging the motion for us to discuss. The various parties that are represented in the Parliament may have different visions for the future of the country, but a Scotland in which each person is provided with the equality of opportunity to reach their potential and fulfil their aims must be common to them all. To aspire towards anything less will only ensure that history records us as having failed to dismantle the institutionalised discrimination that prevents marginalised communities from realising their potential for themselves and for Scotland. To get consensus on that is the easy bit—the motherhood and apple pie of any equality debate. However, it is no longer good enough or acceptable merely to work towards equality of opportunity and the removal of discrimination. It is time to insist that measurable, person-centred delivery of equality becomes part of today's working culture and does not remain something that always seems to hover on the threshold of tomorrow. Scotland's public sector is awash with action plans on the delivery of race equality, disability equality, gender equality and plans to deliver equality for lesbian, gay and bisexual people. Particularly in the case of race equality, some of the action plans have been around for a few years, but what is being delivered? The Government's own effort to define its workforce in terms of ethnicity is two years out of date and cannot tell us—as is required by law—how well people from minority ethnic communities are making career progress compared with everyone else. I ask the minister to give the Parliament clear evidence in  his closing speech that the Government is aware of that and to say what its plans are to take us forward. One of the targets in the Government's disability equality scheme is to increase the number of job applications from disabled people, but is that really the best that we can do for disabled people as we reach the end of 2007? VisitScotland, which has a major role to play in persuading the rest of the world to visit Glasgow for the Commonwealth games does not even have a race equality scheme, in spite of that being a legal requirement for all public bodies. Equality impact assessments of all functions and policies of public bodies, which are required by law to meet race, disability and gender equality duties, are a powerful tool for identifying and removing barriers to a person's equality of access to, and experience of, public services, as well as for accessing work opportunities within those services. Unfortunately, however, such assessments are as scarce as the Government's equality commitments in its budget, as the evidence that was provided by the equality organisations that were represented at yesterday's meeting of the Equal Opportunities Committee clearly outlined. The Government has published on its website the outcomes of just two equality impact assessments. Is that really the sum total of the policies and functions that are available to the Scottish Government, or is it another comment on just how poorly committed it is to using the tools that the major equality communities agree will significantly dismantle the barriers to equality? As I have said, we must move on—and quickly—from merely working towards delivering equality to starting to deliver measurable, person-centred changes that will enable people from all the equality communities to reach their potential. Despite changing attitudes and improvements in some areas, Scotland has not moved far or fast enough in eliminating discrimination and building a model of equality that is meaningful to everyone in the country. The minister spoke about the report by the Equal Opportunities Committee on the Gypsy Traveller community. I was proud to play a role in that in the first session of the Parliament. I was disappointed that previous Executives did not go as far as we would have liked in delivering on that report's recommendations. However, that was not because of a lack of effort—I know the former ministers who were involved in considering and developing those issues. The reality was that that could not simply be done by the Scottish Executive, and it could not be done by diktat. It required buy-in. It required targets. It required public bodies, such as the national health service,  social services and education authorities, to commit to achieving what was set out in the Equal Opportunities Committee's recommendations. I am concerned that the Government's budget proposals do not contain targets. There are no firm budgets. Ring fencing has been removed from the very things that we asked to be established to ensure that delivery could be achieved for the Gypsy Traveller community, and to ensure that it could be measured.

That just reiterates my point about all the equalities strategies that we have. There are requirements and commitments, but there has to be a driving force and there has to be a way of measuring whether those aims are being achieved. We need to tackle persistent inequalities in new ways. As Johann Lamont outlined, we need much better than the Government is currently offering before we can fully approve and be confident of its equality and diversity agenda. That is what the organisations that came to the Equal Opportunities Committee said yesterday. One of those organisations said that the progress that had been made under previous Executives had been faltering, but at least it was progress. The concern is that, without proper targeting and the proper standards being set, the budget as it is outlined contains a huge hole. We need to know where the money is coming from, and we need to know where it is directed. That has to be specified. My colleague Marlyn Glen said that she looked forward to discussing those issues with the Minister for Communities and Sport when he comes before the Equal Opportunities Committee next week. I said earlier that much of the talk that we might have about this issue is apple pie. I recommend that the minister does not come along to the committee with apple pie next week—he should bring the meat dish.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether Scotland has the required capacity for rendering animals. (S3O-1271)

I thank the minister for his response—especially in relation to the rendering plant at the Omoa works, which is run by William Forrest and Son (Paisley) Ltd in Newarthill in my constituency. Will the minister join me in welcoming the decision of Scottish Environment Protection Agency to refuse the plant's pollution  prevention and control permit application and to withdraw its current air pollution control permit application? The decision was based on the historical failure of the company to operate its plant properly. The company has blighted communities in my area and in my colleague Karen Whitefield's area for almost four decades. During that period, the company has tried to blackmail local communities by arguing that if the company did not exist it would have to be invented because of the shortage of capacity to render in Scotland. Will the minister assure us that he will not give in to that blackmail? Will he support SEPA in its efforts to get the company to clean up its act or clear out of our communities?

Does the cabinet secretary recall that the SNP promised in its manifesto to introduce a first-time buyers grant of £2,000? Many housing professionals and commentators criticised the measure on the ground that it would fuel house price inflation. I was unable to study the minister's statement in detail and I found no evidence of provision for the £2,000 grant, so will he tell me whether the grant will be introduced in year one, year two, or year three? Or did a big boy do it and run away with that promise, too?

Following the question from my colleague Patricia Ferguson, I welcome the cabinet secretary's commitment to support local authorities and housing associations that work well to support communities that experience antisocial behaviour. Will the cabinet secretary tell us what she intends to do to encourage local authorities and housing associations that do not provide adequate support in that respect? Will she tell us what future responsibility and role Communities Scotland will have not only in that but in all areas where she proposes to deliver on her policies?

It is with great pleasure that I bring this debate to the chamber this evening. I thank all members who have stayed behind to participate in, or listen to, what I consider a very important debate. As I mention in my motion, the public-social partnership pilot in North Lanarkshire is "an innovative method of engaging communities in public service design and delivery". Public-social partnerships, which are based on an Italian planning approach, are a dynamic new mechanism for Scotland. PSPs bring together local authorities and social enterprises to create services that benefit the local community. Social enterprises are a diverse sector and include credit unions, housing associations, community development programmes and co-operatives, among others. Research by the Department of Trade and Industry in 2001 indicated that there were 1,100 social enterprises in Scotland, employing 30,000 people and adding £1.25 billion to our economy. PSPs are a new approach to public service delivery. They allow contracts to reflect the added benefits that community organisations can bring to the running of services by including community and environmental clauses. The public-social partnership pilot in North Lanarkshire took place this year and has been led by the Community Recycling Network for Scotland with support from Edinburgh-based social enterprise, Forth Sector.  The PSP in North Lanarkshire focused on three services that were provided by the housing department: furniture storage for people who became homeless; an emergency furniture loan service; and permanent furniture packs. Those three services were provided by the groups participating in the PSP, which were Beulah Scotland, St Patrick's furniture project and RECAP—the recycling emergency community action programme. To date, those partners in the PSP have delivered help to 62 families. They will continue to help families in a similar situation until the end of this month, when the pilot will end and the content of the contract will be confirmed. The pilot has had many benefits, not just for North Lanarkshire Council but for all the tenants who use the services that it provides. Tenants now have a choice of furniture for their home and purchase their furniture with vouchers, rather than just being given furniture that will do. That helps to ensure that tenants are treated with dignity at all times. I am proud that North Lanarkshire Council has led the field with this ground-breaking pilot, which has great potential, for which the council should be recognised. The success of the pilot, and the council's belief in its social and economic benefits, have resulted in other councils making inquiries about how they can follow North Lanarkshire's lead. Furthermore, other departments within North Lanarkshire Council—such as the environmental services and social work departments—are now exploring the possibility of entering into a PSP agreement. I very much welcome that. Local authorities may wish to establish a PSP because it would give them an opportunity to look in detail at the service that they provide. They could pilot the PSP in advance of tender. Any cost-saving mechanisms would therefore be identified, and any problems fixed, at an early stage, before the contract was permanently granted. PSPs allow the public sector to draw on their expertise and resources in order to share in the design of a more effective public service. They help to provide a service that is good value for money—something that North Lanarkshire Council recognised was not being provided by the existing service. The PSP is a people-centred service that meets local needs and achieves many added benefits. One such benefit is the additional 12 local jobs that the pilot has brought to North Lanarkshire, benefiting the community both socially and economically. However, for the PSP programme to be rolled out across Scotland, some lessons need to be learned from the North Lanarkshire model. The  main lesson is that PSP participants, in both the public and private sectors, must agree on a shared problem definition and a shared solution to the problem if PSPs are to be successful nationally. That was identified as a barrier in the pilot because the steering group and the service design group did not meet to share their ideas regularly. In March of this year, the Scottish Government issued "Better business—A strategy and action plan for social enterprise in Scotland". The strategy was aimed at providing a better support service for social enterprises in winning public service contests. PSPs represent an opportunity to meet that aim. I hope that the Government considers them a viable option, given the success of the pilot in North Lanarkshire. Social enterprises do an awful lot of good work in our local communities and they need our support, but at root they need support from local authorities. I was disappointed to hear recently that some local authorities have begun to e-tender for services in a way that treats the clients who are served by social enterprises simply as job lots. Such retendering processes happen in a way that is the antithesis of all that the PSP pilot has shown to be good in the way that we can deal with matters on behalf of our local communities. It is vital that the minister addresses that issue by speaking to those local authorities that believe that to be a better way than the one that has been rolled out in North Lanarkshire. I believe that they will find that the North Lanarkshire model is the way forward and that alternatives will be to the detriment of the development of our social enterprises. I thank Antonia Swinson and others from the Scottish Social Enterprise Coalition who brought the issue to my attention and encouraged me to lodge the motion that we are debating tonight. I welcome comments from colleagues on the types of social enterprises that exist in their areas and I look forward to hearing examples of the good work in our local communities that is supported by social enterprises. I commend to colleagues "How social enterprises can deliver for Scotland", which is hot off the press today. I also commend that new agenda to local authorities, so that they can work better with those who can serve our communities because they understand and come from those communities. I thank members for taking the time to join in this evening's debate, and I look forward to the minister's comments.

I welcome the opportunity to participate in this debate, as the issue that is being discussed is important not only to parts of  Scotland, but to every neighbourhood and all individuals who make up our communities. It is right to acknowledge that drinking alcohol is not a bad thing per se, but the effects of misusing alcohol are, unfortunately, a problem for far too many people in our society, whether they are users of alcohol or sufferers at the hands of those who drink to excess. Indeed, the misuse of alcohol has probably become the major source of most of society's ills—literally, in respect of its health impacts. Alcohol is a powerful drug, but it can be a source of enjoyment if it is used properly. That is the problem that we must face in debates on alcohol or alcoholism. Alcohol is too often a problem, but we can do more than hope that it will not be a problem for ever. As members have said, we must change attitudes so that alcohol use can be more of a social and health benefit—if that is possible—than a problem. That was why I welcomed the enactment of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 in the previous parliamentary session. It was the first legislation for many years that not only attempted to tackle how the sale of alcohol was regulated but tried to educate those who mistreat drink into adopting more appropriate alcohol-related behaviour. I took slight issue with Hugh O'Donnell when he said that we had tinkered around with the issue for too long; in fairness, no one could say that the 2005 act tinkered around with the issue. It addressed the fact that its subject matter was not only a criminal justice issue but a health problem that cost our national health service more than £1 billion a year. One in 10 accident and emergency admissions was attributed to alcohol. People who lived in the most deprived areas of Scotland were four times more likely to die an alcohol-related death than those in less deprived areas. We could no longer allow such things to happen, and we tried to ensure that they did not. That the act aimed to tackle underage and binge drinking in particular was vital. The attitudes of far too many people towards drink were becoming alarmingly dangerous. That was why we focused on bringing into the licensing regulations many modern social trends that had overtaken the existing legislation, such as dial-a-drink services and party limousines. Members who were also members in the previous session will be sick of hearing me banging on about those two things, which I did as the Licensing (Scotland) Bill went through the Parliament. However, the police raised such issues with me because they had identified that no legislation existed to allow them to deal with the trends that had emerged. Such issues were having such an immediate impact on the attitudes of young people that addressing them  became important and the bill was the vehicle that allowed us to consider them. It is right to blame underage drinkers for much of the havoc that alcohol can bring to society, but we must be careful not to single out a particular group, because the misuse of alcohol is a widespread problem that occurs across all age groups and social backgrounds. In fact, alcohol-related hospital discharges are most common in the 45-to-54 age group. That certainly surprised me and such statistics may surprise many other people. Licensed premises that make money from the sale of alcohol must recognise that they are part of a community and that they provide a service that is unlike any service that other businesses provide. Given that such premises have an impact on wider society, we should ask them to pay a bit more if they do not provide their service responsibly. Therefore, I support the cabinet secretary in holding licensees to account for the social problems that they exacerbate as a result of their poor sales practice, just as I supported Paul Martin when he first raised that issue in 2005. I am sorry that other parties that were represented in the chamber failed to give their support, but it is a case of better late than never, I suppose. I pay tribute to Kenny Gibson in particular for his speech. My parents were teetotallers, and I did not have to endure the types of experiences that he obviously had to. When I was thinking about what I would say, I wondered how I could bring some reality to the debate. The only story that I could think of was a light-hearted one that a friend told me recently. I do not want to tell it because I want to tell a joke; rather, I want to make a point. The story is about a married couple who were sitting in a restaurant one evening. At an adjacent table, a woman was becoming uproariously drunk. Most people in the restaurant were being distracted by her, but the woman in the couple noticed that her husband was paying particular attention to the drunk woman and her behaviour, so she asked him why. He said, "You don't know this, but I was formerly engaged to that lady. It was about 10 years ago, before we were married." He went on, "I have had a happy life since that time. She has taken to drink in the manner that you see throughout all that time." His wife said, "That's a long time to celebrate." The point is that people see the use of alcohol differently. We have to strike a balance on the issue. Some will use alcohol appropriately and others will not. Some licensees will take their responsible seriously while others will be more lax. Some people think that alcohol is evil and want it to be restricted; others see it as a good thing and want easier access. If the minister gets the  balance right, I will support his efforts to address one of Scotland's most serious problems.

To ask the Scottish Executive how much additional funding has been made available to address flooding in Lanarkshire. (S3O-933)

The minister may or may not be aware that a new grammar school is being built in Uddingston, in my constituency, under the previous Executive's proposals to refurbish and rebuild dilapidated schools. The local community will very soon benefit from the building of the new high school, but prior to it being built some of the minister's colleagues in the Scottish National Party have been scaremongering in the local community. They claim that the development will create flooding. Can the minister assure me that that is not the case? Does he have any evidence from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency that there will be flooding as a consequence of the development? If he does, can he assure South Lanarkshire Council that he will make additional funding available to rebuild the bund, which would address the problem of any potential flooding?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will fully fund its intended council tax freeze. (S3O-496)

Given that there is no timetable for a bill to abolish the council tax, will the cabinet secretary tell us whether he intends to pay for the council tax freeze every year until his proposed local earnings tax comes before Parliament?

In light of the appeal court decision to uphold the original ruling to drop criminal charges in relation to the Rosepark nursing home in my constituency, what legal steps does the First Minister intend to take to prevent such a decision from being possible in future and, for the sake of the families who have been affected, to find out as soon as possible why their loved ones perished in that terrible tragedy?

In my opening speech, I concentrated on our concerns about having this debate; in my closing speech, I will comment on issues that have been raised during the debate. The Green party's motion clearly shows that it has few scruples. It is a so-called anti-nuclear peace party, but its lodging a motion that proposes only a delay in a vote on implementing a new nuclear arsenal merely to make a transparent and feeble attempt to cobble together an anti-Labour majority in the chamber is an example of political deception that is almost unparalleled in the Parliament. We probably should have expected such a fraud, given the way in which the Greens have recently dodged transport and environmental issues to serve their new nationalist masters. For a pacifist party, the Green party has become adept at the military two-step as Green members dance  around each issue making excuses for their latest sell-out.

I could not agree more. Perhaps worse is the fact that the debate is based on the most facile, superficial and obtuse argument possible, which Bruce Crawford and his colleagues have again put eloquently. The Greens and the nats are so opposed to Trident that they want to pursue a course that would lead Scotland to utter impotence in making decisions on it. The independence parties regularly say that they want Scotland to be like Ireland. If they follow their line of reasoning to its natural conclusion, that is exactly where they will be in relation to Trident. I agree with Iain Smith about that.

No. I want to make progress. Durness in the Highlands is further away from Faslane than is Donegal. The member of Parliament for Durness has a vote on Trident at Westminster, but no elected representative in Donegal can have an input into that debate. If Scotland gained independence from Westminster and was like Ireland, Whitehall would still own and control Trident missile systems and would make Scotland, like Ireland, the powerless neighbour of a nuclear state.

The member's intervention is not clever—and nor was his intervention in Jackie Ballie's speech. He will need to step to the mark if he is to make interventions that contribute to the debate. Trident would still be replaced, but it would be relocated to a port in England or Wales. Scotland, its First Minister, any future president or even its current cardinal would have no more say over issues relating to Trident than the Taoiseach, the Irish President or any other Irish politician.

That is right, and they cannot influence the Trident debate.  If the independence movement's ambition is to have no influence over Trident, that ambition is short-sighted. If Scotland wants to have a say on Britain's nuclear missile capability, it must remain part of Britain and allow its MPs to take part in that debate. Scotland will lose its voice on the matter if it gets independence—that is the logical consequence of Scottish independence. However, this debate is not about logic—it is about the all too typical grandstanding that we have come to expect from the nationalist coalition. That is what members have aimed at: Parliament should not be so easily fooled or seduced by the superficiality of the motion, and it should not support it.

Eight years on from the establishment of the Scottish Parliament, the views of Donald Dewar, quite rightly, remain important to much of what happens here. I am  never totally comfortable when speculating on what his stance would have been on any given situation, but I am as confident as I can be that although he did not want to shackle in any way the matters that could be aired here, it was never his intention for members continually to attempt to give parliamentary authority to matters over which the Parliament has no competence.

Let me make some progress. The Labour Party will not be an accessory to such endeavours. The people of Scotland clearly decided the responsibilities of the Parliament when they voted for the devolved settlement. The settlement was established and we respect that judgment. The constitutional settlement contained in the Scotland Act 1998 clearly established the boundaries between devolved and reserved issues. That is why in the past six years no disputes between this Parliament and Westminster have had to go to the Privy Council. However, members on the Labour benches have detected that, in the early weeks of this session of the Parliament, the new Executive and some other parties have no such scruples in relation to respect for the settled will of the Scottish people. We do not intend to waste Parliament's time on matters for which it is not responsible.

We will not defer to anyone, but we will respect the devolved settlement. It is ironic that at a time when Alex Salmond is challenging Westminster for encroaching on Scottish legal matters, we are encroaching on Westminster's responsibilities for defence matters. We want to use this Parliament to focus on the matters over which it has power and for which it has responsibility, and to ensure that there is no free-for-all that shows no respect for the devolved settlement or the cause of good government.

The wishes of the Scottish people are for Scotland to remain part of the United Kingdom and for MPs to represent their views on defence matters in Westminster—MPs  are elected to go there to deal with that issue. We should recall that the reason why this Parliament came into being was that we did not want vital matters of importance to the people of Scotland to be squeezed into short debates held after midnight at Westminster. To squeeze a reserved matter into a short debate here is little better than what happened previously in London. The Labour Party believes that the role of the Scottish Parliament is to concentrate on and debate the matters for which it has competence.

The debate is both too short and unnecessary. The Labour Party is concerned that our minority Government and some Opposition parties want to make the discussion of reserved matters almost the norm in this session. That is what we are opposed to this morning. We take a stance against that tendency, which is why we have never sought to lodge motions on matters that were not our responsibility. Other parties would serve this place better if they followed that principle, rather than merely posturing for effect. I move amendment S3M-169.3, to leave out from "congratulates" to end and insert: "affirms that defence policy is, and should remain, the responsibility of the UK Parliament."

A few weeks ago, I attended the funeral of a family friend. As people do when they get together at such times, members of the older generations shared reminiscences of times gone by, as they looked back on the life of the one who had departed. The names of people long since gone tripped off the tongues of the assembled mourners. "Do you remember Such-and-such, the chemist?" one asked. "What about that Mr So-and-so, who had the corner shop?" They even remembered my own great-grandfather, who owned the yard behind the Crown Bar in Holytown. Someone went on to say, "What was the name of the moneylender who lived down the miners' rows? What a character he was. He saved many a wean from starving. Mind you, you didn't want to cross him." Today, we hear about the same moneylenders and we agree that they operate in a culture of fear. They think that they are above the law. They are the lowest form of social vulture, and they are involved in criminality that is among the worst forms of antisocial behaviour that affects our communities today, but their predecessors can be remembered almost with fondness by decent people who living in the communities in which they used to operate. I was staggered to hear that. I had to interject and point out that we also used to send children up chimneys and send girls down the pits. They were not the good old days. There I was, listening to people who were talking as though they thought that moneylenders today were different from the ones they knew in their youth. I asked them, and the consensus was that there was a difference—"That was then; this is now." The moneylender of their day was a member of the community, a necessary evil. The ones who lend money now, however, are viewed as gangsters, thugs and the lowest forms of scum. I was reminded that there were no credit unions then, which is a significant point to acknowledge. That brought home to me just how important the credit union movement is in our modern society. No longer are the people to whom I have referred prepared to accept the illegal moneylender, no matter how much they might have tolerated them previously. They do not see the need for people to go to illegal moneylenders because of that difference: the credit unions. They understand that communities need to work together to prevent people who are in need from putting themselves at the mercy of today's criminal element, and they look to their credit union for that.  Today, the provision of personal finance services, with access to low-cost flexible loans and secure savings facilities via credit unions makes absolute sense to us all. It seems that we now have to do more to ensure that that vital service becomes more widely available. We need to increase choice and access to a range of more appropriate financial products that are suitable for people on low incomes, as other members have said in the debate. One thing is certain in this life: we will all go out in a box. Sometime hence, people will sit around, reminiscing about this period, as I heard people doing a few weeks ago. I doubt that they will remember with any affection our moneylenders of today—I hope that they do not. Moneylenders should be a thing of the past—a distant memory—if we get it right. Much work has been done to bring that about and, if we put further development of credit unions at the core of our efforts to bring financial assistance to the poorer sections of our society, we can build on the good start that has been made, which is helping bring about the much-needed change in our attitudes to illegal moneylenders. I commend the Executive for its work, particularly its work to support our credit unions, and I look forward with confidence to the results of the latest assistance that it has provided. I remember joining the then Deputy Minister for Communities, Johann Lamont, a year or so ago, when she came to a credit union in Newarthill to launch one of the new innovative support mechanisms that the Scottish Executive had introduced to ensure that the credit unions that most of our communities now take for granted were given the support that they needed to continue the work that most people now recognise they do. I also praise the Scottish ministers for working with ministers at Westminster in targeting resources directly at the criminals. As has already been said this morning, those are the people we are dealing with. We are not dealing with fly-by-nights who just happen to find themselves in a community where they can use their skills to make a quick buck; rather, we are talking about organised gangs of criminals who target poor people and communities. They must be dealt with as they are—as criminals. They prey on vulnerable families and they drag them further into financial and social problems, as other members have said. They have to be challenged—the minister is right to do so and to have secured this morning's debate. It has been a good debate, and I hope that, by the time we conclude it, we will have arrived at a consensus. Credit unions are fundamental to the attack on the problem, but much work still has to be done.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has considered the impact of abolishing all targets for the NHS in Scotland. (S2O-11876)

I thank the minister, who announced investment of £10 billion in the NHS in Scotland today, for that assurance. Does he agree  that we must continue to set rigorous targets that are aimed at providing the best services for all NHS patients? Does he agree that a return to the system that obtained under the previous Tory Government, in which there were no targets, would lead us back to waiting times exceeding 18 months?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to include statistics on the Irish community in Scotland on the website of its one Scotland, many cultures campaign and what the reasons are for its position on the matter. (S2O-11633)

I want to make the minister aware that I and many others in the Irish community in Scotland are concerned that the Scottish Executive's claim on its one Scotland, many cultures website that the Pakistani community is the biggest ethnic minority in the country is factually inaccurate. We are also concerned that its recognition of only non-white ethnic minorities undermines the excellent aims of the campaign. Does the minister acknowledge that as 50,000 Irish-born people and 100,000 people who have an Irish parent live in Scotland and as the multigenerational Irish community in Scotland has almost 500,000 people, the continuing failure properly to acknowledge the existence and importance of the Irish community in the country prevents the development of a proper understanding of the problems of racism and sectarianism in Scotland?

This is not a debate, it is a lecture.

To ask the First Minister what  progress has been made on the issue of sectarianism. (S2F-2617)

In welcoming all the progress that the First Minister has made so far in the campaign against sectarianism, I ask whether he acknowledges the concerns of those who believe that clarity is required on the part of all the authorities concerned regarding what is considered to be sectarian behaviour and what constitutes legitimate expression of cultural and historical identity. Does the First Minister agree that, unless clarity is achieved, there will be misapprehensions about what constitutes sectarianism that will exacerbate tensions within and between communities, which will undermine the good intentions of the anti-sectarianism campaign?

I will press amendment 86.  It has been made clear to me that faith-based adoption agencies want to operate within the provisions of the bill, but they fear that they will not be able to do so unless they are given the legislative protection that they need. Despite the minister's assurances, they are not reassured that that will be the case. As Elaine Murray and other members have said, the agencies currently refer people on, and they have been advised that they can continue to do so. If they are referring people, they cannot be being discriminatory, therefore all the arguments about inclusion of the provision in the bill being discriminatory cannot be justified. There is no logic in such an argument. Indeed, the Scotland Act 1998 seeks to protect religious beliefs and compels us to ensure that that is done. Protecting faith-based agencies is not pandering to discrimination and prejudice, but not protecting them could result in prejudicial action being taken against a religious group.

I have been told by the faith-based adoption agencies that they are concerned about what might happen. That is why the amendment was lodged. I want to respond to what Fiona Hyslop said and to refer to comments that she made at stage 2. I have not used the word "rights". The issue is not that someone's rights will be taken away or that rights will be given; the issue is protection for agencies so that they can operate within the law. The fear of the faith-based adoption agencies that they will be forced out of business has been confirmed by what members have said. It is clear that some people want faith-based adoption agencies to operate outwith the criteria that they set and to be told by the Parliament how they will operate, despite their religious beliefs and the ethos under which they are delivering a first-class service. If amendment 86 creates any difficulties, I cannot understand how we can solve them by dealing with matters in guidance or regulations. There is no logic in saying that it is all right to deal with such things in regulations rather than in the legislation. I do not follow how anyone can believe that providing protection to one group for the delivery of a service without taking away anyone's entitlement must be discriminatory and will diminish the service that is being provided.  The reality is that faith-based adoption agencies provide a high-level service. I cannot believe that the Parliament would wish to do anything that would take them out of the sector in which they operate and deliver that high standard of service. I therefore ask members to support amendment 86.

In speaking to my amendment 86, I will be as brief as possible and limit my explanation of its purpose to two points. The first is legislative and the second is practical. The issue of how faith-based adoption agencies will operate under the new legislation has featured at every stage of deliberation on the bill. In spite of assurances from ministers, those who work in the faith-based agencies remain concerned that they will not be able to continue to operate as they would like to unless legal protection is provided to them. It is important to note that my amendment would not take away any entitlement that is given to anyone in the bill. It seeks merely to protect the status quo as it relates to the faith-based agencies. Some have argued that the protection that the agencies seek can be provided in regulation, but the reality that they face is that there may be some who, in order to pursue an unreasonable test of the law, will seek to force faith groups to act against their philosophical beliefs. This might not be the best analogy to use, but the Parliament introduced an act to deal with the fur farming trade not because of what it was doing—in fact, such a trade did not exist in Scotland—but because of what might happen if legislation did not exist to prevent the emergence of an unwanted scenario. That is all that the faith-based adoption agencies are seeking through the  amendment—to be protected from what might happen. There are other, possibly more important, practical considerations. The faith-based agencies do not have to exist, but they do exist, due to a desire to provide a specific form of adoption service. In doing so, they provide a service that is used by the wider community and which supports the public authorities. If, for whatever reason, the agencies are prevented from operating under their own auspices, they might not be able to continue to provide a service at all. The resultant gap in service provision would have to be filled somehow and the funding would have to come entirely from the public purse. The agencies receive financial support from the public purse, but a huge section of their funding comes from charitable donations. The agencies would not be able to continue without either funding stream. I ask members to support my amendment, because I believe it to be a reasonable amendment that would do no more than enshrine the status quo in the bill, which will be an important piece of legislation. I move amendment 86.

Much of the speculation about the Tory party these days focuses on whether it is pursuing a distinctly different set of proposals in  Scotland from those that David Cameron is developing at Westminster. In the debate, the Scottish Conservatives have managed to pursue both: like David Cameron, they tell people what they think they want to hear, but they remain, in Mr Cameron's words, Conservative to the core. The debate has exposed that, when we get beyond the branding and the newly-created public relations image, the Tories—in Scotland in the rest of the United Kingdom—do not have the answers to the problems that face people in Scotland today. David Cameron would put our economic stability at risk. The tax report that the Tories released in October outlined plans for a huge £21 billion cut in public spending—how very old Tory.

Give me a minute to make some progress. The cuts that the Tories intend to impose would damage our country's long-term competitiveness by undermining Labour's investment programmes in matters such as skills and training—again, so very Tory. From what Tory members have said this afternoon, it is clear that the Scottish Conservatives are signed up fully to that agenda, but they have also told us that they will destroy public services in a distinctively Scottish way. Mr Cameron has been at great pains to put across the PR image that the Tories will not look for tax cuts, but Annabel Goldie, ploughing her own furrow, announced subsequently that the Tories plan to cut taxes for pensioners by 50 per cent, which would cost public services £200 million per year in the process. There we have it: populist nonsense coupled with economic irresponsibility, wrapped in Tory tartan.

I am certainly not going to take any lectures from the Tories about stealing from pensioners. As everyone knows, the Tories have given us an undeliverable promise, which, when held up against the core Conservative instincts, exposes an uncosted ideological sham, despite what Derek Brownlee says. When the Tories left office in 1997, they had created the greatest pensioner inequality in 30 years. Their high-inflation economic mismanagement had eroded incomes and savings for two generations of pensioners, while the mass unemployment that they created  deprived many older workers of the chance to build a decent retirement income. Since they were, mercifully, kicked out of office, they have, in opposition both at Westminster and here, opposed everything that Labour has done to help pensioners. The proposal to cut council tax for pensioners would reduce the money that is available for local services on which pensioners depend. We need to provide help for pensioners, but the Tories want to concentrate on helping only wealthy pensioners. They then revert entirely to type by announcing that they will pay for their tax cuts by privatising Scottish Water.

I am in my last minute. That is not only a failed policy from the past, but one that makes even less economic sense today. Will the Conservatives tell us how, after their one-off windfall—and it is debatable whether it would even cover the £200 million loss to local authorities—they intend to find the money in the subsequent years? They simply cannot, and no matter how populist they try to be, they will never erase from the minds of our pensioners the consequences of their policies.

I am in my last minute. Their proposal is incredible in its substance and in its ideology. It is Tory, it is Scottish Tory and, because it is so, it will never happen.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made towards addressing traffic congestion on the A725 Bellshill bypass. (S2O-11216)

Although the upgrading of the A8 to motorway standard between Baillieston and Newhouse is welcome, the three-year delay in commencing the works means that, because of the situation on the Bellshill bypass, major employers are reconsidering future investment and might well even decide to locate elsewhere. After all, their staff spend two hours trying to exit Strathclyde business park on to the bypass. Is the minister able to assure us that an interim proposal to address the congestion on the A725 at Strathclyde business park will be vigorously promoted among his officials to ensure that a solution can be found to this very serious problem?

I have had the pleasure of serving on the parliamentary committee that has responsibility for local government on and off for seven years. At the start of the first session of the Parliament, I was involved in the discussions between the Local Government Committee and COSLA that established the good relationship that still exists. COSLA was keen to ensure that the Parliament respected local government in Scotland and that there would be no undue intervention by the Scottish Executive, the Parliament or its committees in the operation of the democratic mandate that the electorate gives to local authorities. In his briefing to members, Pat Watters reiterated the position. He said: "the responsibility for delivering on the vitally important issue that is Single Status stops with local government and it is something that can only be negotiated at the local level." He is entitled to ensure that the Parliament, although it takes an interest in the matter, does nothing to impose its will on issues that are for local authorities to address. That is why it is right that the Parliament stays out of the negotiating process, which involves local government and its employees, despite the posturing of the Scottish Socialist Party on issues such as the nursery nurses' dispute and the fire services dispute. The Parliament must know and understand its place in relation to local government. Mark Ballard was wrong: we must not interfere with the action that democratically elected local representatives take in carrying out their duties. Delivery on equal pay legislation is vital. The legislation is based on the fundamental principle that men and women should receive equal pay for equal work. MSPs have a responsibility to ensure that we meet our obligations under the legislation, but we should stay out of local government pay matters and local government's negotiations with its workforce. Why is the SSP yet again asking us to undermine the role of local authorities? The SSP talks a good game about local decision making, but makes contradictory arguments in the debate.

That is what the motion says, but in her speech Carolyn Leckie asked the Executive to intervene and pay the bill. She is taking up contradictory positions. She suggests that local government and its staff representatives  should sit down, think of a number, double it and then ask the Scottish Executive to pay the bill. She suggests that local authorities run up a bill without being responsible for paying it. That is a bit like going to Disneyland on holiday and expecting to pay for it with the neighbour's Visa card. Members of the SSP have the luxury of never having to tell us how they would pay for things—[ Interruption. ]

The SSP exhibits nothing more than self-indulgence and recklessness with the principles of local democracy and sound economic sense. It is nothing short of deceitful of the SSP to use the debate to try to draw the Scottish Executive into a problem over which it has no authority. I assure SSP members that local government and sensible trade unions are not buying into their posturing. Those people know that the debate will solve nothing—frankly, they do not want it to solve anything. Progress on the implementation of the single status agreement has been slow. We can note that and we can encourage further progress, but ultimately we must ask whether we believe in the right of local authorities to determine their own affairs or whether we want the Executive to ride in like the cavalry in the movies. As I recall, in the movies no one emerged victorious, but plenty of blood was spilled. Perhaps that is what SSP members want. We should not be foolish enough to let them have it.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many people were arrested for drink and drug-driving in the Hamilton and Bellshill area during the last festive season. (S2O-10916)

Obviously, the minister will agree that one drink-driving or drug-driving offence is one too many. In the wider context, does the minister agree that, as we look forward to the festive season, what people want most of all is a peaceful and safe Christmas? What plans does the Executive have to mount campaigns or launch strategies that will ensure that communities are safe in the Christmas period?

To ask the Scottish Executive what analysis it has undertaken of the impact on the environment if security of energy supply from indigenous sources cannot be guaranteed in the foreseeable future. (S2O-10873)

Does the minister agree that it is foolish to believe that we can replace all our power-generating plants with hundreds of windmills? If we tried that, the lights would go out when the wind chose not to blow. Does he agree that our future energy generation must have a nuclear component if we wish to reduce carbon emissions and to have security of supply? Does he agree that although renewables are all well and good, if we are serious about the environment, we must look beyond the green spin to identify carbon reduction policies that include nuclear power as not only a carbon-free solution, but an ideal solution?

Can we send him a note, please? [ Laughter. ]

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to develop further initiatives with companies such as Tesco plc and Eddie Stobart Ltd to move heavy freight from road to rail. (S2O-10686)

A previous initiative involved two companies in my constituency. Safeway transferred goods from road to rail at Eurocentral for transport to Inverness. Many companies experience too much bureaucracy when they apply for freight facilities grants. This morning's report from Audit Scotland states that the Scottish Executive is not meeting its congestion targets, so does the minister agree that it would be helpful to redouble the efforts to get road-to-rail initiatives through the process more speedily?

Unlike some people in Scotland, whom Jackie Baillie referred to in her speech, I welcome the opportunities that the Parliament has to discuss non-devolved issues. Some of the best debates that we have had have been on matters on which we cannot legislate, but on which we have the right to express our views. The potential replacement of the Trident nuclear missile system is one such issue. It is just a pity that the Scottish National Party would rather play cheap politics with the subject than give us the opportunity to express our views on it properly. It is an absolute joke that the SNP believes that an issue of such magnitude can be reduced to a discussion of little more than an hour. Although I recognise that small businesses deserve to have issues that affect them debated in the Parliament, I must ask how the SNP expects us and the Scottish public to believe that it considers nuclear proliferation to be a matter of vital importance when it splits its debating time between consideration of the threat of world obliteration and discussion of strategies for the promotion of small and medium-sized enterprises. However, we know that rather than being about ensuring that we have a debate about nuclear missile replacement, this morning's charade is about cheap point scoring and trying to shut down such debate.

I will not take any interventions from the SNP because it has not given us enough time to discuss the subject, although I am happy to indulge in point scoring. I ask the SNP what we would spend the money that we would save from scrapping nuclear missiles on. The party's spokespeople have a wish list of spending commitments that would make Santa Claus despair. Alex Salmond tells us that he would have the money spent on eradicating world poverty. One would think that, after that, there would not be much change left from the £2 billion that is Scotland's pro rata share of the cost of Trident replacement, but not a bit of it. From press  releases, we know that the SNP wants the money to be spent on saving the Scottish regiments, diversifying defence, investing in raising benefits, ending pensioner poverty, improving the national health service, investing in Scotland's children, improving our water system and building new roads. [ Interruption. ] SNP members can clap, but they cannot spend the money more than once. Once the money has been spent, it is gone—that is basic economics. The SNP does not understand that that is an important part of the debate on Trident.

We are talking about what we could spend in Scotland, which is not £76,000 million. That is the amount that the SNP would require to spend to meet all its commitments. The problem with the SNP is that in spite of its constant demands that there should be a debate, it wants us to agree to motions that would prevent us from taking part in such a debate. According to the SNP, we can discuss the issue only so that we end up agreeing with it and then end the debate there. I want nuclear disarmament. I want the threat of nuclear annihilation to be removed from our planet as soon as possible but, unlike the SNP, I want to consider frankly all the options that would allow us to get to that position, which include bilateral and multilateral disarmament. I moved from a unilateralist to a multilateralist position during the 1990s. I remember from the debate that took place at that time the old adage that those who want to go alone can always start today, but those who wish to travel with others must wait until the others are ready. That strategy led to nuclear weapons reduction and was successful. As we look ahead to whether we should replace Trident, I am once again inclined towards unilateralism, but the issue is not as simple as the SNP would have us believe. I want to engage with others in an honest debate and to take on board arguments both for and against unilateralism. I do not want such an important issue to be treated with the contempt that the SNP has shown for it in this morning's truncated debate, which is about not preventing the replacement of Trident, but headline grabbing and constitutional wrangling. I want a genuine debate—that is why I support Labour's amendment, which seeks to allow that legitimate debate to begin.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects to receive and publish the report of the independent local government finance review committee. (S2O-10304)

Does the minister welcome, as I do, the fact that the drive towards introducing a local income tax has been put into reverse gear by the Liberal Democrats? Has there been an updated assessment of the level at which local  income tax would have to be levied by our local authorities if it were to be introduced?

I add my congratulations to those that have already been conveyed to Cathie Craigie for securing this evening's debate, and to the Muscular Dystrophy Campaign for the well co-ordinated way in which it has highlighted the practical problems that are experienced by people who have muscular dystrophy, and their carers. I doubt that there is an MSP who has not discovered in their case load an appeal for help from someone with MD in obtaining necessary aids and adaptations. I first encountered such a situation more than four years ago, when I was contacted by a family whose twin sons required an extension to be built on to their home to provide the space that was required for wheelchairs and other equipment that the boys would need. The fact that the extension was not built until only a few months ago is nothing short of a scandal. I hope that by highlighting such problems in today's debate we may avoid similar situations in the future. To put it bluntly, no one should have to endure the prevarication and red tape that my constituents endured. It was totally unnecessary and completely unacceptable, but I regret that it appears to be all too frequent. Members have highlighted many aspects of the problems that underline the need for the my life campaign. In doing so, they have made the picture very clear. In my brief speech, I will urge the minister to focus on ensuring that positive work that is being done in research into MD can be progressed. Although there is no cure for muscular dystrophy, there are ways of managing the condition that can add greatly to a sufferer's quality of life. Treatments are additive, so they should be used together to look after all areas of a person's life. Recently I was in correspondence with Cecilia Keaveney TD, the member for Donegal in the Irish Dáil, who was seeking interparliamentary support for increased funding for neuromuscular disorders, especially MD. She recently attended a presentation by Professor Kate Bushby on advances in research into MD and heard the positive message that, given the right amount of resources and the required degree of political impetus, the idea that nothing can be done for people with muscular dystrophy could eventually be consigned to history. There has been testing on animals of treatments such as—I must just stun this rather than kill it—antisense oligonucleotides. Apparently such testing has been very successful, even if my attempt to pronounce the term was not. We now need to move on to clinical trials, to ensure that potential treatments will work in people, as they have in animal models. The treatments that are  being tested are theoretically attractive, can be administered and would be available in the long term, as companies already make them for other conditions. They are ready for clinical trials and have been registered. My request to the minister today is not just to help to end the delays in providing aids and adaptations, but to work with our colleagues in other Parliaments where support already exists for research that shows positive signs but needs the political will to advance it. In short, I urge the minister to give people with MD the wheels that they are seeking and not just to reinvent the wheels that already exist, in order to take issues forward on their behalf. This is a very positive campaign and much positive work is on-going. I accept that there are practical problems that must be overcome—the my life campaign highlights them and they must be addressed. In securing the debate, Cathie Craigie has done Parliament a great service in that regard. However, we could do a greater service to those with MD if we could take forward not only the practical issues that have been raised but the research that will give people far greater hope for the future.

It always appears that the length of time that we get to speak in debates in the Parliament is in inverse proportion to the importance of the subject. Usually, we get three or four minutes to contribute to debates on crime, health or education, but six minutes to fill on matters such as local electoral administration and registration services. Not for one minute am I arguing that the bill is not worthy of discussion; I am merely bemoaning the fact that I have been given the opportunity to speak for longer than normal on a subject that the Local Government and Transport Committee found very little to disagree over, and to do so after everyone else has outlined the issues that did arise. John Swinney spoke about the impact of decoupling, as did David Davidson. The fact that they spoke for so long about an issue that is not covered by the bill in any way is perhaps an indication of how much filling was being done.

John Swinney was concerned about the fact that national issues impact on local elections if the two types of election take place on the same day. It is worth pointing out that local elections are taking place today in England, without any other type of election, but the media are discussing only national issues. The idea that decoupling will somehow help to focus attention on local issues is stretching it a wee bit.  David Davidson gave the impression that the electoral system in Scotland is generally more like that in Harare than that in Hamilton. I wonder whether he will reflect on that. To suggest that the system in Scotland has to be corrected because of the issue that he brought to our attention was, again, more about filling in time than about addressing a genuine concern. The fact that few areas of contention emerged during the committee's deliberations would suggest that the LEARS bill is a good one that has widespread support—not only among committee members but among those whom we consulted. That indeed was the case. The general principles of the bill are very sound. However, as others such as Bruce Crawford, David Davidson and Bristow Muldoon have said, that is not to say that nothing in the bill caused concern. Parts of it certainly did. Clearly, it is good that we have been given the opportunity to make the electoral system much more accessible and convenient for voters and at the same time improve the security of the voting process. Bruce Crawford was right to raise concerns over the potential for fraud. The issue is vital and we would like to hear from the minister about the Electoral Commission's advice. David Davidson spoke about the mechanism for counting electronically. Having seen the process last week, and having had the opportunity when considering previous bills to go to Ireland to see how the system there works, I would say that what we are doing is not being done in a vacuum. Such systems are operating daily. The system works in other countries and has been shown to work in pilots here. I do not think that we need have the concerns that David Davidson has over the mechanism. However, that is not to say that other concerns—as have been raised by other committee members—do not arise over issues such as personal identifiers, the potential for fraud, and the practicalities of postal voting. Other committee members and I concluded that the bill contained much of merit, but we also felt that much more detail was needed to allow us to remain confident that the bill's intentions would result in the desired improvements. For example, introducing performance standards for returning officers in the administration of local government elections may be one of those issues that everyone sees value in, but it will be no more than motherhood-and-apple-pie rhetoric if the standards are not defined and monitored effectively. I appreciate that the Executive believes that the introduction of performance standards for election officials—both returning officers and electoral registration officers—is important in order to secure more consistency in the way in which elections are administered and I understand that  the Electoral Administration Bill that is currently being considered in the United Kingdom Parliament contains a clause that proposes that the Electoral Commission be given the power to develop and set standards, but we in the Scottish Parliament have to be involved in that process and be convinced that what the Electoral Commission comes up with will do what it says on the tin when it is applied in Scotland. Others have mentioned that, especially in relation to e-counting, we need to see the detail of the proposals if we are to have confidence in the standard of the system that will be introduced. As Charlie Gordon pointed out, allowing independent observers at a local government election seems to be a good thing in principle, but what will be their purpose and what will we do with their observations? How will we assess them and what status will their comments have? Information on those points from the minister would be welcome, especially in relation to the issues of logistics that were raised by Charlie Gordon. Equally, who could argue against improving the process for disabled voters and those whose first language is not English? It is self-evidently beneficial to have explanatory electoral materials translated into alternative languages and to provide more assistance for postal voters. We are obliged under the Scotland Act 1998 to ensure equality of opportunity, so we are bound to address issues of the accessibility of the voting process. However, we need to be confident that disabled groups such as Capability Scotland will find that the new system meets their aspirations and delivers more than token gestures. The issue is much too important for political will to fail. We must be sure that what is proposed will overcome the practical and resource difficulties that will surely be encountered when delivering the much-sought-after improvements in accessibility. The Local Government and Transport Committee rightly called for more information to be provided to justify the charges for certificates of births, marriages and deaths. However, there was no difficulty in agreeing that the current 230 districts, which are based on traditional registration district boundaries, should be replaced and brought into line with council areas. That will do away with a lot of traditions, but this is one occasion on which the preservation of traditions cannot be defended. As I have said, this is a good bill with much to commend it. I hope that the Scottish Executive will provide Parliament with the additional details that will enable us to be confident that it will deliver on all that it promises.

To ask the First Minister what steps are being considered to ensure that this year's marching season does not disrupt communities. (S2F-2271)

I add my congratulations to all those who committed their organisations to pursuing their democratic rights with as little disruption as possible to our communities. Does the First Minister share the concern of representatives of the Irish community in Scotland that too much emphasis is put on the negative aspects of religious and cultural diversity in Scotland? Does he agree that the Scottish Executive must do more to promote the positive aspects of Irish culture, including that of Ulster Scots, in Scotland? Is it not part of Scotland's secret shame that the Scottish Executive does not sufficiently acknowledge and support organisations such as the Irish Diaspora in Scotland Association, which represents the biggest ethnic minority in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any concerns regarding the operation of the pubwatch schemes that are run by licensees in Lanarkshire. (S2O-9078)

Is the minister aware of cases, such as those in my constituency of individuals—mostly women—who have been  banned for life from all the pubs in a pubwatch area for actions that did not warrant criminal prosecution? Some people have even been served with 10-year bans for the heinous crime of signing people into a social club against club rules. Does he agree that such punishments are disproportionate to the wrongdoing? Does he agree that although it is important that licensees should run their establishments in an orderly manner, they cannot be allowed to combine into organised kangaroo courts in which they act as judge, jury and executioner against people who might have committed no criminal offence? Will he undertake to examine whether pubwatch schemes act in accordance with the European convention on human rights, especially as they do not offer the accused even a hearing or an appeal against the punishments that are imposed?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to encourage school leavers and students to consider nursing as a profession. (S2O-8867)

I thank the minister for his efforts in encouraging young people to enter nursing as a profession. However, I advise him of the other side of the argument, which was brought to me by four students at one of my local high schools. They informed me of their visit to an open day at Glasgow Caledonian University. They went along to show their interest in a nursing career but were advised that two thirds of the places on the course for the forthcoming year were reserved for mature students. Where does that type of policy fit in with encouraging young people to become student nurses?

Throughout the passage of the bill, Tommy Sheridan has proclaimed that his proposals would deliver fairness and would allow us to take from those who have and give to those who have not. Unfortunately for Mr Sheridan, the Local Government and Transport Committee's scrutiny of his bill has shown that to be a fallacy. I began by believing that he proposed to rob the well-earning Peter to pay the low-paid or pensioner Paul. The none-too-subtle intention was to secure the support of Paul but, as Paul would be left no better off, the SSP tactic will surely fail. Equally, I am not convinced that Peter would have to be very wealthy to be robbed by the SST, and those at the top of the economic tree would be best placed to avoid being affected by it. Stewart Stevenson cleverly argued that point, although we need a bit of scrutiny of his argument. David Davidson and Alex Neil provided evidence that Tommy Sheridan's bill would lead to fiscal flight, and that has to be a major consideration. Mr Sheridan is right about one thing: the SNP and the Liberal Democrats, in proposing a local income tax, would hurt the same people in the same way and their tax would have the same practical and costly problems of collection as Mr Sheridan's proposal, given the spanner that HM Revenue and Customs threw into the works. The Labour Party would like to thank Mr Sheridan for this little gift, which, I am sure, will keep on giving.

If the member had looked at the report of the scrutiny of the bill, he would have seen that HM Revenue and Customs said that it could not get involved with a Scottish service tax. At least Mr Sheridan's bill would establish only one overbureaucratic collection agency, whereas the Liberal Democrats would establish 32—one for each local authority. That would be even worse. The one real benefit of scrutinising the Council Tax Abolition and Service Tax Introduction (Scotland) Bill is that it has undermined the idea of a local income tax as much as it has undermined the idea of a Scottish service tax. It took some chutzpah for Alex Neil to offer such indignation at Bristow Muldoon's comments on the points that John Swinney made. The only reason that Mr Swinney is speaking in the debate is that he is no longer the SNP leader—and he is no longer leader because Alex Neil attacked and undermined his position. One of the biggest problems with the Scottish service tax is that it would undermine local democracy by breaking the link between those who use and pay for public services locally and their councillors, and that point was well made by Paul Martin and others. Mr Sheridan and his academic acolytes argued that that link could be retained by allowing local authorities to set local business rates. However, they undermined their contention by omitting to include that in the bill. When the oversight was pointed out to him, Mr Sheridan said that it would have made the bill too complex. I ask members to imagine a minister coming to the Parliament with a bill and telling us that they know that its provisions have a hole in them the size of that in the ozone layer, but asking us to vote it through anyway because it would make things less complicated.

There is an argument to be made for that. However, we are scrutinising Mr Sheridan's bill, which has a hole in it because he did not include in it the return of business rates to local councils to create the democratic situation that his bill otherwise undermines. The bill is no more than an endeavour by the SSP to stake a claim to be more compassionate than the rest of us. All it shows, however, is that  compassion is not a substitute for justice. The Scottish service tax would give nothing to those who already pay nothing, while shifting the burden on to people at or below average earnings, as Bristow Muldoon pointed out. The Scottish service tax would seriously reduce the Scottish tax base, be more costly to collect, destabilise the Scottish economy and place extreme pressure on local government and its ability to maintain service provision. This afternoon, here in the Athens of the north, we heard an argument from the SSP to create the Albania of the north. Whereas we want to move forward into the 21 st century with a strong economy, the Scottish Socialist Party wants to take us back to 1980s Liverpool. The SSP can claim to defend the poor all that it wants, but the reality is that it would increase levels of poverty by risking jobs and undermining our economy. By taxing people individually, it would tax people inequitably, leading to bizarre situations where families living side by side on similar household incomes would be taxed differently and unfairly. The bill is patently and fundamentally flawed. It is an ill-conceived attempt to deceive the poor into believing that they will gain something from the creation of a new tax. Parliament should not be so easily fooled and should reject the bill for the con that it is.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether all eligible people, in particular those in North Lanarkshire, have received the new entitlement card which will be required to access free Scotland-wide concessionary travel from 1 April 2006. (S2O-8811)

In accordance with the requirements of the new concessionary travel scheme, can the minister provide some assurance that the equipment and technology that will be required by the bus operators to operate the scheme will be in place in time? Can he assure us that all bus companies that wish to participate in the scheme will have equal access to the technology?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the Scottish Environment Protection Agency has sufficient powers to deal with odour emissions from commercial premises. (S2O-8639)

I am surprised at the minister's response. My colleague Karen Whitefield, our constituents and I have complained about the noxious odours that emanate from the rendering plant in Newarthill—which is in my constituency—that is operated by William Forrest & Son (Paisley) Ltd. Those odours directly affect us. SEPA deals ineffectively with the complaints and a great deal of buck passing goes on between Scottish Water, the local authority and SEPA. That is part of the problem. May I advise the minister that, in spite of constant complaints from myself—

I was doing that, Presiding Officer.

Is it a lack of effective powers or a lack of resources for SEPA that allows that intolerable situation to blight the lives of the people of Newarthill, Clelland and Salsburgh?

A few weeks ago, I was discussing the issue of the council tax with a pensioners group in my constituency. As I expected, clear problems with the current system were highlighted. However, what amazed me was one of the answers that I received when I asked what members of the group thought should be done to address those problems and what better system could be introduced to replace the council tax. One pensioner proclaimed loudly that he favoured the poll tax. I was stunned by that and asked him why. He said that he favoured the poll tax because it had been abolished. We would all like to pay our taxes with a smile but, unfortunately, we have to pay them with cash. No one likes to pay taxes, but everyone knows that they are a necessary evil. For that reason, politicians should never attempt to con the public into believing that they have a simple solution to the problems of taxation. Crude slogans such as "axe the tax" merely hide the reality of what is proposed—that one unpopular system should be replaced with another. It ill behoves the Scottish Socialist Party to lecture anyone on coming up with money for local authorities to fund equal pay legislation. SSP members are the people who said, "Don't pay your taxes. Don't give local authorities the money that they need to meet their expenses." The SSP created a culture of non-payment that has produced a black hole of £1.2 billion, which would easily meet the bills for which those members ask.

Tommy Sheridan is wrong on the first point and right on the second. The SNP has said nothing this morning about having a coherent solution for local government taxation, although it evidently admires the problem. SNP members spent little time attempting to outline tax reform and they have not suggested a single coherent proposal for spending reform. No one in the debate has attempted to hide the fact that there are concerns about local government finance. However, it is not enough for SNP members to say that more money should be found without saying where it would come from; to say that efficiency savings are good things without offering an incentive to produce them; or to say that local income tax should replace the council tax without explaining why they would turn a loophole into a noose. According to its own figures, the SNP proposals are to increase income tax by 4.3p in the pound. I doubt whether that would be the true level of increase because of the increased bureaucracy involved and I have no doubt that its proposals would hit ordinary working families the hardest. Will SNP members tell ordinary working people what the true cost would be? In the 18-minute speech that Mr Swinney made, he spent less than one minute speaking about that. If his party makes a proposal of such magnitude, that is not good enough. Why does Mr Swinney not tell double-income families that they would be the biggest losers? Why does he not tell nurses in training and students who supplement their income that they would lose out if they went over the threshold? Why does he not tell single people living alone that they would lose their current discount? The fact is that the proposed local income tax would be more complex and expensive to collect than the current council tax and it would be less stable than property-based tax because the yield from income tax is less predictable. Income tax is paid by only about 60 per cent of people, so almost one third of adults would make no direct payment towards the cost of local services. The SNP and others do not want to axe the tax; they want to extend the tax and introduce punitive levels of local income tax. Far from offering tax cuts, the net effect of an income-related change is that those on average incomes would pay more. Two individuals who earn average incomes would be unaffected but, if they lived together, their combined income would be well above the threshold laid down by the SNP, and indeed that proposed by the Liberals. Therefore, it is true to  say that hard-working families would pay more under that scheme. What about the SNP's proposed freeze on council tax? That would result in £89 million of lost income for local authorities this year alone. Continuing that freeze would cost a further £141 million and £196 million respectively in the following two years, totalling £426 million over the three years of the spending review period without any commitment from the SNP that it would deliver on services. Who would cover that shortfall, or does the SNP even realise that it is arguing for cuts in services elsewhere? We are left to assume that a freeze on council tax would shift the burden of funding local services from council tax payers to general taxpayers to cover that shortfall. The Executive would have to cover the shortfall and that would mean cuts to health, education and transport. It does not matter how the SNP dresses it up, the money has to be taken from somewhere to be given to local authorities. The council tax can be redesigned to be fairer and more representative. We need to and can have a fairer council tax banding system that is more representative of house values in Scotland and we need to extend the range of upper council tax bands in particular. The SNP's proposals would do nothing for local authorities. They would do nothing to aid the drive for efficiency and they would mislead taxpayers about the way forward. For those reasons, they do not deserve the support of the Parliament today.

I agree that the council tax benefit system is overbureaucratic and difficult, but will the SNP tell us how it would fill the gap that would be left by the entire removal of that system from the economy with the introduction of a local income tax?

To ask the Scottish Executive, following the initial experience of the domestic abuse court in Glasgow, what plans there are to extend the project across Scotland. (S2O-8546)

I am sure that the chamber welcomes the success of the domestic abuse court. Coupled with the success of the youth court, it shows that the Scottish Executive is developing its court services in a positive manner. However, I am sure that the chamber would like assurances that the resources that are required to ensure that the success of the Glasgow project will be rolled out throughout Scotland will follow.

I should possibly declare an interest as a member of the Carfin (1948) Celtic supporters club. I had not originally intended to speak in the debate, but I said that I would support Helen Eadie today, as I supported her motion  when she lodged it some time ago. I have something else that I have to go to this evening, but the more I heard people talking about John Thomson, the more I felt I had to make a contribution. At the weekend, as we watched the burial of a legend of football, George Best, I was thinking how appropriate it was that in the same week we would have a debate on the death of a genuine Scottish legend, John Thomson. As I was sitting with my children, talking about the images that we were seeing on the television, with tens of thousands of people lining the streets of Belfast to honour George Best, I, like Helen Eadie, recalled how, at a time when transport, the media and people's financial resources were not as they are now, 30,000 football supporters still made the journey to the graveside in Cardenden to pay tribute to a man whom they had watched in their day. As a Celtic-minded person, I was raised in that tradition. I remember learning at my father's knee about John Thomson, and my father had had the story passed on to him by his father. I visited John Thomson's grave. I felt that, as a Celtic supporter, it was my honour and privilege to do so. Indeed, I encouraged my own children to do the same and they have done so. I hope that they will pass it on to their children. We have to keep alive the memory of legends such as George Best and John Thomson, because they are what football is all about. We got the good and the bad with George Best; all I ever heard about was the good of John Thomson. As a Celtic-minded person, I find it easy to discuss with my friends and fellow supporters traditions, history and people such as John Thomson, but it is unfortunate that outside that Celtic family too few people know about John Thomson. That has to be rectified because he was a giant of the game just as George Best was. For that reason, I had no hesitation in supporting Helen Eadie's motion. It is good that she has brought the matter to the Parliament's attention. If we can get more people to learn about John Thomson, all the baggage that comes with Scottish football might start to dissipate and we might start to make progress in tackling sectarianism and taking that aspect out of Scottish football. We should do that in his honour and in his memory, of which Celtic-minded people are proud. In honouring John Thomson in the way that Helen Eadie has requested, the SFA would be doing a service not only to Scottish football but to wider Scottish society. We need more people to learn about that remarkable young man. John Swinburne mentioned the song about the ghost of John Thomson standing in the goals. As a  Celtic supporter I often wonder whether that ghost is just too big for Celtic. Celtic is traditionally associated with attacking football—our number 7 is the greatest known to football fans anywhere. However, Celtic has not had a great tradition of goalkeepers. We have had Ronnie Simpson and Pat Bonner and we might have a great goalkeeper in Artur Boruc now. Celtic has not had the number of goalkeepers that it should have had. Perhaps in honouring John Thomson, we will lift the burden from the goalkeepers who have had to fill the gap that he left. Before I sit down, it would be remiss of me not to take the opportunity to utter the words "hail, hail", because this might be the only time that we have a debate in which I can get away with it.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to reduce the number of appointments missed by patients at NHS hospitals and general practitioner surgeries. (S2O-8208)

The minister will be keen to ensure that people who seek and receive appointments in GPs' surgeries in the NHS keep those appointments. Does he agree with a constituent of mine—Mr Bettley of Bellshill—that it is totally unacceptable that he must wait for three weeks for an appointment with his GP in the knowledge that dozens of appointments have not been kept in that practice? Does he agree that there may be merit in a three-strikes-and-you're-out approach, which would encourage people to keep GP appointments?

I thank the Procedures Committee—especially Iain Smith, the former convener, Donald Gorrie, the present convener, and Karen Gillon, the deputy convener—for dealing with the matters that we brought to the committee's attention. I also thank the clerks of both committees, who helped to take the matter forward and arrived at such a good conclusion. The Scottish Parliament's public petitions system is highly regarded, not only in Scotland but further afield. However, we cannot rest on our laurels, which is why the committee has consistently tried to improve practices and procedures and has been quick to embrace new technology and techniques, not least of which is the e-petitions system. Things have moved on since 1999 and we now have six years' and 900 petitions' worth of experience under our belt. Although many changes and improvements have already been made to the process, it is time for us to consider a number of changes to the formal procedures to ensure that the public petitions system continues to develop. I want to make it clear that, in welcoming the changes, the Public Petitions Committee does not seek to limit or hinder the opportunity for members  of the public to petition the Parliament. Rather, the rolling programme of committee events that the Public Petitions Committee is currently holding promotes awareness of the public petitions system and provides practical guidance on petitioning. While I am on that subject, I take the opportunity to respond to Sandra White's concerns. It has always been the intention of the Public Petitions Committee to work with a petitioner. Only rarely is a petition submitted that meets the requirements of the petitions system with regard to wording. The clerks work closely with the petitioner to try to find a form of words that will enable that petition to become admissible and often they take legal advice in their attempt to find that form of words. Only when the petitioner insists on lodging a petition that does not conform to the advice of the clerks and the lawyers does a petition become inadmissible. We had to clarify that. I hope that Sandra White understands that the committee has never tried to prevent people from lodging petitions. We always attempt to ensure that a form of words is found to allow the petition to be heard. However, when a petitioner insists on submitting their petition in their own way and the petition is inadmissible, the committee has to say why the petition cannot be taken forward. In such cases, the clerks always provide the committee with a briefing that explains why the petition has to be deemed inadmissible. The new criterion of admissibility will prevent the resubmission of petitions that are the same as, or similar to, a petition that has previously been lodged. That will empower the committee to address potential abuses of the system. Under the existing rules, a petitioner who is dissatisfied with the outcome of the Parliament's consideration of their petition can simply resubmit the same petition. Clearly, such abuse of the system has resource implications for the Public Petitions Committee and, indeed, for the wider Parliament. It can also falsely raise expectations and undermine the credibility of the system. The rule change will ensure that petitions that raise new issues or present fresh evidence will continue properly to be scrutinised by the committee, while those that are raised by so-called vexatious petitioners will be prevented from clogging up the system. In responding to the consultation that the committee undertook when it considered the change to the rules, one petitioner commented that such a change might help the petitioner's case as it would provide time for reflection and time to gather new information. The Public Petitions Committee is pleased to support the amendments to rule 15.4.1, which will prevent MSPs from lodging petitions. Unlike members of the public, MSPs have at their  disposal many other mechanisms for raising issues of concern. The public petitions system should be the domain of members of the public. The rule change will ensure that members of the public, and not MSPs, set the agenda for the Public Petitions Committee. The Public Petitions Committee welcomes the procedural changes that are recommended in the Procedures Committee's report. We believe that the changes will further improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the petitions system.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it supports calls for Scotland to have its own Olympic team at the 2012 games in London. (S2O-7782)

I ask the minister to ignore the petty nationalism that we heard during this morning's debate and to address some of the points that the SNP's spokespeople made. They want us to join countries such as Ireland and New Zealand in sending teams of around 50 to 150 athletes to the Olympic games. Does she agree that, rather than doing that, we should stick with the British system that allowed 24 Scots to go to the Athens Olympics and win four medals, while Ireland won only one medal and the might of New Zealand, which had a squad of 150, returned with none at all?

If I were in a political party that aspired to Government, but which had just lost two by-elections, I would have hoped that my party had learned some lessons and that it would focus on the issues that matter to the people of Scotland. The fact that we are debating more of the nonsense for which the SNP is renowned shows that it has learned nothing and that it has no policies beyond the hyperbolic ravings of Alex Salmond. Make no mistake: this debate is not about a vision of a better Scotland. Even worse, it has nothing to do with the interests of Scotland's athletes. Just ask Olympic cycling champion Chris Hoy, who warned us that dividing the United Kingdom into its constituent nations would weaken  the chances of British cyclists competing at the highest level.

Yes, which is why we should concentrate on providing those facilities, not on breaking up the GB team. The fact is that, rather than supporting London's games, which the Scottish National Party claims in its motion to do, the SNP has consistently tried to find fault with them. In doing so, it has done nothing more than expose its enmity towards Britain and England. That attitude is, simply, at odds with that of the majority of Scots. Not only is 2012 a genuine opportunity for our home-grown talent to shine, but it presents Scotland with the opportunity for massive economic benefits and gives us a chance to showcase Scottish sports facilities ahead of Glasgow's bid to host the Commonwealth games in 2014. I fear that all that is a bigger vision than the SNP can contend with so, while our focus for 2012 should be on ensuring that as many Scots as possible are selected for team GB and have the best possible support available, the SNP looks inwards and throws a tartan tantrum. When Colin Montgomery sank the winning putt in the Ryder cup, he was subsequently and rightly hailed as a Scottish sporting hero. How proud was Scotland last week when Andrew Murray led Britain in the Davis cup? However, why was there no outcry from the SNP to try to stop our Scottish golfers taking part in a European team and sharing glory with the Irish, the French and the other nationalities? Why were there no pleas for a Scottish tennis team in the Davis cup? The one difference is that those events were not associated with the Olympic games in London. I look forward to seeing the Scottish successors to Wells, Wilkie and Hoy in 2012. I will be cheering them, along with the successors to Linford Christie, Daley Thompson, Kelly Holmes and Steve Redgrave. Those are the type of athletes who have made me proud when they competed as British athletes in the past. Scots can win in London in 2012, but they will have a genuine chance to do so only if they are part of a well-resourced and properly supported British team. This morning, the SNP has said quite clearly that it would rather have the mediocrity of 100 than the excellence of 25. We should be focusing on that excellence, not on petty nationalism. It might be good enough for the SNP merely to have Scots participate in a Scottish team in 2012, but I want those who are good enough to  compete with the best and to bring home medals to do so as Scots, for Scotland and Britain.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being taken to address violent crime. (S2O-7676)

The minister will be aware of recent reports that highlight the fact that drunkenness plays a part in half of all murders in Scotland. She will no doubt share the view that there is a proven link between excessive consumption of alcohol and violence. Does she share the belief of representatives of the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland that relaxation of licensing laws will lead to a greater increase in violence, or does she agree with me that, by challenging the culture of binge drinking, the new licensing regulations will encourage more responsible drinking habits and that that will help to address the problems associated with drunkenness?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to improve the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. (S2O-7631)

As the minister takes a keen interest in cancer, he will be aware that early diagnosis is very important in the recovery of people who have been diagnosed with cancer. In that respect, a vital bowel cancer initiative that has been introduced in England has been making good progress. How does the minister intend to address the issue of bowel cancer scanning, which helps with the diagnosis and treatment of that illness?

To ask the First Minister what safeguards are in place to ensure that suspected sex offenders cannot work with children or young people in sports-related and other environments. (S2F-1822)

Is the First Minister aware of the recent report by the Independent Football Commission, which reveals that young people have been vulnerable to abuse ranging from bullying by coaches and overaggressive parents to grooming by paedophiles who target them after seeing their pictures in match programmes or by masquerading as talent scouts? Is he also aware that the report indicates that teenage girls who work for contract caterers in football stadiums and other sports stadiums are often subject to inappropriate behaviour? The Scottish Executive has rightly taken the action that he has mentioned to protect our young people, but will he assure members that the measures that have been taken so far will cover the issues that the IFC has raised in its report?

Will Rob Gibson let us in on a secret? I know that there are two by-elections coming up, but does he have an inclination that there will be a general election at which the Government will change and that the SNP will rule Scotland in the near future?

I had the benefit of being at the Local Government and Transport Committee yesterday, at which that issue was thrashed out with the minister. It became clear that, given the timescale that the tendering process will take after today, any lessons that need to be learned from Audit Scotland's inquiry into NorthLink will easily be built into the new tendering process. If we were talking about this a year ago, I would have agreed with Brian Adam about NorthLink; however, he cannot say what he is today.

When our party entered into Government, we as Labour back benchers knew that we would have to face up to making some hard decisions in supporting that Government. My Labour colleagues and I have had to make some very tough decisions since coming to Parliament, and we will have do to so again in the future. More important, we must do so again today. Despite what Fergus Ewing and Tommy Sheridan have said, this is not an academic exercise; this is an exercise in taking decisions in Government. It is easy for members to posture and to promise what they will never be asked to deliver, and it is sometimes tempting to take the line of least resistance. Most serious MSPs, however, know that there is nothing to be gained from doing that. In December last year, I found myself making a tough decision not to back the Executive. That was, and remains, a unique experience, and there had to be very good reasons for that to happen. I still believe that I had no alternative last year but to withhold my support when I was asked to endorse the Executive's decision to put the Clyde and Hebrides ferry services out to tender. As a Labour MSP, I was not prepared to endorse a decision that, although it appeared to me at the time to be ultimately inevitable, left so many issues around protection of the workforce at CalMac unresolved and inadequately addressed by the Scottish Executive. Although a number of legal questions and points about the tendering process were not properly dealt with last year—they remain in dispute—the main issue for me has always been to have the minister and his officials provide me with the assurance that I and, I believe, other Labour colleagues need that the tender documents will include the safeguards that the employees require over their employment rights. Having heard, like  members who have already spoken, a lot of evidence at the Local Government and Transport Committee, I have come to the conclusion over recent months that there is little that the Executive can now do to withstand the will of the EU commissioner. If that were to happen, there would now be consequences for the workforce that would be worse than would otherwise be the case. The Scottish National Party amendment says that going out to tender could have complications. That is true, as the minister has acknowledged. However, the SNP fails to address the fact that there could be financial penalties if the Executive does not follow the instructions of Monsieur Barrot. Rather than recognise that reality, the SNP has as usual taken the easy route. If Government is difficult, it would appear that Opposition, as ever, is easy. Having asked questions of the Executive and having had them answered at the Local Government and Transport Committee, I would now like to hear some answers from Opposition members. Are they really prepared to allow the decision on the tender process to be taken out of the hands of the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications and handed over to EU officials? Are they, as legislators, prepared to advocate defiance of the European Commission, whose responsibility it is to see legislation that is passed in Europe being applied here? Are they prepared to play fast and loose with the possibility that the Commission could order the cessation and recovery of subsidy to CalMac? Are they prepared to abdicate responsibility and place in jeopardy the lifeline services that the islands need and to take the easy option, which they would rather take? They might be, but I am not.

Fergus Ewing has just reiterated his speech and said nothing more than he said yesterday or earlier this afternoon. The question that remains is this: What part of "infraction proceedings" does he not understand? If we want to be in the game, we have to play by the rules. Those rules might be hard to accept and the people who apply them might not be doing so  as we would like them to but, as in most cases, the umpire's decision is final and we have to accept it. That is not a palatable position in which to be left, but we have a responsibility when we come to Parliament, which means having sometimes to make such difficult decisions. Last December, I rejected the Executive's explanation of the situation that it faced at that time. The decision was difficult, but I could take it because I believed that more could and had to be done for the CalMac workers. Since that time, the minister has to his credit taken us towards the point at which I am confident that the important employment safeguards are now being put in place. Unlike last December, when no protection was on the table, I now believe that to vote against the Executive today would leave the workforce totally unprotected and the Executive in no position to further influence the workforce's future prospects within the tender rules. I am not prepared to do that and I urge members not to do it, either.

rose—

The explanation is very simple: Scotland's businesses were not disadvantaged in 2004 and they will be greatly advantaged by the reduction now.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that the licensing boards proposed in the Licensing (Scotland) Bill will adequately represent community interests. (S2O-7365)

The minister will be all too aware of recent problems with pub violence in Hamilton—the town that we both represent—where the licensing board felt it necessary to introduce temporary licence removals. What assurances can the minister give that the proposed changes to licensing boards in the Licensing (Scotland) Bill will provide sufficiently effective and robust powers to tackle those premises that continually prove to be hotspots for violence and other forms of antisocial behaviour, and become no-go areas for the majority who wish to socialise in a safer community atmosphere?

I, too, thank the clerks for their hard work on a sometimes difficult bill. In particular, I thank Eugene Windsor, who is about to move off to pastures new. I was a member of the Local Government and Transport Committee throughout the passage of the bill and I feel that I have been on something of a voyage of discovery. The journey has not always been particularly smooth and the mode of transport has more often been a kicking mule than a Rolls-Royce, but we have arrived at the point of destination and it has been worth the trip. I thank Nicol Stephen for his efforts in piloting the bill through and I look forward to working with Tavish Scott in his new role as Minister for Transport and Telecommunications after the bill has been brought into dock. The new minister will have his work cut out, not so much because of the Local Government and Transport Committee, but because he will have to deal with the civil servants in the transport division. Never before has a team of civil servants managed to call a spade a gardening implement with such alacrity. They even managed to tell us under which regulation under which section in the bill the gardening implement was to be considered; they simply did not want to tell us on the face of the bill. It has been said that we started out with a bill with very little meat on its bones. However, by the time the civil servants had lodged the amendments that the committee and outside bodies had dragged kicking and screaming out of them, I was convinced that at least one of them might be in the Edinburgh royal infirmary to have their head surgically removed from a certain orifice. My first discovery was that the civil servants in the transport division need to take lessons before they draft any more bills and that they need to drop the obfuscation, prevarication and legislative gobbledegook so that members of the Local  Government and Transport Committee can have the trust in them that we need in order to work well together. The main thing that I discovered, however, is that the bill's provisions are good and will, with the committee's amendments, promote better transport throughout Scotland. Who would not agree that new regional transport partnerships, as outlined by Kenny MacAskill and other members, should be established and that we should build on SPT's strengths and expand the system throughout Scotland? However, we discovered that the Conservatives are not happy with that proposal. They want a disjointed, weak and unresponsive batch of toothless RTPs. What we need are strong RTPs, but David Davidson has made it quite clear that he is after his own type of RTP: redundant Tory policies. Part 2 also had to be amended to strengthen the road works provisions. That has largely been achieved and we are now closer to the level playing field that was sought at the outset. Most important, part 3, which gives powers to establish national concessionary travel schemes for pensioners and young people, was what, if nothing else, made introducing the bill really worth while. Notwithstanding Fergus Ewing's comments and Kenny MacAskill's defence of the fact that the SNP has only latterly supported the bill, I was unprepared when, initially, the SNP said that it would not support the bill's general principles. It would not support the general principle of expanding SPT's strengths into the RTPs; of establishing a road works commissioner to allow better management of the roads network and the positive development of transport for all users; and of extending the principle of the concessionary travel scheme. At the next election, I will take great delight in going round my constituency and telling people that. Fergus Ewing said that we should take the politics out of this issue, but we should not forget that he played politics with it throughout the whole process. Despite the fact that the nationalists have only latterly come round to the bill, I am glad that they have decided to support it. Every member in the chamber should do so, because it is a good bill that is worthy of our endorsement.

I thank the minister for lodging amendment 27, which does what it says on the tin. The amendment seeks to improve the bill by introducing indications of the powers that the  RTPs will have. However, I ask the minister to confirm, for the record, that the list in the amendment is not exhaustive and that, as transport develops in Scotland and things change, the RTPs will be able to develop strategies that go beyond the list.

I support the amendments in the minister's name, but I am not content with the amendments that David Davidson and Fergus Ewing have lodged. However, I agree with Fergus Ewing that the scope of the amendments that the minister has lodged demonstrates how much was missing from the bill when it was drafted. That is a lesson for the Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department, which should not have introduced a bill that was so weak that Sylvia Jackson, Paul Martin and I had to lodge amendments to it. Given the scale and universality of amendment 17, the problem that Fergus Ewing has is that his amendments become examples of tautology—the issues are already covered in the bill. All the issues that we wanted to have addressed are covered. Anything that Fergus Ewing wants to add is unnecessary and his amendments just complicate the bill. I do not think that it is necessary to go down that road. I welcome the minister's amendments, but a lesson has to be learned: if this stuff was in the bill, we would not have to have amendments of such size at stage 3.

Politicians are often accused of trying to be all things to all people. In relation to some issues that is unacceptable because, quite simply, we cannot have it both ways. However, when it comes to alcohol, it is difficult not to address competing positions and to give something to every side in the debate. It appears to me that there are two distinct views of alcohol. Some people see it as the devil's brew. They see it as something that robs people of their brains, takes food from the mouths of babies and shoes from the feet of children, and as a substance that kills hundreds on the highways and through the ill health that it causes. They are right—it does. For other people, alcohol is a mild tranquiliser; it calms jaded nerves and is no more than a social lubricant. It is—those people are right, too. Throughout the time that the Local Government and Transport Committee has considered the bill, I have often found myself trying hard not to look at it from one or other of those perspectives. As Margaret Smith said, there had from the outset to be recognition that, in assessing the use of a legal drug, we would have to consider social costs in terms of ill health, crime, public disorder and antisocial behaviour. We also heard from the business community and from health experts that the bill could have social, economic and health benefits. What made it easy to focus on what the bill was about was recognition that, whatever side one takes in the debate, the system by which we have hitherto regulated supply and use of alcohol is too complex and outdated and must be changed. The bill seeks to simplify and modernise the licensing system in Scotland, and it addresses the cultural changes that have taken place in our  country. As the minister said, Scotland has always had a problem with alcohol, but the manifestations of that problem are not what they were a generation ago, when licensing laws were last addressed. I remember clearly from my early days that my grandfather would bemoan how times had changed and recall the good old days when women did not go into pubs. Statistics have shown that one woman in four reported exceeding daily benchmarks; that one woman in seven drank alcohol hazardously; and that approximately one woman in every 21 in Scotland had a degree of alcohol dependence. The situation has also changed for men and for young people, as Mary Mulligan said. As Pauline McNeill observed, things were never as good as my grandfather remembered them, but statistics show that the situation now is much worse than it was in his day. We have to deal with the modern reality of alcohol abuse and its social consequences, and I think that the bill gets the balance right between encouraging sensible alcohol consumption and addressing the effects of alcohol abuse. A desire for more efficiency in the workings of licensing boards is a good idea, but we must be careful that, in moving towards that, we do not shortcut the assessment of licence applications. We must take time to use local knowledge and address local concerns, and I agree with David Davidson and Mary Mulligan, who highlighted that issue, although I do not agree with David about opening up alcohol sales in football grounds. To compare Newcastle with Glasgow does not work. Newcastle has one team; that team can meet its opponents at 3 o'clock on a Saturday afternoon with no problems, but the major rivals in Glasgow cannot do that. There is an added dimension in Scotland that makes the problem far more complex than David Davidson would have us believe, and I would be totally opposed to this or any other bill's being used to open up alcohol to sale in football grounds.

David Davidson completely ignores the fact that there is a social dimension in Scotland that makes the situation here entirely different, so the two examples are not comparable. The development of licensing standards officers is something that we can all support, but we should not rush into that without considering the specific functions and powers that those officers will be able to use in exercising their role. That concern was expressed by a number of members,  so it is absolutely legitimate that we consider such matters further. We also generally support the establishment of a national licensing forum to provide good guidance to ministers on the regulations that would be required to support the new licensing system. However, we are right to be concerned that we still know too little about the composition and precise role of that body. I look forward to hearing from the minister about that in the wake of his announcement, and I agree with what Margaret Smith said on that. The bill contains many good proposals on licensing, such as single premises licences, occasional licences, the ending of permitted hours, and other administrative arrangements, such as those for appeals and objections. To change the culture of drinking, we need more than legislation, but the foundations on which to build a cultural change are clearly contained in the ambit of the bill. I agree with Paul Martin and Donald Gorrie about the need to educate young people. Paul Martin's comments about his experiences in respect of the importance of having the right environment into which to take a young person reminds me of the reality that I have faced in dealing with the bill. I have three children—one in their early 20s and two in their late teens—who think that I come to Parliament every week to consider how to ruin their social lives. My colleagues on the Local Government and Transport Committee will be disappointed if I do not raise my pet subject. As I say, the use of alcohol in Scotland has changed over time; in fact, it has changed since Sheriff Principal Nicholson delivered his report. Because it has changed, he did not deliberate on the development of dial-a-drink services from our off-licences, a problem that has been raised with me by police. Such a service is not a bad thing, but it is evidently being used by young people to circumvent no-proof, no-sale initiatives. We must not overlook that. I welcome the minister's comments on the matter and I am pleased that he shows willingness to listen to the good sense of the Local Government and Transport Committee across the range of issues that it raised in its report. I also welcome Donald Gorrie's support for the committee's report. The bill is worthy of our support and I encourage members to support its general principles.

To ask the Scottish Executive what lessons can be learned from fellow European Union education ministers following recent meetings in Brussels. (S2O-6980)

I am sure that the minister will have picked up a few tips from his fellow ministers. Being a member of this broad-minded Parliament, I ask the minister what lessons the EU can learn from us.

To ask the First Minister how the skills and experience of Scotland's public sector can be used to assist developing nations. (S2F-1687)

Is the First Minister aware that records show that the Boys Brigade took footballs to Malawi in the 1870s, which proves that Scotland was the first to take football to the rest of the world? In spite of Malawi's lack of opportunities, it might well develop enough talent to overtake Scotland in the FIFA rankings very soon. On a more serious note, given that the First Minister has indicated that Scotland must play its part in developing Malawi's potential, is there a danger that his fresh talent initiative could run counter to that by attracting skilled workers away from working in the public services of Malawi and  other poor countries? How does the First Minister intend to prevent that while also attracting new talent to Scotland?

As anyone who has gone on a journey with children will testify, regardless of how long the journey is, it is never long before one hears the question, "Are we there yet?" In 2001, the Scottish Executive started a journey, with the first transport bill for more than 20 years. The aim of the bill was to aid the resurgence of Scotland's transport industry for the future. Its policy objectives were to deliver a sustainable, effective and integrated transport system for Scotland, to empower local authorities to deliver local solutions to local problems and to promote partnership working. The Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 includes provisions to give power to local authorities to address growing congestion and environmental problems in cities and larger towns. As Bristow Muldoon outlined, four years on, the Local Government and Transport Committee decided to conduct an inquiry into the impact of the 2001 act, especially its provisions for bus quality partnerships and bus quality contracts. In effect, we were asking, "Are we there yet?" That may not be the question that Des McNulty wanted us to ask, but Bristow Muldoon explained why the scope of the inquiry was slightly limited. However, I think that it covered many of the issues that Des McNulty wanted us to address. The 2001 act made legislative provision for a plethora of initiatives that transport groups, users and the industry in general had long sought. There were to be joint transport strategies that would involve improved joint planning by local authorities to address shared cross-boundary issues, such as how to manage travel in and out of Scotland's largest cities. Bus quality partnerships were envisaged. Bus services would be improved by giving the force of law to partnerships between local authorities and bus companies. The fundamental aim of such partnerships was to provide quality services to passengers, but the evidence that we took suggested that that is not happening. The theory was that, if bus quality partnerships were tried and failed or were found to be inappropriate, the legislation would enable the Scottish Executive to approve bus quality contracts, which would allow an exclusive franchise to be awarded to a single operator through competitive tendering. There is a distinct lack of evidence that that is happening, because the private operators are not keen for their oligopolies to be tested in that way. The most high-profile element of the bill was the concessionary fares scheme. The aim was to deliver a minimum level of concession for pensioners and disabled people travelling in Scotland and progressively to enhance that level over the next few years. Rightly, the new national  concessionary travel scheme has been welcomed. It is especially welcome that today we have heard commitments from SNP members to support it, because they could not bring themselves to do so when the current Transport (Scotland) Bill was debated at stage 1. SNP members sought clarification from the minister, but we need to know just what the SNP's policy on concessionary travel is. During evidence taking, we heard Fergus Ewing, in particular, suggest that we should not use the money to give concessionary—

It would help the committee to know exactly what the SNP's policy on concessionary travel is. By raising the issue, I clearly succeeded in rattling Fergus Ewing's cage. I recall scrutinising the previous Transport (Scotland) Bill at stage 1 as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee. We found that initially the bill did not make provision for information to be made available in minority ethnic languages and in forms accessible to sight-impaired groups. That was rectified through the mainstreaming requirement. Rightly, the 2001 act amended the provisions of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970 for the enforcement of the orange badge scheme. However, much needs to be done to ensure that disabled users have access to public transport. The committee concluded that, although the deregulated market had led to better services in some areas, issues still had to be resolved, such as the withdrawal of marginal services and the overprovision of services with inefficient competition in certain key urban corridors. Glasgow was highlighted in that respect, although we found examples everywhere we looked. In setting out good examples of the cherry picking that has adversely affected too many communities, Paul Martin exposed the flaw in John Scott's belief that quality partnerships are not wanted. They are wanted, but major operators wish to concentrate on commercially viable routes at the expense of local communities. Quality partnerships are needed to deal with such cases,  but Mr Scott and David Davidson seem happy for bus companies to make money at the expense of communities, even though Mr Davidson argues that the same communities are losing out because market forces are failing to deliver buses to them.

I absolutely agree that the state and the market can both play a role, which is why we have quality partnerships and quality contracts. However, they are not being used. Mr Davidson simply dismissed their relevance. The committee found that there was little incentive for councils and bus operators to enter into statutory quality partnerships, given the costs of developing such partnerships and the perceived effectiveness of the voluntary partnerships. Unfortunately, only the local authorities and bus companies thought that the system was working. The bus users groups did not give it the same support; indeed, as Margaret Smith pointed out, we were presented with a picture of failure in many parts of Scotland. The committee concluded that there might be scope for better development of statutory quality partnerships, especially under the regional transport partnerships that the Transport (Scotland) Bill seeks to establish. We identified a need to clarify the powers of local authorities and the traffic commissioners with regard to quality partnerships. We believe that the Executive could do much more to kick-start the development of quality partnerships in areas where they are needed. Indeed, we heard evidence that, in some cases, the Executive was the obstacle to their establishment. As Bristow Muldoon pointed out, a statement from the Executive is required on how it will support councils and regional transport partnerships when they consider the statutory quality partnerships that are proposed in the Transport (Scotland) Bill. The committee wants the minister to report to it on the progress of the partnership commitment to monitor the quality partnership powers in the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. Are those powers adequate to protect and enhance the evening, weekend and rural bus services that Rob Gibson and other members seek? The committee feels that the Executive sees quality partnerships as an option of last resort. Instead, it should consider whether it can support the further development of quality contracts. Although it does not seek re-regulation, the committee would like the Executive to indicate whether it would consider such a move if quality contracts were shown to have been tried but had failed.  When we took evidence from the Bus User Complaints Tribunal, we found it to be toothless in its ability to tackle the problems with which it was confronted. BUCT should have its remit and powers extended to ensure that it takes responsibility for long-distance coach services and reports more generally on issues that affect bus users. The committee concluded that the Executive should review BUCT's operations and consider whether any additional powers are required. I thank the committee clerks for their efforts and the Scottish Parliament information centre for all its support during our consideration of the evidence. I particularly thank David Mundell for his contribution during his time on the committee and, like others, I wish him all the best as he becomes the fleeing Scotsman. I also thank those who attended our meetings in Stranraer and Glasgow or came through to Edinburgh and gave us the evidence on which we based our report. I have to say that there was no full consensus on whether the legislation is working. At the beginning of my speech, I asked, "Are we there yet?" The committee has concluded that we are not, but we have identified the journey and have shown that it is well under way, even though the route itself might require some modification.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied that all town centre developers have equitable access to information from its officials regarding development proposals. (S2O-6887)

Is the minister aware that none of the existing town centre developers in Lanarkshire was invited to the Scottish Executive's retail forum in November 2004, which provided the opportunity to discuss emerging Government retail policy? They had to request invitations from the Executive. Is the minister also aware that those companies did not receive copies of the Glasgow and the Clyde valley structure plan consultation document when it was published earlier this month, so they had to request copies? Will the minister investigate why Scottish Executive officials—I can provide her with the names of those who are involved—told those companies that it was inappropriate for them to meet officials who deal with emerging retail policy, whereas more favoured town centre developers in Lanarkshire have no such difficulty in obtaining assistance from the Executive? Given that—

Given that I am referring to major investors and developers that have invested hundreds of millions of pounds in the Scottish retail sector, does the minister find the situation surprising?

It has been said that the law should not pretend to punish everything that is dishonest because that would seriously interfere with big business. I say that in a somewhat tongue-in-cheek way, not because it is entirely wrong but because I believe that it is our responsibility to interfere in crime wherever it occurs. What might be more accurate is my belief—which appears to be contrary to the view of the Minister for Justice, given what she said earlier—that we cannot consider the view that crime does not pay to be even remotely true. Crime is one of the biggest businesses in the world today and we must interfere with it. I am glad that the Scottish Executive recognises that and has set itself the task of confronting that reality. Organised crime is truly global and we must look beyond our borders if we are to tackle it effectively. During the recent general election campaign there was a great deal of discussion on immigration. Had there been a reasoned debate on the matter there is much that could have been addressed, but this morning we have an opportunity to consider one dimension of the immigration debate. Migration from disadvantaged or troubled areas of the world to more stable and affluent countries is a multifaceted global phenomenon and it creates great opportunities for serious and organised criminal involvement. Organised immigration crime comprises both people smuggling and human trafficking; the distinction between the two is that in the case of human trafficking the intention behind the facilitation is to exploit the migrants when they reach their destination. The indications are that human trafficking takes place on a much smaller scale than people smuggling, but the nature of human trafficking is such that it is harder to identify. It is clear that human trafficking relies on the frequent use of intimidation and violence, which arguably makes it the more acute threat and one that Scotland's criminal justice system must make a priority. Scotland is not immune to the problem, so it must be tackled by the strategic partnerships to which the motion refers. Criminals involved in serious and organised crime, whether they trade in people, drugs or other commodities, are adept at exploiting weaknesses in the system. Such criminals show flexibility and speed in responding  to the efforts of law enforcement officers to combat their crime and in countering improved detection capabilities. I am particularly concerned that traffickers often recruit migrants specifically into the vice trade. That usually involves deception and the exploitation of the lack of opportunities that are open to women in the source countries. The use of violence to control both trafficked prostitutes and sweatshop labourers is widespread and must cause us great concern. In the case of women who are trafficked for prostitution there are extreme forms of coercion, which usually involve physical abuse and rape by the traffickers. Violence is likely to be present from the point at which the woman begins working as a prostitute and most victims are forced to become addicted to hard drugs such as heroin. They become dependent on both the drugs and the trafficker. Victims of trafficking are a particular concern because they continue to be exploited by serious and organised criminals once they are in Scotland. I hope that the minister will pay particular attention to the problem. Many of the serious and organised criminals who are involved in immigration crime are also involved in other serious and organised criminal activities, such as class A drug trafficking. There is evidence of illegal immigrants being used by serious and organised criminals to facilitate other serious and organised crimes—for example, they are used as drugs couriers. Serious and organised criminals also use illegal immigrants to commit various types of organised low-level crime when they arrive in the destination country. When that happens in Scotland, it shows us how a global problem becomes a local issue. I am glad that the ministers gave a strong indication this morning that they intend to tackle the problem. In any debate on crime, we must have a sense of perspective about what needs to be done and what can be done. From what we have heard this morning, the ministers have got that balance right and I wish them well with their efforts in tackling the problem.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is encouraging people to put their names on the national health service organ donor register. (S2O-6710)

What progress has been made on bone marrow and blood stem cell donations? I remind the minister that, in April  2004, the then Minister for Health and Community Care advised the Public Petitions Committee that, in respect of the Anthony Nolan Trust, "officials would investigate ways in which the Executive might be able to assist in the promotion of the work of the Trust in Scotland."—[ Official Report , Public Petitions Committee , 28 April 2004; c 761.] Has that been done, and what positive effect, if any, has resulted?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to reduce the likelihood of offending by people on bail. (S2O-6149)

Is the minister aware that a young accused person is nearly six times more likely to offend while on bail than an older person? A recent report shows that the rate of offending while on bail for people aged 16 to 20 is 35 per cent, whereas the rate for people aged between 41 and 60 is only 6 per cent and the overall rate is 29 per cent. Does the minister agree that that situation is unacceptable? Will she give an assurance that the proposed changes will tighten up the existing bail system and ensure that many of the people who are granted bail are subject to greater restrictions, such as the electronic monitoring that she mentioned?

An accusation often heard in the chamber against the SNP, and rightly so, is that the party too regularly uses its allotted time to discuss reserved matters and does not—as Wendy Alexander pointed out—debate policy. I therefore find it rather bizarre that, during a general election period when we are all talking  about Westminster, the SNP now chooses to debate a devolved matter. However, we should not be surprised that that type of muddled logic should emanate from the SNP benches, although it has been worth having the debate just to hear Brian Adam promise to abolish inheritance tax. In their rush to weigh in on a populist subject—and populism really is the SNP's only guiding principle—have SNP members, like the minister, taken the time to read the report on local government finance that the Local Government Committee produced in the first session of Parliament? If they have, they might be aware that numerous local councils, including SNP-run Angus Council, recommended retaining the council tax, as did many professional bodies, such as the Institute of Revenues Rating and Valuation and the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy—people who, it might be said, actually know something about the subject. Those people were right to make the recommendations that they made. The council tax retains crucial elements that the SNP has failed to discuss, including accountability between councils and the electorate and the council tax benefit scheme that protects people on low incomes who find it difficult to make payments. The Labour Party remains dedicated to providing financial assistance to those who find the council tax difficult to pay, whereas the SNP just wants to score an easy hit and ignore the difficult decisions that accompany tax-raising powers. Taking its usual line of least resistance, the SNP has decided that a locally set income tax would somehow benefit the people of Scotland. In an effort to court the pensioner vote, the SNP ignores the fact that its proposed income tax would hit working families the hardest. According to its own figures, it would increase income tax by 4.3p in the pound. That does not make the system fairer; it just moves the unfairness around. Having reintroduced—as Bristow Muldoon rightly pointed out—the Andrew Wilson school of back-of-the-envelope economics, the SNP forgets to tell us how it proposes to institute its new taxation system. Would councils collect the local income tax or would the Inland Revenue have to have 32 different collection rates? How does the SNP address the fact that an income tax would result in higher increases in business tax? How does it address the fact that, although the collection rates under the present council tax system are around 91 per cent, they were only around 67 per cent under the poll tax? Simply lessening the number of people from whom a tax is collected does not in any way enhance local accountability. That accountability, when setting the tax rate, is absolutely precious.

Stewart Stevenson fails to address a point that even the Green party has made. If we simply change to a local income tax, we take a whole lot of people who currently pay council tax out of the system, at both ends. That is not an enhancement of the system. If Stewart Stevenson fails to see that, I do not see how he could introduce an income tax system locally that would be fair in any way. The SNP has yet again gone for a populist debate, rather than engaging properly in economic arguments. Its members may like to refer to 50-year-old, outdated reports, but they seem to be unaware of the existence of the local government finance review committee, which is currently reviewing different options for local taxation and the reform of the council tax and is considering the pros and cons of any changes to the taxation system. SNP members clearly believe that they do not need to see the findings of that wide-ranging, extensive and independent review correctly to evaluate local taxation. They already have their minds made up. It is true that the council tax is not popular, but we in the Labour Party understand that there is no such thing as a popular tax. However, we acknowledge the importance of local government and local accountability, which is why we have to retain the link between people's property and the local government area. To drive people out into surrounding areas would punish cities such as Dundee and Glasgow and would just move unfairness around. That is not the basis on which to conduct a debate on local government finance.

Will the member take an intervention?

I have not spoken yet.

Does the member agree with his colleague, Mr MacAskill, who said that the SNP should consider targeting benefits in the way that you are now describing?

I would like to make a frivolous intervention, as there have been frivolous interventions by SNP members. Did the member's dad happen to have a nuclear weapon given to him, which he shoved in his cupboard?

One of the great philosophers of the 20 th century, Will Durant, once wrote: "In my youth I stressed freedom, and in my old age I stress order. I have made the great discovery that liberty is the product of order." In my youth, I was a supporter of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament because I realised the horrible potential of weapons of mass destruction  and wanted to stress the need to be free from that threat, which, during a time of cold war aggression in the 1970s and 1980s, was growing ever greater. I still acknowledge that threat, but I am a little bit older now and, like Will Durant, I have matured. I now appreciate that this is an incredibly complex geopolitical issue that raises many different concerns. I still believe in nuclear disarmament but, in discussing it, we need to have order as we strive towards that aspiration.

If the member had listened, she would have heard me say that I still do not believe in nuclear weapons. If she paid attention, she might not waste parliamentary time with such stupid interventions. Because of our Labour Government, there have been major reductions in nuclear forces. I am proud of that record. Indeed, despite what the Green party said, the UK has relinquished all air-launched weapons; Royal Navy surface ships are no longer able to carry or to deploy nuclear weapons; and the nuclear missile and artillery roles that were previously held with US nuclear weapons under dual-key arrangements have been resigned. That represents real progress towards nuclear disarmament. Trident is the only nuclear system left and I hope that it will be the last. However, getting rid of it will require an ordered defence policy, not disarray, and gaining freedom from the threat of nuclear destruction will require orderly negotiation. In today's post-cold war nuclear politics, the issue is not as simple as the SNP would have us believe. However, why should we be surprised that the SNP has a chaotic defence policy? It does not have an impressive record on issues relating to Scotland's defence; indeed, its approach to defence policy is careless and contradictory. For example, it advocates withdrawal from NATO and has repeatedly opposed NATO action, despite the fact that such action has saved hundreds of thousands of lives. Moreover, the SNP advocates Scottish independence while arguing for the retention of Scottish regiments in the British Army. As I have said before, at least when the Indians and the Irish gained independence, they had the decency to tell Britain to take its army with it. The SNP wants us to believe that Scotland would be the only country in the world to gain independence—its so-called freedom—and still keep the army of its oppressors.  The most disingenuous aspect is that the SNP would put independence before Scotland's national security and the benefit that we gain from defence jobs. This week, the SNP accused Labour of causing unemployment at Rosyth while advocating shutting down the very defence industry that provides thousands of Scots with employment. As the election looms, we will see much more of the political opportunism for which the SNP is famous. I am glad that the SNP has again given us the opportunity to expose that opportunism. The money that is currently spent on Trident has been pledged variously by the SNP to the national health service, to increasing the number of nursery places, to improving the lot of pensioners and even to a Scottish Nobel prize. The SNP asks only that we should wait until Scotland is independent to address the critical issue of defence. I am an optimist and I expect to live to see Scotland free of nuclear capabilities, but I do not expect ever to see Scotland becoming independent. If I ever stop being an optimist, I will become a nationalist.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it has taken to improve the way victims are notified about the release of offenders from prison. (S2O-5746)

Does the minister agree that it is important to continue to support victims, even after the offenders have gone to jail, and that it is doubly important that we provide quick and  efficient notification when an offender is released early from prison? Does he agree that the increasing number of offenders who are released early will place a burden on existing victim notification services and that it is crucial that the Scottish Executive ensures that no victim or family of a victim discovers that their attacker is free by running into them in their community? Can he elaborate on the actions that are being taken to ensure that victim notification is up to date and expedient and that the appropriate safeguards are in place in our communities?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to improve discipline in schools. (S2O-5653)

As the minister will know, recently published figures show that the number of exclusions in schools has risen by 7 per cent and that male pupils account for nearly 80 per cent of exclusions. Does he think that that is a result of teaching styles in schools that alienate boys and increase boredom and confusion, or of the invisibility of bullying among girls, which tends to be less physical and less immediately noticeable? What steps, if any, have been taken to address the issue?

John Stuart Mill, the founder of utilitarianism, is not someone whom I would often quote in a debate, but it is worth noting that the father of minimalist government argued that even if government does nothing else, it must control education and transport. As a member of the Labour Party, I think that government must do an awful lot more than that. However, if John Stuart Mill was correct in identifying the importance at least of transport in the role of government, he served a purpose. Members of the Scottish Parliament acknowledge the priority that transport should be given. There must therefore be good transport legislation and the bill has the potential to become a good piece of transport legislation. I stress the word "potential", because of the concerns that members have expressed. Most members and the minister identified that the creation of regional transport partnerships is a key element of the bill. It is unfortunate that the welcome for the establishment of RTPs was counterbalanced, if not negated, by the Opposition's negativity about the measure. There are three main elements in the bill and RTPs represent only one element. It is good that RTPs are linked to an overall national strategy, which has not been properly addressed in the debate. Members have forgotten that RTPs will have a bigger role than can be ascertained by considering the minutiae of what the partnerships can do. The second element in the bill is road works management, but we did not widen the debate to consider those provisions. However, we spent a lot of time on concessionary travel. I was heartened by the minister's sympathetic response to the Local Government and Transport Committee's concerns about the voting arrangements for RTPs and boundary flexibility  and I am happy that he gave a clear indication that draft orders will be in place before we consider the bill at stage 2. I agree with David Mundell that the lack of detail caused the committee concern and prevented us from properly scrutinising the bill. Des McNulty's contribution exemplified the problem in relation to the lack of detail about finance, which meant that there was a question about how we could assure everyone that the RTPs would be properly resourced to deliver everything that we want them to deliver. It is right that the committee took the opportunity to raise such concerns in its stage 1 report. Early in the debate reference was made to a "store of happiness", which should have set us off on the right track. However, it was Fergus Ewing who introduced the idea. He then forgot to identify any of the good aspects of the bill, at which point the debate started to go wrong. If we regard Fergus Ewing as an example of a hibernating Job's comforter, we might find out where his store of happiness is. Many members expressed concern about the amount of power that RTPs will have. I will not go into that, because I want to focus on the powers of the Scottish road works commissioner, which Tommy Sheridan mentioned. I started my speech by talking about utilitarianism, but Tommy Sheridan took the opposite approach and gave us utopianism. If we can do anything in this bill, we can deliver a strong piece of transport legislation. Very few bills coming to the Parliament at stage 1 are already complete. Tommy was right to say that the bill deserved a yellow card, but I do not think that it will get a red card. I think that we can deliver. If the minister responds positively to the points that have been made, we will achieve a very good bill—and I will be more than happy to go round the doorsteps during the forthcoming election campaign to tell people that neither the Tories nor the SNP could bring themselves today to endorse concessionary travel.

Being a member of the Local Government and Transport Committee, I have spent a lot of time listening to various local government representatives to establish for myself a picture of Scottish local authorities' current financial position. Having also served on the Local Government Committee during the previous session, I remember vividly the situation that we inherited in the late 1990s. I recall COSLA representatives telling us that the gulf between central funding and their assessment of what local government actually needed was in excess of £1 billion. In my assessment of the current situation, it is clear just how different things are for local government now and how much has improved. On that basis, I welcome the minister's speech today. Brian Monteith asked whether the minister remembers from his time in local government where the bodies are buried. I am not sure about that, but I certainly know where Tom McCabe led to the burying of the Tories and the Scottish nationalists in local government. I fully endorse the more open and collaborative approach to local government that the Executive has developed. I welcome the focus being turned much more towards accountability to the people whom local government serves and supports. To sustain robust local authorities, we require to share our priorities and to work together to attain and further the highest standards of public service provision. It is vital that we work in partnership to ensure practical results on antisocial behaviour, transport and crime in particular.  Local government will receive many more benefits from its new budget. I am reassured, in particular, that the Executive's commitment to tackling antisocial behaviour has led it to provide money to allow greater support to be given to initiatives in that area, for example the community safety partnerships that have been funded through local authorities, which will help effective warden schemes to operate throughout Scotland. Only through reform and modernisation can we secure best value for every penny that is spent. Under this budget settlement, the Executive will provide Scotland's local authorities with more than £30 billion in the next three years. That will enable local authorities to make significant progress across the board and will help local government to meet the public's aims. I am especially pleased that the Executive has identified more than £1 billion of revenue grant outwith aggregate external finance for each of the three years of the spending review period. That will assist in such areas as the strategic waste fund, the community regeneration fund and the changing children's services fund. The revenue support for schools will allow for many more improvements in our school infrastructure, which we badly need. It is always worth remembering that we would not have that support if the anti-private finance elements in this place had their way. The nats and the Scottish Socialist Party would deny our schools many of the positive results that will undoubtedly come from the spending proposals for schools. Those will include not only the provision of new or refurbished schools, but more teachers, smaller class sizes, greater opportunities and more protection for the most vulnerable, with grant-aided expenditure provision increasing in 2005-06 for that purpose. The aim of spending under the local government heading is to plan public finances and manage them prudently to deliver excellence in public services and support in growing Scotland's economy, which will enable local democracy to flourish—and I have to say amen to that. The regeneration of our neighbourhoods; the standards of and within our schools; closing the gap between the rich and the poor; making opportunities available to all; improving standards in transport, health, social care and social justice; and making our streets safe places in which to live—that is what local government is all about. Having listened to my colleagues in local government, I know that some apprehension remains. I urge COSLA to remember where we were only five years ago. In partnership with local authorities and other service providers, and with the resources that we should approve today, we can deliver on all the aspirations that I have  mentioned. I encourage the Parliament to approve the order.

I do not know whether the debate is giving me a sense of déjà vu or the surreal feeling that we are joining Alice in Wonderland. I have decided that it is not déjà vu that I am experiencing, as the Scottish National Party is not opposing the motion, even though we are having a debate on a Sewel motion. That was not the case when the Local Government and Transport Committee considered the Sewel motion on the Gambling Bill. I must conclude that we are in Wonderland, especially if we take into account the comments that Fergus Ewing made during the committee's consideration of the Railways Bill last week. He said: "Obviously, the Scottish National Party welcomes the transfer of more powers to the Scottish Parliament."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Transport Committee , 19 January 2005; c 1957.] However, only a few weeks earlier, the SNP  opposed the Sewel motion on the Gambling Bill and attempted to stop the transfer of powers to the Executive that it proposed. Far be it from me to help the Opposition to increase its vote in any way, but I advise the SNP that it may find it easier to convince the electorate that it means what it says if it does not change its position from one debate to the next.

I will come to Fergus Ewing in a moment. Inconsistency may have been part and parcel of life in Wonderland for Alice, but Fergus in Wonderland does not have the same ring to it, although he might be able to help us with that. I see that he does not want to now, although I gave him the opportunity. The Tories were little better; they appear to have left Neverland to get to where they are today. David Mundell is now sitting on his own, so he must know who the lost boys are. We should concentrate on the Sewel motion, which is a good one. After a marathon meeting of the Local Government and Transport Committee, we achieved consensus on the motion. Post privatisation, the British railway system was in a mess, but the Labour Government at Westminster is seeking to address that chaos. We in Scotland will be given enhanced powers over the rail network as a result of the Government's proposals. The Scottish Executive ministers will be given a role that is equivalent to that of the Secretary of State for Transport, which means that we will be in a win-win situation that will enable better planning of services and more accurate targeting of future investment in Scotland. The most important beneficiaries of the new powers will be not the Scottish Executive ministers and their officials, nor the MSPs who can hold them to account over what they do with the new powers and resources, but Scotland's rail passengers, the number of whom will, I hope, grow in the future. They have the most to gain from the new arrangement. We need greater efficiency and more co-ordination between train operators and track providers. If that can be achieved, we will have a more reliable service for travellers. When we can ensure that decisions on service improvement are made by those who are best placed to determine local priorities, the Executive's welcome investment in the ScotRail franchise—which has already resulted in 29 new trains and the provision of several longer station platforms—will be developed further. We will also be better placed to reduce overcrowding, improve customer information and integrate ticket arrangements, which are much-needed improvements. The changes that will be brought about if we agree to the Sewel motion will result in better planning and a greater ability to meet our  and the country's aspirations on rail transport. To return to Wonderland, it is worth noting that, if Tricia Marwick had achieved her proposed moratorium on Sewel motions, we would not have obtained the powers that we will receive as a result of the Railways Bill and the Gambling Bill. The Local Government and Transport Committee took a long time to consider the Sewel motion, which was appropriate. The Opposition parties may have travelled via Wonderland and Neverland, but we have arrived at a good destination for railways in Scotland. At the very least, we should be happy with that and support the Sewel motion accordingly.

To ask the First Minister what the next steps will be in addressing sectarianism following the recent meeting with football supporters associations. (S2F-1347)

I hope that the proposed meeting allows progress to be made towards addressing the cancer of sectarianism, which affects too many of Scotland's people and communities. Does the First Minister agree that the vast majority of communities that are affected by religious hatred are the poorest in our country and that any finger wagging and lectures from chattering-class organisations will have little impact on them? Does he further agree that the eradication of hatred will be a long process based on the development of understanding between different religions and traditions and that our religious institutions will have a much more important role to play in achieving tolerance in our society than will any football clubs or their supporters, given the fact that football-related sectarianism is only a manifestation of the religious hatred that existed in Scotland long before football did?

Mr MacAskill talks about the principles. If all the issues are so important, why did no SNP member take the time to raise them in the Parliament at Westminster, to which they are reserved?

Sewel motions have been a contentious issue for some time in the Parliament, with the Opposition regularly complaining either about the frequency of their use, as David Mundell has just done, or about the perception that powers are being handed over unnecessarily to our Westminster colleagues—a complaint that has come from Opposition parties on all sides. We are reminded that such complaints are made because of those concerns alone; Opposition members are not opposed to Sewel motions in principle and say that they will consider each one in turn and on its merits. Therefore, I am baffled that the Opposition is opposing this particular Sewel motion on the Gambling Bill that is before the Westminster Parliament. If Opposition members are not opposing the Sewel motion merely for opposition's sake, they must come up with better reasons for opposing it than they have done so far. No one can dispute the fact that the modernisation of the UK's gambling laws is badly needed or the fact that the legislation required to effect any such changes is largely reserved to Westminster. I find it peculiar that Opposition members are looking for Scotland to have its own legislation on the issue. I am not concerned about their espousing their desire to have such legislation, but I am baffled that anyone could see that as the best way to address concerns about gambling in Scotland. Given that the Gambling Bill is already under way at Westminster, it would be impossible for the Scottish Executive to introduce its own legislation to parallel that being proposed for the UK. That being the case, the practical effect of our not supporting the Sewel motion would be to prevent Scottish ministers from being given the opportunity to consider proposals to establish a regional  casino in Scotland. The Sewel motion seeks to give Scottish ministers powers that they do not currently have. Without those powers, a regional casino could be established under UK legislation and we would not even have begun the process of legislating on gambling, even in those areas that are devolved to Scotland and over which the Scottish Executive has authority. Like other members, I am concerned that little, if any, encouragement should be given to the extension of gambling in Scotland. The social problems associated with gambling addiction are well known and far too extensive in our country already. However, I do not think that we should overhype the problems that the creation of a regional casino would bring. For example, I doubt whether many bingo players would drift away from their couple of games of housie a week towards the poker and blackjack tables in a casino. I also doubt whether the punter who puts a few pounds on the greyhounds or the horses would be any more susceptible to gambling addiction. My concern is about the establishment of a culture of gambling that would suck people, especially younger generations, into the heavy gambling promoted by big business as a glamorous leisure pursuit. I would like the Executive to obtain the powers that will allow it to have an input to the new gambling environment that the Government in London proposes. If people are worried about the potential expansion of gambling-related social ills, to oppose the Sewel motion would be perverse. Westminster is responsible for the bulk of the powers over gambling, but the Scottish Executive has been given the chance to expand its involvement, and we should seize that opportunity. I am not much of a gambler myself, but I am prepared to wager that the Sewel motion is being opposed for no reason other than the fact that it is a Sewel motion, and that if members examined what it would deliver, the Parliament would support it.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the centralisation of health services is a policy objective. (S2O-4799)

I am glad to hear that the centralisation of services is not a policy objective, because Opposition members have made it their job to try to portray it as such. Will the minister reassure my constituents and the wider public in Lanarkshire that the on-going consultation that is being led by NHS Lanarkshire is aimed at the modernisation and improvement of services, so that those services are delivered in Lanarkshire not as a cost-cutting exercise but as a clinical need that will improve services?

It is often said that Government is difficult, but I find myself thinking that it must be difficult to be an Opposition MSP. Having nothing to offer the people of Scotland on the issues on which this Parliament was set up to legislate, the Opposition continually resorts to holding debates on issues over which we have no authority. The Scottish National Party has a group at Westminster but does not want a British Army. The Scottish Socialist Party and the Greens have no one in London and therefore cannot debate the issue there, so, to an extent, I can understand why those parties concentrate their efforts here. However, I find it difficult to have any sympathy for the Tories. They are the main Opposition at Westminster and have ample opportunity to raise defence issues there. They have the shadow Scottish secretary to raise specific Scottish issues for them with the support of the rest of the Tory group at Westminster behind him. On second thoughts, if that is the extent of their party's ability in London, perhaps we can understand why the Tories would rather have Murdo Fraser front the subject for them here. I have always taken great pleasure in representing Hamilton, where the regimental museum of the Cameronians is housed. That regiment was suspended, but not disbanded, in 1968—the museum assures me that the regiment awaits any renewed call to arms—and the Cameronians' recruiting area of Lanarkshire was thereafter taken over by the King's Own Scottish Borderers, which already recruited in the area. Indeed, my father spent his national service in the KOSB during the Malayan emergency in the mid-1950s. Elaine Murray has already outlined the importance of the KOSB, so I will not dwell on it, except to note that it boasts proudly of being the only regiment that fought for the Government in all three decisive engagements in the Jacobite wars: at Killiekrankie, Sheriffmuir and Culloden. That is a good enough reason, some might say, for preserving the regiment in perpetuity. Unfortunately, it also spent much of the 18 th and 19 th centuries suppressing the Irish, so it might  have fought against my ancestors at some stage, but I will forgive the regiment for that and take pleasure in defending its right to continue to exist. I was also interested that the regiment notes on its web pages that, after all the battle honours that it achieved in the service of Britain over 300 years and following its operations in the first gulf war in 1991, it added to its list a vigorous campaign at home called operation Borderer. That was the fight against the Tory options for change proposals, which would have led to the regiment's amalgamation. The Tories were forced to reverse that decision, and the three centuries of history continued with an unbroken lineage. I doubt that the Cameronians will be reformed to join the latest fight, but their successor in Lanarkshire, the KOSB, must be given a future. The Tories tried to destroy the KOSB themselves once. The nationalists might be scared in case the regiment comes back to haunt them, à la Culloden. The nationalists, like the Greens and the SSP, would have no need of any British Army regiment, so we will take no lecture from them. Hypocrisy reigns in the Parliament this morning. We have to ignore the sanctimonious hyperbole that is emanating from various parties: those who want to turn the Army into an ambulance service or a military brass band and those who do not want a British Army at all. We need to ensure that Scotland's present needs are put first, and Scotland needs the King's Own Scottish Borderers.

As convener of the Public Petitions Committee, I welcome the First Minister's statement and the contributions from Nicola Sturgeon, Annabel Goldie, Jim Wallace, Robin Harper, Rosie Kane and Margo MacDonald. I am delighted that the committee has managed to secure this debate on a petition that raises highly sensitive issues and I am sure that colleagues will agree that the petition is genuinely worthy of debate in the chamber. I am particularly delighted for the petitioner, Chris Daly, that his petition has resulted in a full parliamentary debate and a ministerial statement. As colleagues are aware, one of the underpinning principles of our new Parliament is that we should be open and accessible and encourage a participative approach. The public petitions system has consistently provided one of the main avenues for public participation, and today's debate again emphasises that. This is the first time that the committee has secured such a debate and I thank the other members of the committee for their diligence and hard work in progressing PE535. In doing so, the committee is mindful of the need to balance the wishes of those victims of childhood abuse who believe that the process is cathartic with the wishes of those who might prefer not to reopen old wounds. On that basis, the committee has been careful not to refer to individual cases. I point out that the committee has not taken a view on whether or not to recommend that the Parliament support the petition's aims. In seeking today's debate, our aim has been to facilitate a full consideration of the issues raised by the petition. The committee will consider the petition further, along with the Official Report of today's debate and any additional evidence, and agree what action to take when we meet on 22 December. In opening today's debate, my role is simply to provide the background to the committee's  consideration of the petition and an overview of the main issues that have arisen during the process. On that basis, it would not be appropriate for me as committee convener to take a view on the aims of the petition. Public petition PE535 was lodged by Chris Daly on 20 August 2002 and first considered by the Public Petitions Committee on 8 October 2002. The petition calls on the Scottish Parliament to urge the Scottish Executive to conduct an inquiry into past institutional child abuse, particularly for those children who were in the care of the state under the supervision of religious orders, to make an unreserved apology for said state bodies, and to urge the religious orders to apologise unconditionally. The petition is prompted by the petitioner's belief that the Executive should follow the Irish Government's lead in recognising the need to acknowledge and support victims of past childhood abuse. Colleagues might be aware that in May 1999 the Taoiseach announced the Irish "Government's wish to apologise on behalf of the State and all citizens of the State ... to victims of childhood abuse for our collective failure to intervene". At the same time, the Irish Government established a commission to inquire into child abuse in Ireland, with the primary focus of determining the causes, nature and extent of physical and sexual abuse of children in institutions and other places, and to make appropriate recommendations. The petitioner wrote to the Public Petitions Committee that "counselling, compensation and pastoral services help Irish survivors with the process of healing and reconciliation. It's my view that Scottish victims and survivors should be given the same recognition." The petitioner has also stated: "I'm sure I speak for other survivors in saying that we need support from the Scottish Parliament. It would be courageous of the Parliament to take this matter on board and deal with it in the sympathetic searching way it was dealt with in Ireland." Furthermore, in a letter to the First Minister dated 15 June 2004, and copied to the committee, the petitioner suggested: "In my view, we have to move forward from here and the time has long since arrived when the adult survivors of institutional abuse have the opportunity to tell of our experiences to a sympathetic, experienced forum. That would be an inquiry set up by the Scottish Parliament/Scottish Executive as outlined in the petition terms of reference." At its meeting on 8 October 2002, the committee agreed to write to the Scottish Executive and the cross-party group on survivors of childhood sexual abuse and see their comments in relation to the issues raised in the petition. In a response dated 17 February 2003, the Executive stated that  "any case of child abuse is unacceptable" and said that it was "considering whether an inquiry of the sort that had been requested, or some other forum, should be established to look into cases of abuse in institutions in Scotland, having regard to cases that have come to light in recent years, and what other role the Executive might take in addressing these cases." In a letter to the committee dated 6 March 2003, the cross-party group on survivors of childhood sexual abuse stated: "We believe it is right to expect an inquiry into past institutional child abuse, in particular for those children who were in the care of the state under the supervision of religious orders. We further agree that an unreserved apology to those survivors from the religious orders is appropriate." The petitioner has also provided a letter of support from Children 1 st , which has "agreed to support the petition and further that: there should be a public statement acknowledging that child abuse has occurred, apologising for it and stating unequivocally that it should not have happened; that anyone who has suffered abuse should have access to services, which they need, regardless of their age and how long ago the abuse happened; that there needs to be an investigation into why the voices of children are not sufficiently heard when accusations are made and are being investigated. The inquiry should also ascertain why children are too often powerless when those investigations take place, and make substantial recommendations on how that will be changed." The committee has received other letters of support for the petition from victims of institutional child abuse. For example, in response to the minister's decision not to hold an inquiry, one submission states: "I am appalled that the Scottish Parliament has refused to hold a public inquiry into the abuse of children in institutions in Scotland. This is a scandal of enormous proportions and in my view makes the legislators in Scotland part of the conspiracy of silence that surrounds the sexual abuse of children while in 'care' ... I add my voice to the many others calling on the Scottish Parliament to immediately open a full inquiry into the abuses committed against the children of that country ... The truth must be told. People robbed of their innocence as children must now be heard. That is the very least they deserve." Another victim states: "Until Scottish society acknowledges the awful nature of what happened to thousands of innocent children in care, the terrible pain and torment will remain strong for many victims." Although the Parliament has not yet come to a view on whether it would be appropriate to hold an inquiry, that letter expresses the strength of feeling that exists on the issue and underpins the decision by the Public Petitions Committee to bring forward this afternoon's debate. The committee again considered petition PE535 at its meeting on 25 March 2003 and expressed  concern that the Executive had not provided any timetable for progressing the matter. It requested that the Executive provide an update on progress early in the summer term—by mid-June 2003, if possible. However, in spite of a number of reminders, no response was received from Executive officials. Having been advised by the clerk that the Executive had not responded, I placed petition PE535 on the agenda for the committee's meeting on 12 May 2004. At that meeting, the committee agreed to write to the Minister for Education and Young People to seek an urgent response on any progress that had been made on consideration of whether to conduct an inquiry and the timetable for such an inquiry. The committee also agreed to write to the First Minister to express disappointment that the Executive had failed to respond to it, in spite of its having sent a number of reminders since its initial request. Having still not received a response, I placed petition PE535 on the agenda for the committee's meeting on 29 June 2004. At that meeting, the committee agreed to invite the Minister for Education and Young People to give evidence at its first meeting after the summer recess on the issues that had been raised by the petition. The committee subsequently received a reply from the minister in which he stated: "The First Minister and I apologise for what has clearly been an unacceptable delay in providing a substantive reply to your original request for information. I know you will appreciate this is a difficult and complex subject and we have been examining the way ahead very carefully." He went on to say that, after very careful consideration of "whether an Inquiry would prevent future abuse, help meet the needs of survivors, or be in the wider public interest ... we decided that it would not." The minister provided four main reasons for deciding against an inquiry. First, he said: "Following inquiries and reports into residential establishments, we have taken steps to improve the protection afforded to these vulnerable children." Secondly, he spoke about "Providing high quality support for survivors of past abuse." The third reason was about "Ensuring that individuals who have suffered abuse have access to legal rights and remedies." The final consideration was "Whether an Inquiry would prevent future abuse, help to meet the needs of survivors, or be in the public interest." The minister stated: "We have given very careful consideration to this. We have concluded that, on balance, an inquiry would not achieve these purposes."  The petitioner also responded in writing to the committee regarding the minister's decision. He stated: "There was two years delay in a response to the petition. In those years no contact was made with the survivors during the decision making process. Also there was no apparent study of other countries progression on the issue." The petitioner also asked to which survivors the minister had spoken who would be against a public inquiry, while recognising that although some survivors might welcome an inquiry, others might prefer that the issue was not raised in public because that would reopen old wounds. The petitioner suggests that we need to find a way of meeting the needs of both sets of survivors. After receiving the minister's response, the committee took oral evidence from the Minister for Education and Young People at its meeting of 29 September 2004. In his opening remarks to the committee, the minister stated: "I make as clear as I possibly can that the decision not to proceed to an inquiry does not imply that the Executive does not acknowledge that, at times in the past, the treatment of some of our young people fell well short of what should be regarded as acceptable." He continued: "The Executive is very clear ... that some of the things that happened to young people in residential settings were gross and truly appalling."—[ Official Report , Public Petitions Committee , 29 September 2004; c 1046.] Having heard from the minister, the committee agreed unanimously that the issues raised by the petition warranted a full debate in the Parliament. As I have stated, this is the first time that the committee has taken such action, which emphasises the seriousness of the issues that the chamber is being asked to debate today. The committee also agreed to invite further comments from the Minister for Education and Young People, the Catholic Church, Quarriers Homes, the In Care Abuse Survivors/In Care Abused Support group—INCAS—and the petitioner. The minister subsequently responded to the committee. In a letter dated 5 November 2004, he stated that he had met the petitioner and INCAS on two occasions since giving evidence to the committee and that they had received a presentation on the actions that are being taken in the area of child protection. The committee has also received responses from INCAS, Quarriers and the petitioner. In its response to the committee, Quarriers states: "Quarrier's position is that if any individual suffered abuse at Quarrier's then we apologise." As of the deadline of 26 November, the Catholic Church had yet to respond to our request. As I have stated, the committee will decide at its meeting of 22 December what further action to  take on PE535. It will be useful for the committee to hear the views of colleagues today on what I am sure we all agree are hugely important issues, not just for the victims, but for Scotland as a progressive and enlightened society. On behalf of the Public Petitions Committee, I again welcome this afternoon's debate. In calling for the debate, we have done a good thing. I move, That the Parliament notes public petition PE535 calling for the Scottish Parliament to urge the Scottish Executive to (a) conduct an inquiry into past institutional child abuse, in particular for those children who were in the care of the state under the supervision of religious orders and (b) make an unreserved apology for the said state bodies and to urge the religious orders to apologise unconditionally.

This is the second occasion this week on which we have discussed individual rights and freedoms. However, unlike the debate that we had yesterday, this debate puts the emphasis on a negative perspective on the value of life. Yesterday, Margaret Smith correctly told us that we should support a smoking ban because we should not support somebody's right to kill somebody else and because we should be doing what we can to protect people. That is a positive view of life that is full of hope for a better society. I have worked closely with doctors and nurses in the palliative care and hospice movement, so I have come to understand just how difficult it is for anyone to make a judgment about what constitutes a worthwhile or worthless life. I have met lots of doctors who have had patients who valued their lives and who fought to preserve their lives in circumstances that the doctors viewed as being insufferable. Every palliative care professional can tell of a patient who has said that they often wished for the end of their life to come. It is my view that that leads, more often than not, to a valuable discussion about the various issues and allows an opportunity to deepen doctor-patient trust.  It is universally acknowledged that patients are reassured when they are told that expressing such thoughts will not result in action to terminate their lives. Experience also shows that it has been extremely rare for patients to make determined and persistent requests for their lives to be terminated. The doctor-patient relationship would be seriously compromised if patients could not express their distress lest it lead to euthanasia. There is good evidence that a desire for death in terminally ill patients is closely associated with clinical depression. The desire for death can also vary with time and depression is, potentially, treatable. Delirium or confusion is common in palliative care patients and is sometimes so subtle that it is difficult even for clinicians to recognise it. It is impossible to be absolutely confident that a request for a life to be ended does not arise from a disordered state of mind, whether treatable or not. Most doctors believe that any obligation on them to consider carrying out euthanasia or, if they have a conscientious objection to it, to refer the patient to a willing colleague, would be fundamentally at variance with their duty as doctors to honour the sanctity of life. I also think that the effect of such action on doctors would be enormous. The taking of life would diminish them as individuals and it would lead to psychological problems for many doctors in the long term. Palliative care doctors tell me that clinical care is effective in alleviating suffering. That would be undermined by the practice of euthanasia. Obviously, there will be times when a doctor cannot help a patient clinically; not all problems can be fixed. However, even if we could be sure that a doctor was dealing with a competent and mentally sound patient with intolerable and untreatable suffering, the overwhelming majority still believe that the taking of life is wrong because of the clinical principle of non-abandonment. Sometimes, all that a doctor can do is accompany the patient as a caring and even loving clinician who does not give up on them, even when they cannot remove the problem. It is precisely because humans are never worthless that we should attempt to alleviate suffering or, where we cannot do any more, we should still care.

As has been said this morning, we are here again discussing a reserved matter. The SNP has ensured that there is nothing new in that. We can do it, as Alex Neil said, and we have done it before. The difference this time is the underlying reason why we are doing so. The SNP's message this morning is that the party has accepted that it is led from London. It cannot bring Mr Salmond up from London, so it has to waste valuable debating time in this chamber massaging his ego, which can almost be seen from London. He is obviously so full of his own importance that he probably hopes to die in his own arms. Everyone can see through the SNP's ploy. The debate shows that Mr Salmond pulls the strings from afar and has no difficulty in causing his party to hinder the business of Holyrood. In doing so, however, he exposes yet again the paucity of serious policy emanating from the SNP. As was evident from her speech, Nicola Sturgeon is clearly intent on condensing the most words into the least amount of thought. Mr Salmond was once seen in political circles as someone with genuine promise. Now he is just full of empty promises. He therefore has no qualms in demanding that the SNP impedes the discussion  of matters that are genuinely appropriate to the devolved powers of Scotland in order to show that he is the boss. One advantage of having this debate is that the SNP has exposed that it is at least consistent in failing the poor of Scotland on vital issues. Its record shows that it could not support anti-poverty measures such as the minimum wage and the working families tax credit. It would now add to that catalogue of disgrace by abolishing the pension credit that is targeted at the poorest pensioners. Of course Scotland has an aging population, but that section of society is currently benefiting from Labour policies. On average, our pensioners are £19 a week better off from having the pension credit and other measures than they would have been if an earnings link had been applied to the basic state pension from 1997.

I do not want someone on my earnings to receive a bigger pension because the SNP will not make the hard decision to focus the money on the poor who need it. Unlike our time-wasting colleagues in the SNP, we have helped to reduce absolute poverty by two thirds and the number of people who are living in relative poverty by 0.5 million. In 2003-04, Scottish pensioner households were on average £1,400 better off as a result of UK measures introduced since 1997. Unlike the SNP, with its short-term vision, Labour is committed to creating a better life for older people in Scotland—permanently. We will do that by enabling older people to live healthy, independent lives and by ensuring that a long-term strategy is applied for the challenges that lie ahead. Since Labour came to power, there have been many advances that have enriched and improved the quality of life of our aging population, boosting the overall fundamental entitlements of older people in Scotland. The SNP, having nothing to offer pensioners, is attempting to con Scotland's pensioners into giving up many of the major benefits that they have received under Labour. Through the Labour-led Scottish Executive, the UK Department for Work and Pensions, local government and voluntary organisations, the partnership against poverty working group can encourage older people to claim what they are entitled to. It is disappointing that, instead of encouraging pensioners to claim what they are entitled to, the Lib Dems are, typically and for political point-scoring purposes, joining the SNP in finding fault. They would rather cut the benefits that are  available and add the complication of a new benefit. By being part of the Scottish Executive, the Lib Dems have the benefit of the economic success of the Labour Government in London, but they want to pick away at the sensible economic basis for that success. There is no better example of people who, having been given a bar of gold, complain that there is no handle on it to help them to carry it to the bank. Robert Brown's amendment is characteristic of that attitude. The Lib Dems have no ideas about how to create the stable economy at the UK level from which pensioners in this country can gain, but they have any amount of ways to criticise the Labour Government that has delivered the success from which the Executive has benefited financially. The SNP's proposed divorce from the rest of the UK could seriously put at risk the stability and security that has been created by Labour's economic progress to date. The Lib Dems' vacuous point scoring is little better. How can any of them help poorer pensioners in Scotland by undermining the economic benefits that are being harvested by Whitehall? If political idiocy reached the same levels as current oil prices, the SNP could pay for its spending plans by selling the drilling rights to the Lib Dems. I endorse what the Executive is doing and encourage the Parliament to support what the Executive has succeeded in doing.

The First Minister is talking about the image of Scotland. He will be aware that one of the most symbolic emblems that we have is our saltire. What is his view on the use of the saltire to promote Scotland?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Executive is taking to address recent reports on standards in care homes. (S2F-1069)

I welcome the First Minister's answer. I am sure that he is aware that residents returned to the Rosepark nursing home in Fallside in my constituency this month. Will he join me in welcoming that development and recall that commitments were made to ensuring confidence in the residential care sector following the tragedy in January? Will he therefore ensure that the recent reports into standards in care homes will not be viewed as a cup half full and that the failings that have been found in half Scotland's care homes—some of which have been exemplified in media campaigns such as that in the Daily Record —will be considered to be an intolerable situation that he will recommit to addressing?

I welcome the personal commitment that the minister gave this morning to sporting activity. The progress made so far by the Scottish Executive is welcome. There has been significant improvement, but this morning we need to take the opportunity to urge further development. As I have shared some sports fields with the minister, he will know that I engage in sport, despite my physique. There is no truth in the rumour that I believe that if God had wanted me to touch my toes, he would have put them further up my body, nor do I hold to the opinion that the one advantage of exercise is that we will all die healthier. I join the minister in recognising the contribution of the Scots paralympians. Their achievements in recent days have been important to us all in enabling us to recognise their value and what they can contribute to Scottish society. However, important though the recognition given by the minister and other members is, I urge the minister to go further and to ensure that the paralympians are recognised in the same way as our other Olympians were recognised, and that they also have a reception at Bute House and are given the opportunity to go through the streets of Edinburgh. It is vital that sport is seen as a way of promoting inclusion in our society. We must use the examples of James Anderson, Andrew Lindsay and others who have done so well for us in recent times and add them to the Colin Montgomeries and Andrew Murrays who play sport at the top level. Our contribution to the disabled community must be to promote the accessibility of sports to them. As John Swinburne and others said, there are certainly potential heroes and top sportspeople out there in Scotland. It is also true that there are potential heroes in the disabled community who cannot get access to sport because the facilities are not there. Disabled people are not taken into consideration when sports facilities are located too far away for people to be able to travel to them, are not accessible and offer a restricted range of sports. What is true for the disabled community is true for the rest of society. Members have pointed out that the standard of available facilities is vital. For example, there is a sports club in my home village of Newarthill, in my constituency, which is primarily an amateur boxing club but is open to the wider community as a fitness centre. Unfortunately, the  facility that people use is a dilapidated old portakabin, which was donated by a former business. The club is the only such facility in the village and the community needs modern facilities. I have worked closely with the club to try to secure support and resources from sportscotland for a new facility, and we have tried to draw in people from the private sector who have a commitment to the local community. However, we are caught in a dilemma. The demand is there—local football clubs would participate in a new facility—but the resources are not there to provide the facilities that the football clubs would need. As the minister knows, football is primarily played during the winter months, when it gets dark early, so floodlights are needed if young boys and girls are to be able to participate. However, the resources are not there to provide floodlights. It is a catch-22 situation: there is an identified demand and a willingness to provide facilities, but the resources are not there to provide the facilities that would attract more resources. That vicious circle needs to be addressed in any future strategies that the minister might develop. There is real frustration that young people who want to participate in sport cannot get access to sport. I am from Lanarkshire, so I can knock on the head the myth that young people do not want to take part in youth activities because they do not want to spill their Buckfast. Young people want to get involved in sport, but the facilities are not available in their communities to allow them to do so and to become the heroes that we have heard about. We must exploit the potential that is there and do all that we can to ensure that if someone has ability—whatever their sport might be—the facilities are available to enable them to tap into that ability. We do not want more people to leave Scotland to play for England, as Peter Nicol did, because it is their only way of making progress; we want people to stay in Scotland because they can achieve their full potential in Scotland—that is what this debate should be about. We must ensure that Scots regard Scotland as the place where they can maximise their abilities. As John Swinburne said, our bigger football clubs, such as Celtic and Rangers should be regarded not as the big stepping stones that players can use to get to England or Europe, but as clubs in which players can maximise their ability and which will be given support to compete in Europe or wherever they are, using Scots players. We must ensure that players regard Scots football and sports clubs as the places where they can be all that they can be. I welcome what the minister said, but I urge him to go as far as possible as quickly as possible.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to reduce class sizes in schools following recent representations from the Educational Institute of Scotland. (S2O-2871)

I am sure that the minister will share the agreement of members throughout the chamber that a reduction in class sizes would not only benefit students, but would be more conducive to staff delivering education in the classrooms. Does he agree that the EIS's suggestion that strike action is an appropriate method by which to achieve a promise of future reductions in class sizes is detrimental to that argument, and that the only people who would lose out in those circumstances would be the students?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the guaranteed waiting times in the partnership agreement will be met. (S2O-2590)

I am sure that the minister will agree that the reduction in waiting times is not just a laudable aim but an essential feature of a modern health service. It is not sufficient to meet the current targets without looking to the future. Can he assure us that the improvements so far achieved will be sustained and that firmer targets will be set in future to improve on the current situation?

In the mid-1980s, I was a member of the Scottish Trades Union Congress youth committee and was, through my participation in that body, able to meet young people from a cross-section of Scotland and from several overseas youth organisations. I recall attending the world festival of youth and students in Moscow and having the opportunity to discuss issues, formally and informally, with groups of young people from apartheid South Africa, Chile and other countries under oppressive regimes and dictatorships. I especially recall an encounter with four Iraqi students who had settled in Scotland. I knew little of their country and even less of the system that they were evidently relieved to have escaped. At the end of our discussion, I was left with two abiding memories. One was of bewilderment, not only that such a barbaric Government could be allowed to get away with systematic brutality, but that it clearly had support from the west. The other memory that I have is of the heartfelt pleas of those students and their insistence that if Britain and other western countries did not desist from supporting Saddam Hussein, the people of Iraq were destined to suffer even greater terror at his hands. Soon after that encounter, we learned of the massacre at Halabjah. My anger at the complicity of my country's then Government in turning a blind eye to that barbarism remains as strong today as it was then. As time marched on, I attended more and more events at which Saddam was condemned and action called for to deal with his tyrannical regime, but still the west did nothing until Saddam threatened the oil supplies by invading Kuwait. Only then was action taken. Alas, that action was only about oil. As history tells us, we were still not interested enough in the people of Iraq to bring down the Baathist regime. The truth was—and I know that this flies in the face of the clichés about  the war being for Iraqi oil—that we had no oil interest in Iraq and had no need therefore to cross into Iraq. Saddam was left in place and the west got on with ignoring the plight of the Iraqi people. UN resolution after UN resolution was passed and ignored and Iraqi after Iraqi died because, collectively, the UN did not care enough to do anything. Now we have done something and I believe that we did the right thing—better late than never. I do not particularly care that we did not find weapons of mass destruction. We know that Saddam Hussein had them because he had used them previously and we knew that he would be capable of using them again. The only reason why he cannot do so now is not because he does not have them but because we now have him. I am confident that the four students that I met 20 years ago are glad about that. I am not so confident that they will be proud of this Parliament today as it discusses this tawdry piece of political opportunism.

I heard that argument, even if Robin Harper did not. This debate is not about principle, it is not about upholding international law and it is not about exposing deceit. It is about political point scoring, naked opportunism and blatant hypocrisy. As a supporter of the Iraqi campaign, I am more than happy to face up to the difficult challenges now facing the Government. There were and are consequences of war. Equally, however, there and were and are consequences of not taking action. Will the SNP face up to that and tell us why it would have left the Iraqi people to suffer at Saddam Hussein's hands? The SNP should not tell us that all we needed was another UN resolution. As for the SNP's position today, we can look to Rob Gibson who, in an SNP press release dated 28 February this year, said: "The Blair Regime must be indicted for war crimes and the writ of British rule removed from our way of life." Such extreme language leaves me in no doubt that the SNP's motion about removing an army of occupation is more to do with anti-British sentiment than anything else and that, as ever, it is using the prevailing situation in post-Saddam  Iraq to cover up its own internal strife and prepare for next week's election. No amount of crocodile tears for the plight of the Iraqi people will wash away the fact that the SNP is more interested in attacking Britain than it is in finding a way to help Iraq. If it believes that the answer is to withdraw, it has questions to answer about that. How could a Muslim-based UN force help and where would it be drawn from? What about Turkey or Iran? Would the Kurds and marsh Arabs want them on their soil? What about Saudi Arabia? If al-Qa'ida can target that country for its western links just now, just think what it could do if Saudi troops were in Iraq. I believe that my Government was right to do what it did. I trust it to resolve the current problems. There will be differences across the chamber on this matter this afternoon, and they will be legitimate ones. We will not hide from our responsibility but I ask the SNP to take some responsibility for once and accept the consequences of the opportunism that it is exhibiting this afternoon.

Is not that the same thing?

Will the member take an intervention?

As a member of the Local Government and Transport Committee, I thank the committee clerks and those who gave evidence to us. Like Bristow Muldoon, I am speaking as a Labour back bencher. In this Parliament, we are often presented with bills which, although worthy, are highly technical and lack any great political intrigue. Some, on the other hand, are fairly straightforward in detail but are intrinsically political. In my view, the bill that is before us—especially part 1, which deals with changing the electoral system—combines elements of both types. The proposed system is complex and the reasons for its introduction are simply political. David Mundell and Murdo Fraser discussed that issue with a degree of cynicism, it must be said. Their speeches were examples of politics through the looking glass, but at least they were better than Linda Fabiani's, which I found to be bitter; indeed, it was patently unworthy of her and she has done better than that.

I agree entirely with that. What I want to know is how Linda Fabiani managed to get a picture of me that was quite good. In relation to what Murdo Fraser and David Mundell said, Patrick Harvie made a couple of points about the transparency of the system. We must accept that we are here because the electorate made Parliament the way it is; we must deal with that reality. The bill is not big, but it encompasses a huge array of issues. We have heard various views on the case for change and the case against it. We have debated power—who has it, how they got it and how it is used. We have assessed the way in which those who serve in local government are rewarded and how we can widen access to under- represented groups and increase eligibility for membership of councils. Trish Marwick and Mark Ballard made points about that. I think that the bill achieves a good balance in many of those respects. To attempt to reform local government alone will be difficult, but to attempt to do it by dealing with electoral reform as well makes the attempt much more contentious. We will not achieve perfection through the bill, but we can aim for merit; I think that the bill has that. The prospect of the introduction of STV elections does not sit comfortably with the Labour Party in particular. That that is no secret was exemplified by the speeches of Elaine Smith, John Home Robertson, Helen Eadie and others. However, I have always believed in electoral reform and in the pragmatism of the Labour Party. We have a programme for making the lives of Scotland's people better; our part in the partnership agreement with the Liberal Democrats is about furthering our programme in the political context in which we find ourselves in Parliament. Scottish Labour stands for a number of things, each of which will have a different priority at any given time. One thing that holds true regardless of political circumstances is our desire that there be redistribution of power from the few to the many. As Aneurin Bevan said: "The purpose of getting power is to be able to give it away." Whatever else is debated in relation to the bill, the PR debate is not about a sell-out of any Labour principle. In the context of the mass-industrialised society, which was polarised between two great ideologies and parties, first past the post was the logical system by which to distribute power. Labour was founded to break that system and we have won that battle. The universal franchise was achieved and it has been put to good use for the improvement of material welfare. Society has moved on and the Labour Party has made that happen. As a result, the construction of a working coalition in the Scottish Parliament has become both necessary and necessarily difficult. That said, it opens up more exciting prospects for representation, for engaging with the electorate and, especially, for fairness. The same could happen in local government. In today's pluralist society, we require to reconcile the needs and desires of different sectors of society. The voting system, the way in which representatives are elected and the structures under which they work can enhance the process of managing those different needs and can aid the finding of a balance for those desires. We have to realise that what might be fairer for the electorate might not be in the interests of any one  party. For many years, the Labour Party has enjoyed a comfortable hegemony in Scotland, but we cannot afford to sit comfortably any longer. In this age of modernisation and institutional change, we cannot afford simply to hold tight to the status quo. From the time of its foundation, Labour has been a party of democratic reform. It is a party that was built on the knowledge that social justice and democratic fairness go hand in hand. We are now in a position to return to our roots—to the commitments of James Keir Hardy, as Sarah Boyack said. As the MSP for the constituency in which James Keir Hardy was born, I am proud to share his conviction in and support for electoral reform. I am equally comfortable in subscribing to the words of the Independent Labour Party, which in 1913 stated: "no system of election can be satisfactory which does not give opportunity to all parties to obtain representation in proportion to their strength." The proposals for electoral reform that are set out in the Local Governance (Scotland) Bill are a compromise. Although the aim of the compromise was to achieve stability in the Scottish Parliament, it is a good compromise. The proposal for three to four-member wards will allow us to maintain a strong ward-councillor link. It will allow, as McIntosh and Kerley demanded, geographical diversity and the potential for a close fit between council wards and natural communities. David Mundell spoke about electoral reform being delivered as part of the new constitutional devolution settlement. A consequence of the settlement is that it must also come at local level—a reality with which I have no difficulty in engaging. It places Labour in a position to reclaim the mantle as the champion of our own ideals. Robert Brown spoke about the bill giving us an opportunity to do what is best for Scotland. The bill will allow those who serve their local communities to be rewarded properly for their service. A by-product is that the electorate might be encouraged to turn out and vote, as Tommy Sheridan said. In the end, it is up to us: the challenge is before each and every political party. Whether or not it transpires that the electorate are encouraged to turn out and vote, the bill will certainly give those who cast their vote a political system that facilitates fairer representation. That is worth achieving in itself and it is why Parliament should support the bill.

I know that the First Minister is aware of the statements that were made yesterday by divisional commander Tom Buchan of N division of Strathclyde police, but is he aware of the comments of community police officers and other senior officers in N division on the need for additional powers to tackle antisocial behaviour? In particular, is he aware of the comments of former superintendent John McKelvie of ND division, which covers Bellshill? He said that, in 30 years as a police officer, he often felt that he had a screwdriver to deal with the issue and that he would much rather have had a toolbox, which is what the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill will give police officers.

Well, here we are again, debating local government and welcoming increases in the amounts that are going into local authority coffers. We have a Labour-led Scottish Executive—so no surprise there. Indeed, it is difficult not to become blasé about the record that the Scottish Executive has established in delivering much-needed funding to our local authorities—but we must try. I take this opportunity, therefore, to welcome again the Executive's commitment to increasing funding for local government. I am pleased to see,  from the minister's announcement, that real increases have been found for local government, which will see it continue to benefit from the minister's sound handling of the country's finances. Three-year settlements, I believe, are an important aspect of the way that local government budgets are produced. Such settlements enable local authorities to plan budgets better, to manage them more effectively and to deliver the quality of services to which we in the Labour Party especially are committed. I particularly welcome the increases in aggregate external finance to North Lanarkshire Council and South Lanarkshire Council, which amounts for North Lanarkshire to a 5.9 increase in the financial settlement for 2004-05 and a further 5 per cent increase in 2005-06, while South Lanarkshire will get increases amounting to 6.7 per cent and 4.7 per cent respectively. As for other local authorities, the settlement provides an above-inflation increase in revenue grant from 2004 to 2006. That has to be welcomed and will guarantee that the Lanarkshire councils can continue to work towards raising standards and responding to local needs, bringing lasting improvements to the quality of life of the community and continuing to build on investments and innovations that already benefit local citizens and economies through the work of the local authorities. That work goes from the large-scale physical improvements of roads and buildings to improvements in lifestyles, such as providing a piece of fresh fruit for schoolchildren. However large or small those things are, the variety of projects will make a meaningful difference. In addition to the AEF support that was announced in the settlement, I am pleased to note the extension to current funding arrangements for the better neighbourhood services fund. The sums that have been announced will enable the councils and their partners to continue to provide more strategic services in North Lanarkshire and South Lanarkshire. However, the future of the BNSF and the social inclusion partnerships funding remains under debate, so I urge the Executive to safeguard council funding in those areas. I welcome the Executive's commitment to funding the new services and policies that local councils are being asked to deliver. As the main providers of education, the councils are committed to the Executive's five national priorities to improve standards at every level. For example, South Lanarkshire Council is looking to achieve a 10 per cent reduction in the time that teachers must spend on administration, with a commitment to achieving the recommendations of the report "Time for Teaching: Improving Administration in Schools" by 2005. That must be welcomed.  I am also pleased to see that through the national priorities action fund—which is replacing the previous excellence fund within education—an additional £1.66 million will be given in the settlement as a specific grant to North Lanarkshire Council. That is a welcome package, which is earmarked for the nutrition in schools initiative, with the dual purpose of providing fruit to primary 1 and primary 2 children as well as improving the overall nutritional value of school meals. It is vital that the Executive and local government continue to work towards the provision of healthy and nutritious food in schools and towards the promotion of health in general. The settlements this year will obviously help that. In the light of the Executive's commitment to challenge antisocial behaviour and address youth crime within that, I welcome especially the increase to the Lanarkshire councils' funding allocation to tackle youth crime. The purpose of the increase is to build on progress that has already been made by reducing the number of persistent offenders and achieving the national standard for youth justice by 2006. Both Lanarkshire councils are committed to safer communities for everyone, with initiatives such as the antisocial task force in North Lanarkshire and the antisocial behaviour teams in South Lanarkshire. Those initiatives are at the heart of the councils' efforts. Today's announcement is a good illustration that the Executive is confirming its commitment to communities and local government and to the policies and initiatives that are implemented by local authorities by yet again putting its money where its mouth is. Above-inflation increases will allow authorities to continue to improve the public services that they already deliver, to reduce class sizes and to support youth justice. It is a good settlement and I welcome it.

To ask the First Minister what action is being considered in light of the fire at the Rosepark nursing home in Uddingston. (S2F-602)

The First Minister will be aware that, in response to my question following her statement to Parliament yesterday, Cathy Jamieson said: "the care commission and the fire authorities will get together to examine the processes that are currently in place and to consider whether additional guidance is required"— [ Official Report , 4 February 2004; c 5451.]  in relation to residential care home safety. Given that thousands of residents in the hundreds of residential homes across Scotland and their families require as much reassurance as possible in the wake of the Rosepark fire, will the First Minister advise the chamber of when he expects the two bodies concerned to come together and of the timescale that he envisages for any subsequent guidance to be produced?

I extend my condolences to the families in my constituency who have been bereaved by Saturday's events. I also extend my sympathy to the families of those who were injured and to those who remain in hospital. I thank all the members of the emergency services whom I witnessed at work on Saturday. They conducted themselves with exemplary professionalism in difficult circumstances. I thank those ministers and parliamentary colleagues who have offered their condolences and support to my constituents and to me, as the local MSP for Fallside in Uddingston. I mention in particular the Minister for Justice, the First Minister, Hugh Henry, Tom McCabe and John Swinney, the leader of the Scottish National Party. I ask the minister whether she is aware that, although investigations began on Saturday, the detailed forensic investigation into the fire at Rosepark care home began only yesterday and that its outcome might not be known for some time. Will the minister reiterate that it is important that speculation on the tragedy at the Rosepark care home is resisted as much as possible? Does she agree that, although experts and others will have opinions on the cause and effect of the fire on Saturday and on the potential solutions, it would be better if assessment of the tragedy were conducted on the basis of the facts not assumptions? Will she also comment on the current situation whereby fire service involvement in safety assessments in effect ends when safety certificates are issued? Does she agree that, although the care commission should retain the primary role in relation to care home standards, there should be more on-going involvement from fire services and that the maintenance of fire safety equipment and standards should not be left entirely to the care commission and to owners of care homes, as is currently the case?

To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the reported proposals in England and Wales to fine parents who take their children on holiday during term time. (S2O-1137)

Does the minister agree that while it is fine to have principles about tuition, they are often too difficult to adhere to in practice? It is right that students should be at school during term time, but is he aware that, for example, a police officer in my constituency has never been able to obtain a holiday during school holidays throughout the time that his daughter has been at school and so has had to take her out of school to enjoy a family holiday? Does he agree that common sense and flexibility are required in these matters? Will he confirm whether any Scottish  parents have been fined for taking children on holiday during term time?

I join John Scott in congratulating Susan Deacon on securing this evening's debate. Members' business debates are of vital importance to the work of MSPs in raising matters of a specific nature in respect of wider issues. Given that Hamilton park, which is one of the five racecourses in Scotland, is in my constituency, the debate gives me the opportunity to do that. In general, Lanarkshire is historically synonymous with heavy industry, especially coal and steel. My constituency consists of communities that were built up around those two previously large sources of betting revenue. What is less well known is that my constituency also has  other historical significance and that it has some very beautiful areas of natural heritage. The battle of Bothwell bridge was of great significance in respect of the involvement of the Covenanters. No doubt, the battle involved many horses. That battle is not to be confused with the battle of the Bothwell Bridge Hotel, which involved Barry Ferguson, some Celtic supporters and a kebab. My constituency also contains Strathclyde country park and is an integral part of the Clyde valley tourist area. This is the picturesque setting that is home to Hamilton park racecourse. Hamilton park is independently owned and holds 18 race meetings a year. As Susan Deacon said, along with the other courses in Scotland, it has experienced a growth in popularity. Success in recent years has seen it outperform national averages. There has also been a pleasing increase in the number of senior jockeys attending race meetings at Hamilton park in recent years, including the champion jockey Kieron Fallon. Since 2000, racegoers' attendance has increased by 26 per cent, with 58,866 visitors attracted to the course in 2003. Since 2000, prize money has increased by 50 per cent to over £1 million in 2003. Over £3 million of racecourse income has been invested since the year 2000. Hamilton park has been proud to win two awards this year. The first was for ground staff of the year for flat racing. The second—no matter what John Scott says—was for the best racecourse in Scotland and the north-east. The course was recently described in The Times by Alan Lee as "a course heading for the heights". The OFT has concluded that the orders and rules of racing limit the capacity for the racing industry to comply with competition law. The conclusion might result in a fixture free-for-all. It could also result in a reduction in the value of racecourse betting income and in the picture and data rights that total more than half of racecourse annual income. Like those who run Hamilton park, I welcome the opportunity for more freedom to run more races and to have more of a say on race dates. I am told that another three or four fixtures a year could be added at Hamilton. Currently, only one-day events are held there, eight of which are held in the evening. Although that is of benefit to local hotels, Hamilton park is looking for growth. It wants to appeal to corporate business, attract additional local racegoers and host other events. As Susan Deacon said, a fixture free-for-all is envisaged as a result of the OFT decision. That could pose certain downsides for Hamilton park.  Like other courses in Scotland, the course is small, independent and at a geographical disadvantage in respect of accessibility. Although those factors do not undermine its achievements or its potential for further growth, there is the possibility that groups of racecourses in England could use their power to force smaller independent courses out of the good slots. Ultimately, that could reduce the attractiveness and viability of Scottish racing. I urge the OFT to ensure that the racing industry can continue to operate within a structured framework that will allow successful independent racecourses to thrive. I am encouraged by the comments of the minister with responsibility for tourism and sport at Westminster that the Government wants to ensure that there are comprehensive arrangements for racing across the country. Scotland's racecourses are looking for the support and backing of the Scottish Parliament for their continued growth. They also want an increase in the number of fixtures; the introduction of an all-weather racetrack; and the prospect of further economic development, investment and training. We need a self-sustaining Scottish racing industry that attracts breeders, owners and trainers. All of that would lead to an expansion of the industry, which, in turn, would lead to the industry making a greater contribution to the economy and to increased employment. It is important that we have fair trading, but the OFT must not prevent good trading. There is justifiable concern that its efforts will do just that in respect of horse racing. The Scottish Executive should make every effort to ensure that the OFT addresses the industry's concerns.

As member for Hamilton North and Bellshill, I have two of the proposed locations in my constituency, but I participated in the scoring event last week, unlike Mr McFee, who would rather grandstand and talk to the press than participate in the process. Does the First Minister agree that any perception by the public of a haphazard decision-making process would undermine the ability of professionals to deliver the services that the public expect, especially services for those with mental health issues? Does he therefore agree that an independent review should be a requirement in any NHS consultation process so that the public can have confidence in it?

I welcome the minister's statement. Will he tell us specifically what in his statement indicates that the needs of Scotland's cities are being met?

In the four years since I became an MSP, two issues have risen steadily in importance in my constituency. One is the problem of antisocial behaviour and the other is transport. I am glad that the Scottish Executive has increased its efforts to tackle both issues. The Executive's commitment to delivering an integrated transport system for Scotland is progressing through its increased investment and balanced thinking and planning. I particularly welcome the Executive's transport priorities in Lanarkshire, such as the construction of the Larkhall to Milngavie line, which will be of great benefit to my constituency as it will provide an enhanced link from Hamilton to other parts of the county, although I remain sceptical about the ability of current proposals to address the problems at either end of the Bellshill bypass at the Raith and Shawhead interchanges. I welcome the initiatives to extend concessionary fare schemes for older people and people with disabilities and the scheme to introduce concessionary travel for young people on bus, rail and ferry links. Those measures reflect a Labour-led Executive committed to a mission of social justice and a sustainable development strategy for Scotland. Because Labour recognises that a strong economy relies fundamentally on our transport  infrastructure, I take the opportunity to draw to the Executive's attention an impending problem, which could impact negatively on Scotland's economy if it is left unaddressed. From March 2005 mobile workers in the road transport sector will benefit from the 48-hour week contained in the provisions of the working time directive, which are to be extended to cover sectors that were previously excluded, such as road haulage. However, the implementation of the road transport directive has massive implications for Scotland's economy. There will be an impact not only on the road haulage industry but on our manufacturing base. Scotland has 9.8 per cent of operators' licences for running heavy trucks in the UK but, as far as I am aware, there has not yet been any specific research to assess the impact of the new directive on Scotland's economy. There has been UK research, but an extra and separate factor must be considered for Scotland. Scotland's distance from its marketplace means that drivers must travel further and journeys to delivery destinations therefore take longer. Although I welcome measures that the European Commission has taken to improve road safety and to protect further the health, safety and welfare of workers in road transport, the directive may seriously undermine Scotland's ability to compete in the road haulage industry. It may have a negative knock-on effect on our manufacturing base if the Scottish Executive does not develop a strategy for assisting the industry. Working time for mobile workers covers the time devoted to all road transport activities—including driving, loading and unloading, assisting passengers to board or to disembark, cleaning and technical maintenance. It also includes time during which workers must be at their work station, ready to take up normal work. That will include, for example, periods spent waiting for unloading when that duration is not known in advance. A great deal of planning, preparation and change will need to be managed. There will be huge costs and operational implications, which will have to be considered now. UK research estimates that at least 60,000 additional drivers will be required, because drivers' average working hours currently exceed the limit of 48 hours. That figure for additional drivers assumes that demand will not increase. The upside is that employers will have to employ more drivers to cover the hours that their existing drivers will no longer be permitted to work. The downside is that the UK and Scotland already have a severe shortage of drivers. The introduction of night work restrictions means that a shift to day work is likely. That, in turn, may impact on road traffic congestion. That is likely to decrease average road speed by 5 per cent between 2002 and 2010, resulting in a fall in vehicle productivity. That, and other factors such  as the need to increase hourly pay for drivers to compensate for cuts in their working hours—let alone the need to recruit new drivers—will entail massive costs for the industry. As far as I am aware, the industry is more than happy to meet those costs because they will apply across the board—in other words, because there will be a level playing field. That is not the difficulty. However, the directive has practical implications. The effects on an industry in which the average profit margins are between 1 per cent and 3 per cent are obvious. I welcome much that the minister has said this afternoon, but I call on the Scottish Executive to assess the impact of the working time directive on Scottish road haulage and on our manufacturing industry, and to assess the implications for Scotland's economy and on our ability to compete, within the restrictions, as costs increase. We have to develop an integrated transport strategy for Scotland, but we require transport companies to remain in existence if that strategy is to work.

Will the member give way?

It gives me great pleasure to speak in this important debate, which allows us to focus on two key issues that are of real importance: equal opportunities for all Scots; and the primacy of the parliamentary process in our democracy. The importance of today's debate rests on the Parliament's founding principles. The mace that was presented to the chamber in 1999 is inscribed with the pillars of "Wisdom", "Justice", "Compassion" and "Integrity". Of those principles, I believe that justice—for all our citizens regardless of race, religious belief, sexual orientation and so on, and in our parliamentary process—is of fundamental importance. The principle of justice in equality is enshrined in the Scotland Act 1998, which led to the creation of our Parliament. The commitment to justice was sustained by the consultative steering group's commitment that "equal opportunities should be mainstreamed into the work of the Parliament, and through the demands of and scrutinising of the Parliament, into the work of the Executive." Having had the privilege of serving on the Equal Opportunities Committee in the first session, I was proud that, in taking forward its agenda, the committee recognised the requirement to provide guidance to ensure the mainstreaming of equality issues in the work of the parliamentary committees. Our work began on 24 October 2000, and our task was "to devise a means of ensuring that equality was 'built in' from the beginning, rather than 'bolted on' at the end", as had arguably been the case in the past. That recognition of a requirement for process improvements is a good example of how our young Parliament has grown and matured. Having served on the Equal Opportunities Committee in the first session, I am happy to reiterate Margaret Curran's recognition of the particular role that was played by Kate Maclean, and of her leadership in taking forward an inclusive consultation process. I know that Cathy Peattie will build on that work. I welcome the encouragement and guidance that has come from a variety of civic bodies, such as the CRE, the Equal Opportunities Commission and the governance of Scotland forum. I particularly welcome the opportunity that we had  to engage with stakeholders from the north-east during our visit to Aberdeen in April 2002. During a civic participation event that the committee held on the subject, the committee noted representations from more than 55 individuals from organisations operating throughout the north-east. The committee report made nine recommendations for action, many of which will be familiar to members. They include the provision of equality guidelines for committees and a need to equality proof Scottish Executive legislation. The committee noted: "The greatest hurdle to starting the ... mainstreaming process can be the absence of political will". I am pleased that, in the committee's judgment, the Parliament had an "unwavering commitment of political will towards mainstreaming equality." I welcome the conclusion of researchers at Sheffield Hallam University, which were highlighted by Elaine Smith. The researchers said: "The Scottish parliament is at the leading edge in mainstreaming equality". With mainstreaming commitments in place, it is important that we examine where specific process improvements can be made, and that is what the report does. In particular, education is key to delivering a mainstreaming strategy in our committee processes. The need for members and staff of the Parliament to be fully aware of equality issues was recognised under recommendation 3, which states: "The Committee recommends that the SPCB agree to the provision of training on mainstreaming equality which will complement existing training on equal opportunities within the Parliament." Such a desire was raised by a number of consultees, including Fair Play and the Disabled Persons Housing Service. The introduction of two training courses in the Parliament has been a welcome outcome. However, the education process must go beyond that. Ensuring that all members, their support staff and those who participate in the policy process are aware of our commitments in that regard is key to mainstreaming. With that in mind, the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body should consider how it can broaden the availability and awareness of such courses to all members and to their constituency staff, who are essential in aiding members deliver for their constituents. Training must go beyond SPCB staff, and consideration should be given to the production of material highlighting the importance of mainstreaming equality in the policy process. Those resources must be made available via the Parliament's website.  It is important for members to recall that a mainstreaming strategy is not, in itself, a guarantee of equality; rather, it guarantees that equality issues will be considered. The principle of delivering the mainstreaming of equality in the policy process should be a priority for all those who believe in the importance of equality of opportunity in the Parliament. Education and training, both for internal use and for external audiences, are key to targeting delivery. Mary Scanlon and Christine May mentioned changing attitudes and challenging prejudices, and I was recently reminded of how important that is. The west of Scotland forensic steering group has attempted to consult on the siting of a medium-secure unit in my constituency for people with mental disorders. I understand the prejudices and fears that people have in that respect, but I cannot understand why four MSPs—four people who should know better—would join together to issue a press release supporting a campaign that builds on those prejudices. In that press release, people with mental health problems were called "unsavoury characters". It was argued that the secure unit should not be sited at the proposed location because it would be too near schools. The press release suggested that we should be saving the health service money, as the people concerned should be locked up in Dungavel. That came from an MSP. What an absolute disgrace! The press release goes on to suggest that to locate the secure unit in my constituency would "create stigma" for people with mental health problems. I hope that those four MSPs are ashamed of themselves for pandering to prejudice, rather than confronting and challenging it. Perhaps the secure unit should not come to my constituency, because it may not be the right location—that is what the consultation is about. It is not about targeting people with mental health problems and allowing campaigns to be run against them. The four MSPs concerned should take the first opportunity to come to the Parliament to apologise for what they have done. Only then can we genuinely believe that we are challenging prejudice and only then will this debate mean something.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many children were knocked down by cars in the streets around their schools last year. (S2O-484)

Is the minister aware that North Lanarkshire Council is the only United Kingdom local authority to have implemented twenty's plenty schemes in all built-up areas throughout the authority? Is he aware that, within 12 months of doing so, an 18 per cent reduction in accidents had been achieved, and that a total outlay of £400,000 had resulted in savings of £7 million for the local authority? Does he agree that North Lanarkshire Council should be congratulated on its policy? Does he have any  plans to give it, and any other authority that wants to follow suit, the power to make those 20mph zones mandatory in areas of their own choosing beyond school gates?

As a Parliament, we must recognise that Scottish society is forever evolving, and that the needs and aspirations of Scots in relation to the national health service are changing in line with our aspirations for every other aspect of life in our country. To remain in tune with that attitudinal development, we must reform the methods of delivery within our public services, especially the NHS. That is essential to ensure that the needs of patients are paramount in the progressive process. Partnerships in the community and effective co-operation and planning will strengthen public involvement, and will help to purge health promotion and other health services in Scotland of the bureaucratic formalities that hinder the fundamental needs of patients. The ethos of the Scottish Parliament is that it is inclusive, and that the public are involved in  discussions and have a direct hand in the policy-making process. Scottish health care should be no different. With the changing pattern of health care services, decisions need to be taken in an open, honest and informed way, to ensure that patients are able to have their say on health care strategies that affect them, and to deliver high-quality services that address inequalities and inefficiencies in the right way. Working together is the key, as that will empower patients, communities and professionals, involve them in the decision-making process, and assist in addressing what individuals need and want. Throughout Scottish health care services, new duties and roles have been adapted to address the ever-transforming nature of health care. By emphasising the patient, individuals are given a voice and are respected and involved in their own care. Transparency with a flexible approach is crucial, but we need radical thinking now for a radical change tomorrow. We must combat the conservatism that is often exhibited by professionals in the NHS. No longer must we assume that the doctor always knows best. If power is to be devolved into the hands of the people, we must challenge the position of the British Medical Association and those within it who oppose change. For public requirements to be met, doctors and health care professionals should remember that they are, first and foremost, public servants who meet the requirements of the people whom they serve. Patients should have an active role in their own care, by contributing to things that affect them and their families and by being involved more widely in developing and improving communication and partnerships throughout the population, developing new partnerships and strengthening existing ones. Reform of the current system will ensure participation by patients, families, stakeholder groups and communities. They will be listened to and their suggestions will be taken forward. The empowerment of communities will increase control over, and improve, individuals' health, while clinicians, professionals, patients and carers work in partnership to understand a person's full needs and make an informed decision about the right treatment and care that should be received. I was disappointed to hear the minister say that clinicians must be at the forefront. I think that the patient should be at the forefront. The clinician should listen to the patient's needs. I am pleased that NHS trusts will be abolished to bring about the changes. That will cut bureaucracy and inefficiency. I welcome the extension of powers to intervene if protocol and best practice  are not being carried out. I also welcome the establishment of community health partnerships, which will devolve responsibility to the front line so that local health services meet the needs of individuals and communities, and the placing of a duty on health boards to involve patients. I am sure that such restructuring will effectively improve the quality and consistency of care for all. We must ensure that the efforts that are made are responsive to patient needs. Direct contact must be made with individual service users, community groups and voluntary organisations to inform—with mediation and advisory services if appropriate—and support those who need help through appropriately disseminated practical information and training. Others want to pander to the vested interests in the NHS. They show a lack of enthusiasm for and a lack of interest in patient focus. I believe that we are on the right track to improve the voice and the health of the Scottish people.

There is a place for the voice of the people to be heard in the system, but it has to be an informed voice. I would rather concentrate on the information that comes from patients than on the structures through which the information comes. That is what I mean by listening to the public. We must act on people's suggestions. We can define patient concerns and investigate ways of implementing appropriate and much-needed radical approaches. We can examine best practice for a socially inclusive, patient-oriented, contemporary health service in Scotland. I commend the Executive for its plans, as far as they go, but I urge ministers to take on the consultants and doctors who stand in the way of the radical change that patients demand from our NHS.

I welcome the Minister for Transport to his new role. I feel quite new to this myself, because over the past year or so I have been the ministerial parliamentary aide to the First Minister and, as such, have been bound by ministerial code and prevented from participating in debates in the Parliament. Although I enjoyed being in the post, I am pleased to be free from those restrictions and able once again to take part in important debates such as this one. I am also now in a position to be able to criticise the Executive on matters where I think that it has got it wrong and I assure members that I will do so when I see fit. It just so happens that this afternoon will not be one such occasion. That is not because I think that everything in the garden is rosy when it comes to public transport, but because I believe that, on the whole, the new Executive appears to be putting in place realistic and achievable plans to make progress and build on the previous Administration's achievements in public transport. Access to public transport is fundamental to many aspects of people's lives. As Pauline McNeill said, it is related closely to developments in health, education and leisure and to allaying environmental concerns, placing social inclusion and the overall standard of living at the heart of any strategic development. Recently I spoke to an elderly man in my constituency who told me of the simple pleasure that he gets from receiving his concessionary bus pass, which saves him enough each week for him to have a few extra pints and a couple of extra bets on the horses. That is good, because it has enhanced his quality of life and, more important, he is getting out of the house more and for longer. He is able to be in the company of others and catch up with his friends, breaking up the loneliness of sitting at home watching the rubbish on daytime television.

My constituent has a social life and concessionary travel has encouraged him to participate in an active life, which gets him out the house and keeps him healthy. There is no harm in having an extra couple of pints if it keeps someone going. What I described might seem a simple, and possibly questionable, benefit, but it is shared in different ways by the 350,000 elderly people in Strathclyde and the more than 1.1 million elderly and disabled people throughout Scotland who  have gained from the concessionary bus pass. It is a good thing, and we in the Labour party are justly proud of it. The benefit will be increased when the Executive announces more spending over the coming months and years.

I agree entirely. We have to strike a balance between the private sector and the public sector. We have to consider our road-building programme. Far too often, we see areas resembling car parks rather than free flowing areas that help our commercial sector—the Raith interchange, the Shawhead junction and the Auchenkilns roundabout in Lanarkshire, for example. We cannot have a repetition of the situation in Bellshill some time ago when a delegation of representatives of a large American company packed up and went home after being stuck in a traffic jam outside their hotel on the Bellshill bypass, taking with them the possibility of 200 jobs, because they could not see the infrastructure supporting their needs. There are major issues to consider. We have to build on the A8 and extend the M74, because we must create wealth to finance our public services.

I join members in congratulating Keith Harding on raising this issue for debate this evening. Although the Parliament has debated breast cancer before, it does no harm to remind ourselves of the frightening statistics to which Keith Harding alluded. Cancer Research UK has shown that breast cancer is by far the most common cancer in women and, with the exception of melanoma skin cancer, is the fastest growing cancer for Scottish women. As the research shows, one in nine women are at risk of breast cancer. We must never lessen our commitment to address that.  While we must not diminish in any way the serious impact that the disease has on women, we cannot ignore the much neglected fact that around one in every 2,400 men are at risk from breast cancer. My father-in-law died from breast cancer. Because of the difficulty in diagnosing and recognising the disease in men, by the time male breast cancer is diagnosed it has usually progressed to an advanced stage. It should be recognised that the treatment for men and women given such a diagnosis would be the same. Male breast cancer is uncommon. It is equally true that the disease is less common in younger women. My wife was diagnosed when she was only 33. Most women are diagnosed after the menopause, but a staggering 17 per cent are aged below 50 when they are diagnosed. My point is that in addressing the overall effect of breast cancer, we must not lose sight of the minority groups among those statistics that are affected by the onset of the disease. The good news is that, in general, mortality rates have decreased by 22 per cent in the last 10 years, and five-year survival rates in Scotland are at 75 per cent. That is due to earlier detection and improved treatment, which is the result of good research such as that carried out by essential organisations such as Cancer Research UK. It is essential that funding is available for research into the importance of genetics, hormones and lifestyle, all of which control the development of the disease, with a view to developing better treatments, increasing the effectiveness of present facilities and finding new ways of detecting the cancer earlier. Investigating issues such as risk factors, prevention, treatment and drug therapy, earlier detection and screening are paramount. We must do everything in our power to ensure that those developments continue. I cannot commend highly enough the medical and ancillary staff on their dedication, hard work, and relentless commitment to supporting patients and their families, which I have seen at first hand. Organisations such as Glasgow's Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Cancer Research UK, CancerBACUP, Macmillan Cancer Relief, Marie Curie Cancer Care and more organisations besides are committed to research into diagnosis, treatment, clinical trials, alternative therapies and the psychological impact of the disease, to name but a few of the processes that are involved in breast cancer diagnosis, treatment and support. I know from personal experience that those organisations, both voluntary and professional, are at the core of the treatment. I have met a plethora of organisations that provide treatment, support and guidance to patients and families of breast cancer sufferers, I know the high level of  commitment and dedication of the staff involved and I wish to pass on my full support and thanks, and that of all members, to them. It is with those thoughts in mind that I have no hesitation in supporting Keith Harding's motion. I thank him for bringing breast cancer to the awareness of Parliament again. We need to know more. We need to know the how, the why and the when. I fully support any funding from the Executive for increased awareness and research, and for the provision of treatment, support and all other aspects of breast cancer care.

I will not hold my breath.

Quality over quantity.

rose—

I congratulate Alex Neil on producing what some MSPs consider to be the perfect bill. Unfortunately for him, the only people who think that are his sycophantic colleagues in the SNP. Mr Neil is also to be congratulated on taking up an issue on which I am sure everyone in the chamber agrees and managing to divide us on it. That is indeed a remarkable achievement, but given the tenor of Mr Neil's arguments, the comments that he made earlier and his comments during evidence to the Local Government Committee and the Equal Opportunities Committee, it was inevitable. Alex Neil's bill contains more holes than a North  sea trawler's nets. If the bill is to progress, it will require to undergo a host of changes in order to address the concerns that were raised by the committees and by those who gave evidence to them. Given the Executive's commitment to introducing its own proposals, which even Alex Neil agrees amount to 80 per cent of what he is seeking, it is not worth wasting Parliament's time on this bill. The Local Government Committee's report indicated concerns which colleagues expanded on earlier. One change that we did not argue for was a renaming of Alex Neil's bill but, given his contribution, perhaps we should have done. Rather than the Public Appointments (Parliamentary Approval) (Scotland) Bill, it should be called the I Hate the Labour Party and Want to Take Every Opportunity to Give It a Good Kicking Bill—that is what the whole process has been about. The way in which Mr Neil's colleagues have rolled over and ignored every concern that was raised during evidence on the bill has highlighted the hypocrisy of the Nats. They never tire of telling Labour MSPs that we are Executive lobby fodder and that the Lib-Dems are Labour's poodles. However, when it comes to it, the Nats have exposed their own incapacity to criticise their party colleagues. I am proud to be a member of two committees that have shown the ability regularly and effectively to challenge Executive proposals. We have built a track record of listening to groups and individuals concerned about ministers' proposals, and addressing those concerns. In keeping with that record, we did the same with Alex Neil's bill and it is to Tricia Marwick's shame that she made her earlier comments.

However, when it came to criticising Alex Neil, his spineless pals could not bring themselves to criticise their own leader-in-waiting. It was not a problem for them that people might be deterred from applying for posts. When Alex Neil did not outline the changes to standing orders that would be required to make the bill workable, they did not indicate their concern. They did not complain that the appointments process would be slowed down unnecessarily to allow the Parliament's committees the opportunity to score points by politicising that process. All of that might be considered to be a matter of opinion around which a serious debate could ensue. Perhaps amendments could be lodged to address the problems that have been identified in the bill. The concerns that witnesses raised at committee were ignored by the Nats because they  were feart to criticise Alex Neil's bill.

No amendments were called for and all criticism was dismissed out of hand.

For the SNP, parliamentary scrutiny appears to mean that everyone should scrutinise Labour, but that no one should criticise an SNP proposal. Some sections of the bill are up for debate, but there can be no debate where the facts get in the way of Alex Neil's views. Evidence from the Commission for Racial Equality and the Equal Opportunities Commission included concern that committees of the Parliament are not subject to the acts governing discrimination on the grounds of sex, race or disability. That evidence was put to Alex Neil. His reply was, "Nonsense". I am sorry, Alex, but the legal advice that we received proves that that is not the case. For Alex Neil's bill to succeed would require the Scottish Parliament to remove the right of the people to challenge a decision if they perceive it to be discriminatory. If the Parliament is to be taken seriously, it can not tolerate that. The bill contains a variety of flaws. The fundamental flaw, which cannot be overcome as it goes against everything to which the Scottish Parliament is committed, is the failure to protect the rights of the Scottish people. In the main, it is for that reason that I will not support Alex Neil and I hope that I have the agreement of all other members on that.

Will the member give way?

I am fortunate to be a member of the Local Government Committee. During our inquiry into local government finance, I spent a lot of time hearing from local authorities that represent our disparate local communities. Having listened to them describe the issues, I believe that, although far from perfect, things are much better in local government in Scotland than they have been for a considerable time. The announcement that we are debating today is a further indication that we are following the best  possible route for a modern, collaborative and effective approach to local government finance—a system that is accountable to those that it serves and supports. As the minister pointed out, in no other part of the United Kingdom do local authorities have the certainty of knowing three years in advance what their central Government funding allocations will be. That is welcome, as it gives local authorities a certain security, allied to the flexibility that will allow them to make significant progress across the board. Partnership is key in identifying shared priorities, which allows local authorities to plan for the long term and work together to remove any barriers to improvement. From what I have heard, I think that we now have much more open dialogue about the priority issues for both levels of government. That has to be a good thing. Perhaps because of that, the increase in local authority capital investment allocations has already borne results, not only in additional local services and infrastructure, but in improved planning, and has paved the way for continued and sustained improvements for the future. We are now in year two of the three-year local government settlement. The additional £350 million in grant support is welcome and will build on the real-terms increases announced last year. Local authorities will receive an increase of almost 11 per cent this year, which will bring the increase in total revenue grant support that local authorities receive next year to more than four times the projected rate of inflation. The situation is almost unparalleled and demonstrates the Executive's commitment to providing better public services for Scotland's citizens and to continuing the vital role that local government plays in delivering those services. Every local authority is set to receive an above-inflation increase in revenue grant. When the move from ring fencing to local outcome agreements develops further, we will, I hope, see further progress on optimising service provision. It is important that we realise the difference that an efficient, fairer system of funding will make for local authorities and service users, working for the communities and the people of Scotland. However, I am somewhat confused by recent COSLA statements on finance. I liaise regularly with my local authority colleagues in North Lanarkshire and South Lanarkshire. Last year, when the strategy was announced, I encountered favourable responses. Not only has the settlement found favour in Labour authorities but, I am glad to say, it has unearthed consensus across the political spectrum. As an avid reader of the Montrose Review, I was delighted to see Alex Johnstone MSP quoted as saying:  "Nobody can describe the grant settlement to Angus Council as anything other than generous."

I have just been told that I am in my last minute. Before the Nats start to shout that a right-wing alliance has been formed, I draw members' attention to the Largs & Millport Weekly News , where SNP councillor Alan Hill, in welcoming all the extra money that will go to his authority, whinges—as the Nats are wont to do—that he hopes that the Scottish Executive "gives all of the money to the council straight away." Therefore, it is surprising to hear the contrary being reported in COSLA's recent critical statements, especially since its vice-president Pat Watters last year described the programme as "the most positive settlement in more than a decade." Overall, the promises are being delivered upon. The modernisation of local government is progressing, ensuring that services are created and delivered with best value. More stable, fairer long-term plans are now the norm. The progress so far is good and it is our duty to guarantee that more will be delivered in future. Scotland deserves the best possible services for the money provided. I endorse the progress made in local government finance and congratulate ministers on their continued efforts.

The key word in the reference that Mr Sheridan made was unilateral. Now that the Labour party is in power, we have reduced the number of nuclear missiles and we are working with our counterparts in other countries towards arms reduction. That is what happens when parties get into power. Unilateralism was something for the 1980s; arms reduction is something that we are doing now.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the general principles of the Marriage (Scotland) Bill. Seeking to extend the choice of venue for those who want to have a civil marriage in Scotland is a very worthwhile aim and one that deserves the support of the Parliament. It is high time that the present anomaly was addressed. I congratulate Euan Robson on doing so in the bill. Proposing legislation that will allow couples to get married in the venue of their choice, rather than being restricted to one of Scotland's 247 registration offices, makes perfect sense. People should not be penalised, as they are at the moment, purely because they opt for a non-religious ceremony, so I welcome the modernisation of this aspect of the marriage ceremony in Scotland. However, there is always a but. By and large, I agree with the bulk of the proposals in the bill, but there are a number of issues that need more clarification. I am pleased that Euan Robson has accepted that to be the case in making many changes to the bill in line with the concerns that were raised during consideration of the bill in committee. I am disappointed, however, that Euan Robson will not accept the changes that were proposed by the Equal Opportunities Committee, which centre on a local authority's requirement to pass judgment on what is "seemly and dignified" and "morally disreputable". How can it be reasonable to ask a local authority to judge on the suitability of a venue by having to interpret such highly subjective and vague terminology? Those terms are almost impossible to define in a meaningful way that would be acceptable and inoffensive to all. I urge the Executive to reconsider the requirement for that apparently unnecessary, restrictive and downright impractical definitive description. Is it not enough that the ceremony should be conducted in a safe, practical and trouble-free setting? Furthermore, the requirement that the local authority should be satisfied that the venue has "no recent or continuing connection with any religion or religious practice" is also too restrictive. I cannot conceive of a current religious building being used, but I have to question why a former religious building or connected establishment could not be suitable for a civil ceremony. As such buildings would no longer be consecrated, the restriction appears ludicrous. Trish Godman and Iain Smith mentioned the former church building across the road from this chamber—the Hub, which is a case in point. If it, a former church, can be home to a cafe, bar and  internet facilities, and be a venue for meetings of parliamentary committees, why should it not be a place where civil marriages can take place? Indeed, it could be argued that any parliamentary meetings that took place there would be more immoral. They are certainly likely to be more unseemly and undignified. If we can meet in a building such as the Hub, why cannot a civil marriage take place in a similar circumstance? The bill should not burden local authorities with omnipotent decisions on what is dignified for a marriage service. A wedding ceremony is an individual and personal event and has different meanings for different people. To provide equality and impartiality, we must embrace cultural diversity rather than endorse the rules that restrict it. The aim of asking local authorities to assess the appropriateness of a venue's moral suitability is worrying and may lead intentionally or unintentionally to discriminatory practices and blinkered decisions. If considerations are to be objective and avoid bias, the prerequisites in the bill must be revised. The subjectivity of the restrictions defeats the purpose of the bill's aims. Although I agree with the principles of the bill, I hope that the above points will be considered in future scrutiny of it.

Will the member take an intervention?

Today's Conservative party press release says of child prostitution that "many of the youngsters involved in child prostitution are the authors of their own misfortune." For the sake of clarity, will Lord James Douglas-Hamilton tell us what the Conservatives mean by that?

Will Alex Johnstone give way?

Does Brian Adam accept that, unless the Gypsy Traveller community is identified as a distinct ethnic minority, it will not be given access to protection under the Race Relations Act 1976?

As colleagues have mentioned, the members of the Equal Opportunities Committee—none more so than I—were somewhat dejected by many of the points in the Executive's response to the inquiry. However, having heard the speeches made by Phil Gallie and Kenny Gibson, I have to say that any comments that the Scottish Executive made were far superior to those made in their speeches. Indeed, I question whether Kenny Gibson has read the report. I defy him to name any representative body of the Gypsy Traveller community that did not support or endorse our report.

All Kenny Gibson has done is to reinforce the fact that he completely missed the point of the committee's report. He said that being a Gypsy Traveller was a lifestyle choice. It is no more a lifestyle choice for someone to be a Gypsy Traveller than it is for a black person to be black. They are an ethnic minority. Kenny Gibson should not use the term new age traveller in connection with Gypsy Travellers.

That is not the report I am talking about. It does not at any point refer to new age travellers; that was not part of the inquiry. Kenny Gibson has repeatedly compared the Gypsy Traveller community with the new age traveller community. They are not in any way comparable. In the light of what can only be described as the Executive's apathetic approach to the widely welcomed recommendations suggested in the report and in an attempt to address the needs and specific considerations of Gypsy Travellers, the committee was left with no option but to say that it wished "to express its disappointment in the tone and extent of the Executive's response to its report. The Gypsy Traveller community and others shared this disappointment." I welcome members of the Gypsy Traveller community and their representative bodies, who are in the public gallery. The committee went on: "Whilst accepting that not all of the recommendations contained in the report are the direct responsibility of the Scottish Executive, the Committee does feel that the Executive has an important role in spearheading anti-discriminatory practice." That commitment is not evident enough in the Executive's response. I am sure that colleagues in the chamber will agree that everyone should be able to live in a decent and secure home and that provision of safe and affordable accommodation, free from discrimination and the fear of racial harassment, is central to the creation of any sustainable strategy in that regard. It is vital that the Scottish Executive does more to promote racial equality and eliminate institutional racism throughout its activities. That should undoubtedly include the Gypsy Traveller community. Social barriers, many of which will be  perpetuated by the Executive's disregard for our popularly supported recommendations, often make that difficult to accomplish. The key findings of the report highlighted Gypsy Travellers' widespread experience of systematic failure among local authorities and organisations such as the police and health boards in ensuring that they have access to the same level of services and legal rights as are available to other inhabitants of Scotland. The all-too-frequent response of the Executive is to pass the buck; it indicated that many of the problematic issues should be addressed at local level and are a matter for local authorities. That is simply not good enough. Local authorities need guidance which, on the evidence of the Scottish Executive's response, will not be forthcoming.

I agree that there are difficulties for local authorities in determining what they should do. That point came through loud and clear in all the evidence that we took. Everyone at local authority level knew that they wanted to do more but needed guidance on what they should do. Such guidance is missing from the Scottish Executive's commitments. The committee concedes that many of the policies mentioned by the Executive in its response are commendable. However, for many in the Gypsy Traveller community, such policies often fail to materialise in the Executive's practical aims or policy objectives. Evidence taken by the committee showed that having no address, or one identified as a Gypsy Traveller site, may lead to subsequent refusal or difficulties in accessing services and a general disfranchisement from the democratic process. That is an essential finding of the inquiry. It is urged that, for the purposes of future amendments to housing legislation, the definition of home should be reconsidered, to include Gypsy Traveller sites. That is why the committee called for a review of alternative management and ownership arrangements for local authorities and the development of model tenancy agreements for Gypsy Traveller sites managed by local authorities and registered social landlords. Although some guidance is available, there should be a review and significant monitoring of the key role of site managers in providing support and information services for site residents, making accountability  an essential component of the job. Our report showed that private sites should be subject to the regulations and standards applicable to local authority sites and that local planning authorities should be required to identify the need for Gypsy Traveller site provision and land for sites in statutory plans, using the community planning framework. Consultation and co-operation are the key. Improvement programmes should be developed in consultation with Gypsy Travellers and representative organisations on such issues as location, design, facilities and services. At the Cairntow site, which Jamie McGrigor and I visited, we saw a group of accommodation facilities forced into the back of a quarry with 18-inch icicles running down the inside of the quarry. That was considered acceptable accommodation for a local authority to identify as a site.

They would certainly be better than some people who have a military background, who have brought that experience to their managing of sites. Equal opportunities is described as the prevention, elimination and regulation of discrimination. On the Scottish Executive's equality strategy, which endeavours to address equal opportunities issues, the committee was under the impression that equality lay at the heart of strategic development for the potential fulfilment of all. Unfortunately, that commitment is not entirely evident in the Executive's response. The committee requests that the Government takes a leading role, as it has done on other racial equality issues, in providing appropriate guidance, support and information to Gypsy Travellers and other relevant organisations, as well as actively promoting initiatives that are designed to combat discrimination towards that group. We must embrace the diversity of the different cultural communities of Scotland, and their needs must be recognised and dealt with accordingly. We hope that the Parliament recognises the fundamental human rights issues highlighted in our report and that it will support our recommendations, urging the Executive to act on the findings that have been raised in today's debate.

We did not .

The purpose of providing sites was to address those problems. We were not covering up those problems or pretending that they do not exist; we were trying to find a way of dealing with them. If the member reads the report in that light he will see it as a positive measure in addressing the points that he makes.

The point of the report was that travelling is not a lifestyle choice; it relates to the ethnicity of a group of people in Scotland. Their ethnicity cannot be divorced from society. It makes them what they are. The tenor of Kenny Gibson's argument is that Gypsy Travellers choose the lifestyle and therefore choose their problems. They do not make that choice.

Will the member give way?

As someone who has supported electoral reform all my adult life, I am more than happy to be given the opportunity by this SNP  debate to state my reasons for believing in the benefits of electoral reform for local government elections. Those reasons stem from a belief that an electoral system should be about good governance rather than the vested interests of parties. For me, electoral reform is a matter of principle. My principles may be different from those that Helen Eadie espouses, but they are my principles. Electoral reform is about encouraging the type of consensus that will allow us to develop good policies at whatever level those policies have to be delivered. If we in Scotland truly want a society that operates on the basis of inclusion and co-operation, we have to begin by having debates on electoral reform that will at least take the matter forward. What we cannot have is the type of tawdry mudslinging that we have heard from the nationalists this morning, especially and unfortunately from Tricia Marwick, Stewart Stevenson and Kay Ullrich, whose comments about Motherwell and Monklands border on the slanderous. Have we heard much today about principle from the SNP? Was there much in the SNP contributions that developed the issue of electoral reform? I believe that we have heard quite the contrary. The Scottish nationalists have said little about the opportunity for change. The creation of the Scottish Parliament has given us all a tremendous opportunity to provide a modern electoral system in local government that is fit for the 21 st century and that aims to play a part in achieving progressive reform of local government. What the SNP has done in this debate runs counter to that. Apart from a limited attempt by Kenny Gibson, SNP members, rather than outlining how we can reduce distortion in electoral results, have tried to paint a picture of sleaze. Instead of addressing the cause of disillusion with the current system, they have concentrated on their recent hobby-horse of cronyism. Not for them a coherent argument about the need to tackle disfranchisement. What they have said is an assault on local democracy itself. They have sought to portray Labour-run local authorities as places of corruption and maladministration, while ignoring the mass of good work that goes on and the talent that brings it about. We have heard an attempt to place in the minds of the electorate the image of a Labour party that abuses the position given to it in local authorities by that same voting public. Through some weird type of reasoning, the SNP has attempted to argue Labour bad, SNP good. If this had been a proper debate about good governance, we would at least have heard an attempt to explain why we need local government reform for the sake of effective government. Instead, what we got was an  argument about why we need electoral reform to reduce the power of the Labour party. We could have discussed the type of electoral system that would best achieve the good governance that we all aspire to and that we want from local authorities run by any political party. Instead, the SNP has sought to disguise the true intention behind holding this debate. SNP members want to portray themselves as the moral guardians of local government in Scotland, but the real reason for their stance is all about power, who has it and how it is shared. Labour has it and the SNP wants it. This is not about principle but about jealousy and opportunism; it is about political winners and losers. If the debate was about implementing the Kerley report we would have heard more—or even something—about councillors' remuneration and about achieving representation at local level. What we got was mudslinging and innuendo. What about a comparison of electoral systems? Why STV and not AMS? The McIntosh report highlighted the different systems that could be used, but it did not recommend any. Kerley recommended STV, but could not get unanimity behind his report. Different voting systems provide different answers to the questions raised by them. Have we sought any of those answers here this morning? I suggest not. All that has happened is that the Parliament has broken down into fixed party lines. The Lib Dems have always supported the principle of electoral reform. The Tories have always opposed it. The SNP members in this Parliament would have us believe that they want PR for local government, but where the SNP is in power in local government not all members are united behind PR.

We are doing something about it. I shall come on to that later. In its discussions of the Kerley and McIntosh reports the Local Government Committee sought the opinions of local authorities from across Scotland. SNP councillors in some SNP-led areas have told us that they do not support PR. That is the point that I wanted to make. We are having this debate in the context of having made a commitment to make progress on the issue, which our coalition partners have accepted.

I want us to move in that direction as quickly as possible. I have always wanted electoral reform. Believe me, being an advocate of electoral reform in the Labour party in Lanarkshire is not easy. However, when one holds that view as a matter of principle, it is easy to defend. I want greater proportionality delivered in local government elections. That would be a good thing. It might even make the SNP groups in Lanarkshire produce costed budget proposals instead of just opposing those produced by the Labour party. It might make the SNP raise its game. Electoral reform has not brought that about in the Scottish Parliament, but it might do it in local government. It might even help to reduce factionalism within party groups. Perhaps electoral reform would allow SNP members to stand in the same street in Bellshill at election times instead of leading separate camps in opposite directions from one another to deliver leaflets. I am not convinced that one must have a majority to have stability. I believe that one can provide an enhanced level of voter choice and still maintain the link between members in geographical constituencies. Those are all principles that I could argue are to be found in the alternative vote system, which I would prefer to Kerley's STV system. I could debate all day the merits of one system over another. I could argue about the differences in principle. I am more than happy to engage in a debate on the matter within the Labour party and I live in hope that the case for electoral reform will gain support in my party. What I will not do is vote for the SNP motion today, because it is not principled and it is not worthy of support.

One of the Parliament's strengths can be found in the fact that we are able to find time to introduce short bills that tidy up some of the issues that seem to interested parties to have been hanging about to be dealt with for a long time. Many areas of Scottish legislation are known to require remedial action, but finding the time to deal with them was previously a problem. The Police and Fire Services (Finance) (Scotland) Bill comes into that category. It is simple enough to amend the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 and the Fire Services Act 1947 to allow working balances to be carried forward. The clear value inherent in such short bills leaves one wondering why they could not have been dealt with earlier.  This good bill has the sensible intention of bringing into force the suggestions that were made in the joint report of HM inspectorate of constabulary and the Accounts Commission for Scotland, "Credit to the Force". Fulfilling the bill's intention will allow police and fire boards to take greater value from their resources and to have greater stability in funding and enhanced efficiency and effectiveness in future financial planning. It is hardly surprising that the intentions of the bill found support from everyone who took part in the consultation process. Another strength of the Parliament is that we are able quickly to pick up problems that have been identified by those who are affected by a bill. The progress of the Police and Fire Services (Finance) (Scotland) Bill through the scrutiny process, via the Local Government Committee, raised a number of issues that the committee was required to cover in its report. As previous speakers noted, three main issues arose during the consultation process. Colleagues on the committee have addressed those points already. I will focus on the issue that gave me the most cause for concern: the impact of the proposal to allow constituent authorities to withhold consent for the carry-forward of unspent moneys. Both ACPOS and CACFOA raised that issue and both provided the committee with disturbing scenarios of the potential consequences if an authority withheld its consent. Chief Constable Rae of Strathclyde police said: "once one of the partners takes away its share of the cake, it is difficult for me to say that I will not send as many police officers to an incident because that authority has withheld a proportion of the budget."—[ Official Report, Local Government Committee, 4 September 2001; c 2152.] Those words were echoed by the CACFOA representatives. Their concerns were so strong that it would have been wrong if the committee had not taken cognisance of them. I am glad that the minister, like the committee, also recognised those concerns. Once the committee had recognised the concerns that had been raised, members had no alternative but to conclude that the proposal on opt-outs in the bill was unacceptable. I am in no doubt that an authority's decision to withhold moneys could have led to a reduction in the level of provision within that authority at any given time. Therefore, I am pleased that the minister reconsidered that proposal and will lodge amendments. Surely it is right that the total underspend is either carried forward or withheld in its entirety. That is the only way in which the dangerous possibilities that were outlined by the police and fire officers could be averted. My committee colleagues and I felt so strongly about that matter that we would have found it  inconceivable for the bill to remain in its present form after stage 2. I repeat: this is a good bill, with good motives. I was concerned that, as drafted, it could have unwittingly introduced inequalities in the provision of the emergency services. That would not have been the bill's intention, but the potential consequences would have been unacceptable. The minister is to be congratulated on his intention to lodge amendments to the bill at stage 2 to prevent those potential consequences.

Is the minister aware that Peter D Stirling Ltd, a haulage company that operates out of the Mossend railhead facility in my constituency, has encountered difficulty in obtaining a freight facilities grant for the past 18 months? Is he further aware that for many years the company has been taking freight from road on to rail and that the delays are preventing the company from expanding and increasing the levels of freight that it transfers? Can the minister assure me that the obstacles—which appear to include the fact that the company deals with 17 commodities rather than just one—will be addressed with greater urgency?

Will the member give way?

The bill already contains important measures that relate to anti-social behaviour and harassment, including, for example, the welcome provision for specifying harassment—including racial harassment—as a ground for eviction. Amendment 198 seeks to go a little further by adding those issues to the matters on which ministers can issue guidance. Essentially, amendment 198 sets additional  areas in which Scottish ministers will be able to issue guidance to local authorities and RSLs. Importantly, it would ensure that the regulator would be able to take action against landlords who did not follow the guidance that was issued under section 70. The amendment would enable ministers to issue guidance to social landlords on the prevention and elimination of "anti-social action and conduct amounting to harassment". Amendment 198 is straightforward. I hope that all members will agree on the importance of raising and tackling anti-social behaviour and harassment, which, unhappily, are topical issues. The Commission for Racial Equality originally suggested a similarly intentioned amendment. The CRE believes that taking the measures in the amendment would go some way to addressing the needs that housing groups and refugee and equality campaigners have identified with respect to tackling harassment. The CRE also supports the Scotland-wide framework for tackling harassment that the Protection from Harassment Act 1997 provides. I believe that amendment 198 is a valuable and constructive addition to the bill's aims. I hope, therefore, that the Executive and the Parliament will support it. I move amendment 198.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will announce the outcome of its consultation on the establishment of an index of adults unsuitable to work with children and its proposals for any legislation on this issue. (S1O-3521)

Has the minister considered whether anyone whom it is deemed necessary to place on such an index, so preventing them from working with vulnerable children, should also be prevented from working with vulnerable adults, such as those with mental health problems?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it plans to take to improve the education of looked-after children. (S1O-3495)

I know that the minister shares my concern about the poor educational prospects faced by young people in care. What further steps could be taken to provide the educational support that such children need?

It is not uncommon for members to make comment during non-contentious debates or consideration of technical motions or bills. However, it is difficult to speak without repeating what was said earlier, or to generate sufficient interest among the public in what is being debated. That never stops us carrying on with the debates, however. So I will participate in the debate without any belief that I am adding substantial enlightenment to the subject, and  without believing that I can engender any more public interest than any previous or subsequent speaker. In fact, as an enthusiast for the wit of Oscar Wilde, I could say that I am following his advice, that the best possible form of exercise is to talk, not walk. I have only a few minutes and, although I need the exercise, I do not expect to lose much weight. I find the Conservative amendment strange. Although I can understand Keith Harding's dissenting from the Local Government Committee's report on the bill—because he had not participated in the consultation debates—I cannot comprehend why, if he had read the final committee report and studied the information that had been discussed in committee during the consultation, he and the Conservatives would find it necessary to propose any opposition to the general principles of the bill. In spite of what Bill Aitken said, I, like others, can only assume that that derives from an ideological hankering for a return to CCT. The evidence provided to the Local Government Committee made clear a strong desire on the part of all concerned to continue the development of the best-value regime. There was also substantial opposition to the re-implementation or continuation of CCT, even on the part of those representing the private sector. Most representations conveyed the message that CCT had been remarkably unpopular in Scotland, and was opposed by local authorities and the private sector. The feeling was that continuous improvement was shunned in favour of emphasis on rigid contracts. Innovation was inhibited and the ability to respond to changing requirements constrained. The result was often poor standards, service inefficiency and constricted flexibility. That perpetuated cuts in wages and subsequent objectionable conditions of employment. The evidence that we took highlighted the imposition of excessive central Government control, diminishing local accountability and neglecting the needs of service users in the local community. The CCT straitjacket, as it was known, limited the way in which local authorities could provide their services, reduced flexibility and jeopardised best practices. Not everything about the bill is universally welcomed. Although I have encountered favourable responses to the bill's proposals, a number of concerns were voiced about the extension of the moratorium. It is clear that there is overwhelming support for the transition to a best-value regime, but it should be delivered as quickly as possible within a definitive time scale in order to assist in the development of partnership, avoiding competition between local authorities and private  companies. There can be no doubt that local authorities have expressed enthusiasm for fully embracing the best-value principles, but they remain concerned about the fact that they have been forced to maintain the provisions of the Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980 and the Local Government Act 1988, because they form part of the moratorium regulations. As DLOs and DSOs are required to run both CCT regimes and the early days of a best-value regime in parallel, we must recognise the fact that those two types of regime are totally incompatible, and that that places a significant burden on service providers. Modernising local government is essential to the progress of our communities. I am sure that the Executive is listening and responding to the voice of local government. On that point, I was pleased to hear Peter Peacock say to the Local Government Committee that the Executive firmly intended to publish its legislative proposals in the autumn. Therefore, there is all the more reason to question the motive behind Keith Harding's amendment. The Executive's proposals should be presented as soon as possible, but they should be progressed with a degree of caution. A new statutory framework is required to replace CCT, but I hope that the Executive will ensure that it is done right rather than quickly, so that we avoid problems in the future. I am sure that the Parliament will acknowledge that such an important change cannot be introduced overnight. Nevertheless, a majority of members of the committee and of the organisations that it met welcome and commend the general principles of the bill. I hope that the Parliament, too, will endorse them.

I congratulate Karen Whitefield on securing this debate. This issue is clearly important not only to the communities of Airdrie and Bathgate, but more widely to communities in the Lothians and Lanarkshire. As the economic structure of our communities changes and business evolves, freedom of mobility is of the utmost importance. Plainly we must look towards an efficient integrated transport system that does not threaten our environment and that is  accessible and commercially feasible. Such a system must be geared towards not only local communities but wider society. I am sure that we all value the importance of the future of railways in such a strategy, because if we are serious about encouraging people to use public transport and the railway network, we must provide a safe, reliable and effective service. A new link between the east and west of Scotland is crucial for the manufacturers, producers and consumers involved in Scotland's industrial diversity. As a result, I commend the work that the local authorities in North Lanarkshire and West Lothian are undertaking, as it highlights the benefits of reopening the Airdrie to Bathgate line and the commercial sense that that would make. The present stalemate of congested and overburdened roads such as the M8 through Lanarkshire and beyond not only affects Karen Whitefield's Airdrie and Shotts constituency but leads to the disruption of business and means sluggish mobility for commuters from many areas in the central belt. As a result, we must aim to develop a modern, fast and efficient transport infrastructure instead of restricting it. Furthermore, we must encourage the use of public transport to help reduce congestion in major corridors such as the M8 in my Hamilton North and Bellshill constituency. Not only is that area at a standstill for much of the day, it is also a location of dangerous traffic situations and accidents. It has been suggested that congestion increases carbon dioxide emissions by 10 per cent on urban roads, which is obviously a matter of great concern to major towns and surrounding areas such as my constituency. As a result, any effort to reduce road traffic growth and congestion, especially in urban areas such as mine, can make an important contribution to the improvement of air quality and the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions. As colleagues will be aware, projects such as the reopening of this line have considerable benefits for labour market accessibility and potentially advantageous effects on employment levels and economic growth. A more effective transport infrastructure between the east and west of the country would benefit people who wish to find employment further afield or who need such a transport system for employment purposes. We must show our commitment to a coherent transport strategy for our nation and to reducing the impact of traffic congestion on our roads and its harmful environmental effects while providing attractive affordable alternatives. The reopening of the Airdrie to Bathgate rail link would adhere to the Executive's commitment to a strategy founded on integrated transport and the multimodal ethos. It  would also expand on the existing user network and would help the local authorities, employers and enterprise networks to promote inclusion for the people of Airdrie, Bathgate, Lanarkshire, West Lothian and Scotland in general. Although this debate has greatly helped to raise the transport problems in the constituencies of Karen Whitefield and Mary Mulligan, their campaign will help to alleviate problems in my area and many others. I wish the campaign well and fully support the initiative. I hope the minister will do so as well.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will ensure that the judiciary is more representative of the communities it serves. (S1O-3169)

Does the minister agree that the project of making the judiciary more representative of Scottish society cannot be a mere numbers game? Does he accept that appointments must  not be made as an exercise that results in unrepresentative tokenism? Does he accept that the process of change should not result in a broadening of the establishment at the expense of the depth of the representation within it?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Are we going to get a summing-up from the SNP spokesperson, or are we going to get what the papers said?

I congratulate Trish Godman on prompting today's debate. As the convener of the cross-party group on palliative care, I cannot commend enough the work that is done by the hospice movement. I thank Trish for giving us another opportunity to highlight its work. Hospices are essential for the provision of quality of life to adults and children who suffer from a host of illnesses. Having visited a number of hospices, including Rachel House, I am aware of the high level of commitment and dedication among staff, and I take this opportunity to pass on my full support and thanks to them for that. The dedication of the carers, volunteers and fundraisers is remarkable and must have the Parliament's support. As independent voluntary organisations with charitable status, hospices receive an average of 39 per cent of their running costs from the NHS. They are highly dependent on funding from their local communities and I commend all the fundraisers who give their time, effort and money for this important cause. I am aware of the high quality of service offered by the hospices and of the expertise that has been built up over the years by skilled multi-specialist professionals, carers and volunteers, who not only care for the sick, but attend to the social and psychological needs of the families who are affected by having individuals with illness. The range of services that is offered by hospices is tremendous and includes not only terminal care and pain control but palliative respite care, combination therapies and post-acute and respite care for social, emotional, psychological and spiritual needs. The hospice movement has come a long way, but much more still has to be done to meet the ever increasing complexity of palliative care needs. I join Mary Scanlon and other members in calling for the minister to provide details on the Executive's intentions to ensure that health boards meet their target for the provision of 50 per cent of the running costs of hospices. Will the Executive give a commitment to address the funding shortfall for Scotland's only children's hospice, at Rachel House?  In my discussion with the Scottish Partnership Agency for Palliative and Cancer Care, I understand that it is the minister's intention for hospices to be regulated by the proposed Scottish commission for the regulation of care, the setting-up of which is of course welcomed by the hospices. At present, hospices are regulated in the same way as nursing homes. The hospices feel that that is totally inappropriate for the care and service that they provide. Can the minister confirm what the Executive's intentions are in this regard? It is important that the terms of the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill make it clear where hospices fit into the new regulatory system and that hospices' future regulation by the Scottish commission for the regulation of care be undertaken against standards that are developed specifically for hospice care. Ideally, that would be done by a commission team with particular knowledge and understanding of palliative care. Hospices should have the opportunity to contribute to the development of the standards against which they are to be regulated. I understand that hospices, like other charities, currently enjoy relief from water charges. The Minister for Environment, Sport and Culture announced last Friday that that relief was to end. I ask the Executive to note that hospices provide their services free of charge and would find it difficult to pass on such costs to the patients and families for whom they are trying to provide. I request that the Executive reconsider that recent measure. I again congratulate Trish Godman on securing the debate, which has allowed me to raise those points, which the hospice movement hopes will meet with a positive response from the minister.

Does the First Minister agree that it would have been wrong for a constituency representative—particularly for a constituency in Lanarkshire, which has experienced divisions in its communities—not to have expressed concerns that were based on his knowledge of his constituency? Whether or not we agree with his analysis that there would have been problems on Sunday afternoon, does the First Minister accept that it is even worse for people to use this matter as a political football? That could create even greater divisions in the communities that we represent, where great work has been done to bridge the gaps.

Is Mr Wilson aware that, when representatives of COSLA came to the Local Government Committee and were asked to identify the figure at which the issues that Mr Wilson mentions could be taken into account and what the settlement should be for this year, they said £1.2 billion? Is he also aware that the Scottish Executive delivered in excess of £1.2 billion?

As a member of the Local Government Committee, I have spent a lot of time listening and talking to various individuals, trade unionists and local government representatives about these issues. Each of those groups believes in a modern, open and collaborative approach to local government, based on accountability to the people whom local government serves and supports; that is what I believe in, too. Therefore, I welcome, as does COSLA, the Scottish Executive's recent steps, outlined by the Local Government Committee's convener. In particular, I welcome the scrapping of annual spending guidelines, which will allow local authorities the  autonomy to budget over three years. The settlement will enable local authorities to make significant progress across the board. The financial support given to local government will reach record levels. The total Scottish Executive grant will greatly enhance capital investment. Without doubt, improved public services will result. A lot has been done, but there is still a lot to do. The settlement has afforded local authorities the ability to plan ahead, allowing more flexible strategies aimed at providing stability and, I hope, a more effective budgetary map for longer. As the member for Hamilton North and Bellshill, I am in the fortunate position of being able to liaise regularly with local authority colleagues in North Lanarkshire and South Lanarkshire. I am delighted to say that I have encountered favourable responses to the recent settlement. Jim McCabe, the leader of North Lanarkshire Council—who, I assure members, is not a man easily impressed by local government settlements—took the view that he looked forward to improvements. He described the 16.8 per cent increase allocated to North Lanarkshire as "very encouraging", as it would allow the local authority to make the best use of available resources. He recognised that £27.5 million over three years is a substantial amount of money, which will allow the targeting of priorities such as the local economy, community safety, health, housing and social inclusion. Having listened to the needs, requests and aspirations of the people of North Lanarkshire, Jim McCabe stated that the local authority had already "taken account of the investment needed to upgrade and improve council facilities across all services". He added: "this package provides the best value for all tenants". Councillor Eddie McAvoy, Jim McCabe's counterpart in South Lanarkshire—another person who is not usually given to expressing undeserved praise—agreed that the three-year capital programme with annual spending announcements "would enable councils to plan ahead and target investments in services". South Lanarkshire is receiving a 15.9 per cent spending increase. With the simplified distribution formula, three-year revenue grant settlement for each council, three-year capital allocation for each council, abolition of expenditure guidelines and the piloting of local outcome agreements, the aim of promoting stability, flexibility and simplification for efficiency and effectiveness will never have a better chance of being achieved. Quality public services are essential in our local  communities. Those services must be—and be seen to be—efficient and effective.

Alex Neil is right that there has been privatisation in that area through public-private partnerships. However, his analysis of the outcome is totally wrong. The SNP wanted to see large-scale redundancies and a waste of money, but that did not happen; that is why the SNP is disappointed. There are still problems, such as the concerns of Glasgow City Council and Dundee City Council about tax burdens and settlement levels, but I welcome the positive feedback from many local authorities. They must be reassured that the Scottish Parliament will work in partnership with them to make the new system of strategic financial planning work for everyone. I am pleased that we in the Labour party have promised for local government and are delivering for it. We are modernising local government, listening to our communities and ensuring best value, for a more stable, fairer long-term plan. The nation's taxpayers deserve the best possible services for their money. Through this programme, we are delivering on the shared priorities of central Government and local government—to work together to improve services across the board. I warmly welcome the measures that Angus MacKay has announced.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it plans to take as a result of the recent report "Without Prejudice? A Thematic Inspection of Police Race Relations in Scotland". (S1O-2842)

Is the minister aware that organisations representing black and minority ethnic communities have consistently raised concerns that there remains a huge gulf between the good words in official documents and the real outcomes and treatment in minority communities? Can he advise the Parliament what monitoring will take place to ensure that the good intentions of the police are translated into a new confidence among our minority communities in their treatment by the authorities?

To ask the Scottish Executive how its housing bill will meet the needs of homeless people and others in the most housing need. (S1O-2769)

Will the minister confirm that the measures contained in the Housing (Scotland) Bill contribute to the achievement of the Executive's target that no one need sleep rough by 2003?

Like me, does the minister wonder whether Mr Wilson's interest in policing in England has anything to do with his concern about the possible troublemaking of members of the Scottish National Party at forthcoming Scotland football matches? Will he confirm whether the record £258 million of extra funding for the police in Scotland that is being delivered by this Executive will be sufficient to keep any such troublemakers under control?

The minister will be aware of the unique structure of the careers service in North Lanarkshire and South Lanarkshire, where the councils provide benefits in kind through facilities and employee support. Will the minister tell us the outcome of any discussion of those areas in relation to the planned new structure?

indicated disagreement.

As a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee and the fourth of the four committee reporters to speak this afternoon, I gladly receive the signals and measures to address the problem of inequality in Scotland that are set out in the equality strategy. I particularly appreciate the focus on partnership and mainstreaming. We must have partnership. There must be an alliance among the statutory equality agencies, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, trade unions and other organisations. If policies are to attain optimum effectiveness, there must be consultation with ethnic minorities and organisations such as the racial equality advisory forum, the women in Scotland consultative forum and the new deal racial equality group, to name only a few. We must have mainstreaming—we must put equality at the heart of the legislative programme so that it is an inherent part of social policy development across the departmental spectrum. The Executive states that mainstreaming should be "built-in from the start to development of policy, the design of services and the monitoring of evaluation frameworks" so that the equality strategy is integrated into the daily mechanisms of government. That is absolutely right. The strategy can build on the good foundations that have so far been laid by the Executive. The equality unit should ensure that the Executive remains committed to being a leading employer  and an example of best practice and raises awareness of the fight to end discrimination, promotes equality and incorporates social inclusion.

That difficulty is faced across all agencies. The difference is that the Executive is taking a lead in identifying where the problems are and addressing them. Many visitors to the Equal Opportunities Committee have insisted that there must be better data collection, collaboration and research, so that we can understand equality issues better and improve our response to them. We have to find better methods to include equality in the formulation of policy, legislation, service design and financial planning. Although the equality strategy is very welcome, we must not be complacent. The strategy is a huge step forward, but its implementation will undoubtedly encounter problems. People are often unable to access services and resources due to obstacles of language or prejudice, or because of physical barriers. It is unfortunate that, even when effective policies have been designed, people are still being denied financial support, social services and treatment because of communication difficulties and other problems. That must be addressed. We must recognise that the problems created by institutional racism cannot be put right overnight. Police statistics show an increase in their efforts to tackle racial crime, but there is also evidence that they may not be addressing the problems effectively. Rather than just move the problem from one area to another, we must aim to tackle the heart of the problem. The training and education of public servants must therefore be improved. Public awareness campaigns on institutional racism might help to put the message across. Information about services has to be produced in appropriate formats. That may require adjustments to financial resources. I welcome the minister's announcement of additional moneys. The nationalists bleat that equal opportunities legislation is a reserved matter; I am happy that the Scottish Executive values the importance of working positively with our Westminster colleagues and with the Scottish arms of our national anti-discriminatory bodies to promote equality. Rather than allow the problem to go unchecked while we debate the constitutional details of the  Scotland Act 1998, we must act to fight discrimination. We must work together to ensure that equality is an integral part of society, tackling structural inequalities and ensuring that an equality strategy is intrinsic to every institution in Scotland. It is better for implementation to be properly carried out than to have a quick, but ineffective, fix. In implementing our equality strategy and providing sufficient resources to produce effective implementation, we will be more responsive to the diversity that is Scottish society. Communities will be changed and a new, more consultative, partnership-based society will be created, with equality at the heart of a modern, fairer Scotland.

I accept that the member has concerns about aspects of the equality strategy, although she should be specific about them, but where in the SNP motion does she call for any action to be taken? The motion consists of nothing but navel-gazing, this time on the Scotland Act 1998. Why cannot she put forward something constructive in conjunction with the equality strategy?

Answer the question.

I am pleased to speak in the debate, because the Local Government Committee has discussed and debated business rates at great length, having been afforded the opportunity to listen to and learn from various sections of the business community. There are more than 138,000 small businesses in Scotland and they represent nearly three quarters of all businesses in Scotland. In attempting to ensure that extensive consultation takes place and to ensure maximum effectiveness, our first principle must be to get the scheme right, rather than to  introduce it quickly. Therefore, I am pleased that the Executive is attempting to obtain appropriate and independent evidence before jumping feet first into such an important and consequential decision and that, in the meantime, it has set out guidelines to provide stability and predictability for businesses in the future. The SNP outlined its key policies in its manifesto, which included "a package of measures to promote small businesses" and an input of £90 million to address the burden of business rates on small firms. As with everything else that it proposes, the SNP fails however, to tell us exactly how the money will manifest itself. In the arguments that SNP members are putting forward this morning, they appear to contradict themselves by agreeing with the business community that any changes must be self-financing. Evidently, the SNP's economic policies have not improved under a new leader, or possibly the back of Andrew Wilson's envelope has finally been filled up. During its consideration of the issue, the Local Government Committee received representations, as Kenny Gibson said, from a wide range of bodies. None had a solution, but all offered suggestions that are worthy of consideration. Kenny Gibson is correct in his assertion that the Local Government Committee was unanimous in its view that, although a transitional relief scheme was introduced to phase in increases in rates bills that arose from the revaluation, small businesses face a disproportionate rates burden. The committee also felt that a small business rates relief scheme that is more generous than the current system's 1p poundage reduction should be made with effect from 1 April 2001. There is no disagreement on that. However, the committee also said that we must assess the issue in the light of a number of other considerations. There have been suggestions about the methodology that should be used to identify genuinely small business, which would permit them to qualify for rates relief.

I am going to ask a similar question, so we are not in disagreement. One method, which was proposed by the Forum of Private Business in Scotland, would make use of national insurance contributions and would take into consideration the size of the business rather than the size of the property. Another method  would relate to business turnover, rather than to property tax, as occurs in the current system. It has also been suggested that the relief proposals would interact with other relief schemes, such as the relief scheme for village shops. After careful deliberation, the Local Government Committee came to a number of conclusions. First, it is essential that the relief scheme should avoid small changes in rateable values that produce large increases in rates bills. Also, an objective should be to reduce the incentive for businesses to appeal against their rateable value simply because they hope to obtain benefits from the relief scheme, while encouraging them to grow without the risk of step increases in their bills. That points to the need for a tapered multi-banded scheme. The scheme should also be self-financing, possibly through an increase in the Scottish poundage system, so that only genuinely small businesses would benefit from the scheme. Those points should be considered while considering regional variations. The committee recommended that the issue of a relief scheme be kept under review. I say to Kenny Gibson that that is the point that I was trying to make. The Local Government Committee would welcome further suggestions on the Executive's thinking on the matter. The Executive should liaise with the groups that I mentioned and it should contemplate statistical evidence from local government assessors, the Scottish Assessors Association and the Local Government Committee so that an informed and effective judgment can be made. That is what the small business community seeks—it is in all our interests that it should get it. I do not believe that the positions of the Local Government Committee and Angus MacKay's amendment are incompatible. I will have no difficulty in supporting the Executive.

To ask the First Minister what assessment has been made by the Scottish Executive of the impact of increased public spending. (S1F-588)

I join the First Minister in welcoming the positive impact of the Scottish Executive's spending strategy. Does he agree that the alternative of cutting public services rather than investing in them would cause massive and long-lasting problems for communities and businesses throughout Scotland, but especially in Lanarkshire? Does he agree that there is no place in Scotland for the slashing of public services, and  that employees in the public services in Scotland should also benefit from the Executive's spending strategy to boost their morale?

I want to start this all too short debate by taking time to thank members from all sides of the chamber for supporting the motion in my name, which was lodged some months ago when the Scottish Parliament's cross-party group on palliative care was established. Like many people, I was not always involved in the palliative care movement. It was only when a family member faced suffering from cancer that I took an interest. My activity grew from there. I was pleased, shortly after being elected last May, to be introduced to Margaret Stevenson, director of the Scottish Partnership Agency for Palliative and Cancer Care, who discussed with me the possibility of establishing a cross-party group to raise palliative care's profile in Parliament. It is vital that we do that. A society, it is argued, can be judged on the way in which it cares for the dying as well as the way in which it cares for the living. The chamber has echoed with many important debates on health care in the past year and no doubt will continue to do so, but I am pleased that we have the opportunity to examine today our record on palliative care. Sufferers from many illnesses require palliative care, but I want to consider one predominant illness to highlight the need for such care. We recognise that the incidence of cancer in Scotland is rising despite advances in treatment. The majority of people who have cancer will not be  cured. As the Imperial Cancer Research Fund recently publicised, one in three people in Scotland will develop cancer in their lifetime and 60 to 70 per cent of them will require palliative care. Sadly, one in four will die from the disease. In 1999, 14,688 Scots died from cancer. Palliative care aims to control pain and other distressing symptoms, to help patients and families with emotional upset and the practical problems that they face and to help people deal with the spiritual questions that might arise from their illness. It also seeks to help people to live as actively as possible despite their illness and to support families and friends following the loss of a loved one. We know that people who have cancer report in the last year of life a high incidence of problems including physical symptoms—such as pain and breathlessness—and psychological symptoms, such as depression. Unfortunately, studies show that such symptoms are often not well managed and, as a result, people suffer unnecessarily in the advanced stages of their illness. Knowledge of how to manage the symptoms effectively exists—it has been developed by health professionals who specialise in palliative care, but it is not yet universal practice. Most of us would prefer to pass on at home among family members. However, the latest figures show that in 1999, only a quarter of people who died with cancer did so at home. Scotland needs effective palliative care provision to enable more people to die in their place of choice and to be as comfortable as possible in their last days. As we know, palliative care in Scotland is provided mainly by voluntary services, with a small number of national health service hospices also supporting that vital work. Of the 15 hospices in Scotland, 13 care mainly for adult cancer patients. There is one specialist AIDS hospice—Milestone House, the work of which David McLetchie highlighted recently—and one children's hospice, Rachel House, which is an exceptional national resource that is based in Kinross. Such hospices provide specialist palliative care through in-patient support and day and home care services. They are increasingly integrated with the national health service and provide outreach facilities to hospitals and primary care teams. Specialist palliative care nurses in hospitals, Macmillan and Marie Curie nurses, general practitioners and district nurses also provide palliative care as part of their normal duties. It is important to acknowledge the significant and vital work of the many thousands of health professionals throughout Scotland who provide support to those in need and their families during difficult times. However, although I recognise the commitment of the Executive and local health  boards—including Lanarkshire Health Board—we must seek constantly to examine how provision can be improved. The top priority is to make sure that health boards and NHS trusts ensure that palliative care is available to all those in need, including those who have conditions other than cancer. Let us remember that more palliative care does not always mean more hospices—it can mean better support from the NHS for existing hospices and a greater spread of palliative care principles and practice in other care settings. The Executive must seek to increase the level of palliative care knowledge and awareness among all health professionals who care for people with progressive, life-threatening conditions, whether in hospital, at home or in nursing or residential care. The Executive must also continue to examine funding arrangements to support the work of voluntary hospices. Health boards have been asked by the Executive to fund about 50 per cent of the agreed costs of adult voluntary sector hospices, so it is a matter for regret that the average contribution last year was 40 per cent. The contribution for some hospices, however, was as low as 31 per cent. There must also be greater co-ordination between health boards and voluntary sector bodies such as Macmillan Cancer Relief and Marie Curie Cancer Care, so that expertise is shared in developing local strategies for palliative care. Moreover, the Executive must examine the level of palliative care support in hospitals. I note that it is not yet commonplace for hospitals to have fully staffed specialist palliative care teams, despite the very welcome increase in staffing levels in recent years. Increased services to enable people to be cared for at home, if they wish to remain there, should be a goal of the Executive and Parliament. Speedy provision of equipment, 24-hour community nursing services, access to specialist palliative care services and respite and support for carers and families must be achieved. Palliative care is a vital support, which should be open to every Scot who suffers from an incurable progressive illness. Although we recognise the significant advances in recent years in both cancer care treatment and palliative care provision, as my motion states, it is important that palliative care remains a priority for the Executive and that further development of palliative care is undertaken. My colleagues in the cross-party group and I will pursue the issue. I look forward to the rest of the debate and the minister's response.

What is the SNP's plan B? SNP members say that if people vote for independence, they can get investment, whereas we tell people that they can vote for stock transfer and get investment. Is the SNP claiming that its version is not blackmail?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am glad that Mr MacAskill is going to listen and not lecture, as he mentioned in yesterday's debate. Mr MacAskill had an opportunity in yesterday's debate to tell us what he and his party would do about the issues that he raises. He is now eight or nine minutes into his speech and still has not done so. Will he tell us what his proposals are and how much they will cost?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the First Minister's statement, particularly in relation to the accident and emergency services. Is he aware of information that I received this morning to the effect that some funeral directors and undertakers will be unable to conduct their business during the next 24 to 48 hours if they are not considered to be an essential service? Has there been any consideration of the impact that that would have? Will they be considered as an essential service to enable them to receive emergency fuel deliveries?

I congratulate David McLetchie on securing today's debate and Margo MacDonald on bringing the matter to the Parliament's attention. Although David and I disagree on many of the great issues of the day, issues such as the one under debate today rightly cut across party divides. I also want to thank David McLetchie for his recent letter to me on this issue, which contained a briefing from David Johnston of Waverley Care Trust. That briefing was very useful indeed, and I am pleased to say that I will have a chance to discuss with staff the issues outlined in the document when I visit Milestone House on Wednesday morning. As convener of the newly formed cross-party group on palliative care, I want to add to David McLetchie's comments by stressing the importance of hospices to such care. We recognise that palliative care aims to maintain as far as possible and improve quality of life for patients and their families. We also recognise that palliative care is not only for people who suffer from cancer, but for people with advanced heart failure, motor neurone disease and AIDS. Like many others involved in the cross-party group, I know from experience the importance of hospices to people in their care, their families and their friends. Having visited a number of hospices such as St Andrew's Hospice in Karen Whitefield's constituency of Airdrie and Shotts and familiarised myself with the impressive Maggie's Centre in Edinburgh, I know the high level of commitment and dedication of the staff involved and wish to pass on my full support and thanks to them on  behalf of all members in the chamber. It is with that in mind that I have no hesitation in supporting David McLetchie's motion on Milestone House. Through talking to others with connections to the hospice, I am well aware of the valuable work carried out there, offering care and hospital support services to people with HIV and AIDS, affected carers and children. I am also aware of the high quality of service offered by the hospice and of the expertise that has been built up there over the years. Indeed, on browsing the internet—something that politicians are all encouraged to do—I came across the Waverley Care Trust website. As its web address is quite long, instead of reading it out, I will pass it on later to any member who wants it. I was pleased to see that it had a 1999 profile. In discussing the matter today, we must recognise that the needs of people with HIV and AIDS have changed since Milestone House was first opened, with fewer people needing terminal care for AIDS, principally due to the success of combination therapies. We must not forget, however, that there is more to Milestone House than terminal care. Palliative respite care, combination therapies, post-acute care and respite care for social, emotional, psychological and spiritual problems are also provided. While the Parliament must recognise that it is appropriate that health decisions be taken at a local level, we must recognise that 20 per cent of Milestone's registered users are from outwith Lothian and that the wait for a decision since 1997 has not been good for the hospice, the staff, the service users and their families and friends. It would be inappropriate for this Parliament to dictate to those involved in the review. That said, however, I am sure that I speak for all members in calling for a speedy conclusion to the review while ensuring that full consultation with those involved with the hospice takes place. It is important to maintain the critical mass of specialist multi-professional expertise that has built up at Milestone House. I urge Lothian Health, City of Edinburgh Council and Waverley Care Trust to work together to meet the changing needs of those diagnosed with HIV and AIDS and to fulfil the ambitions behind David McLetchie's motion.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will Mrs McIntosh give way?

I welcome this morning's positive statement. My simple question is to seek an assurance from the minister on whether the Executive will involve in the consultation the employees who deliver services. That would give the consultation on best value the best chance of a positive outcome.

I am pleased to be able to speak  in today's debate for two reasons. First, as a Labour MSP, I am firmly behind the Scottish Executive, local authorities and other agencies working to tackle social exclusion. Secondly, as Michael McMahon the sports fan, I am pleased that the Parliament is turning its attention to this important area. I welcome much of what Rhona Brankin has said today about the link between sport and tackling social exclusion and about the Executive's strategy to promote sport throughout Scotland. The contribution that sport can make in the fight against social disadvantage cannot be overstated. The benefits of participation in sport are clear in terms of health improvements, community cohesion, social development and the sense of personal achievement. As a keen follower of sport and as someone again familiarising myself with the inside of the gym, I welcome the Executive's sport for all philosophy, even for thirty-something MSPs. I also welcome the Executive's commitment to widening participation for all in sport. All Scots, regardless of their level of ability, income, gender or age, should have access to good-quality sports facilities and opportunities to participate. I welcome the Executive's moves to increase sports opportunities for our young people. Over the years, many children have been denied the chance to participate in sport and develop their talents. I was pleased when Labour launched the new Scottish institute for sport to provide opportunities for everyone under 18 to get involved, and stay involved, in sporting activity. I welcome the team sport initiative, which has helped 180,000 young people and 12,000 coaches, teachers and leaders, the top sport programme to encourage active play and sport in primary schools and the action taken to tackle the loss of playing fields through the new planning procedures.

I am disappointed that someone could be annoyed that £700,000 is being spent. We must look on the positive side. The Executive has placed great emphasis on the development of sport in Scotland. I welcome its commitment in the programme for government to establishing a Scottish football academy, with associated network academies, and to ensuring that every school in Scotland has a sports co-ordinator in place by 2003. I note that a football  partnership has been established to take forward proposals for football academies, which will be in place over the next three years. As a member with two social inclusion partnerships operating in my constituency, I am glad that the key role of SIPS in developing the link between sport and social inclusion has been highlighted by the minister. While discussing the role of sport in social inclusion, I would like to raise the issue of the Scottish Football League's recent decision to fine Hamilton Academical football club 15 points for failing to fulfil a fixture in April of this year. I recently had the pleasure of meeting Ally Dawson, the club's manager. I was heartened to hear his plans for taking the players around south Lanarkshire schools and public parks for training sessions in an effort to encourage young people to become active in sport and to raise the profile of the club, which has been away from the town for six years. He did not pontificate about social inclusion or theorise about the importance of sport for education, but he could see the practical support that he, the players and the club could give to the local community from the privileged position that they have. As members may be aware, the decision by the SFL, which was described as "savage" by one football commentator, Brian Scott, will relegate the Accies to division 3 for next season. It penalises the players, the fans and the town. Equally important, it threatens the future finances of the club when, today, it has just been announced that it has been given the go-ahead for the planned new stadium project to return to the town. The decision is about more than the Accies club. The decision by the SFL directly threatens the livelihood of players, who were forced to take industrial action against their employer because payment of their salaries had been delayed, not for the first time, because of the club's already precarious financial situation. Those are the same players who are willing to take part in community outreach projects, which are so valuable to the Executive's sports strategy. Regardless of the internal politics of Hamilton Accies, the league's decision will force the club, which is already hard up, to make further savings from the pay bill. The livelihoods of the club's support staff as well as its players will be threatened by the ruling—not much social inclusion there. I think that it is the league's responsibility to assist its member clubs to get away from the breadline rather than to put them on it or, as in the case of Hamilton Accies, to take the bread from their mouths. An appeal on the decision will be taken tomorrow. I hope that the Executive and the  Parliament will send the message to the Scottish Football League that it must reconsider the punishment, take into account the club's circumstances on the day on which it did not play Stenhousemuir, and not make its situation worse.

Colleagues, I am particularly pleased to have the opportunity to speak in this debate, because I feel that the issues raised by the Ethical Standards in Public Life etc (Scotland) Bill are central to what our new Scottish  Parliament should be about and to the ethos of what we must achieve. Our people expect us to create a more accountable system of government, so we must deliver one. This Parliament has made excellent progress in ensuring that high standards in public life are at the core of its work. We have a strict code of conduct for MSPs, an open register of interests and a powerful Standards Committee. I am pleased that we are considering the extension of those same high standards to our staff, who support us in our work. However, our job as parliamentarians is not only to ensure the highest standards in this chamber. We must distil public confidence in all areas of public life, from our local authorities to health boards, local enterprise companies and beyond. I am pleased at the introduction of the bill and at the establishment of a fully independent standards commission for Scotland, headed by a chief investigating officer. I am pleased at the introduction of a national code of conduct for local authorities and a statutory code for other public bodies, and at the provision under which local authorities and public bodies are to establish and maintain a register of members' interests, which will be open to public inspection. We recognise that there are genuine concerns that the current ethical framework does not allow for open and transparent investigation of allegations of misconduct. The measures included in the bill will go some significant way towards tackling the lack of trust in and cynicism about politicians and public officials that is felt by many of our people. It is important that, in introducing this bill, we take with us the good will of local councillors and other public figures. The bill must not be seen as an attack on local government; rather, it should be seen as an enhancement to it. Local government is central to the good governance of Scotland, and the bill will assist local government in the process of modernisation, thereby enhancing public confidence in its operations. The bill will provide a consistent framework of standards, which will allow for the protection as well as the investigation of public representatives. That move will be welcomed by many of the decent, hard-working councillors with whom I work day in day out, particularly those from South Lanarkshire Council and North Lanarkshire Council, which are in my constituency. The bill will also help to ensure high standards in other areas of public life, as a new, statutory code of conduct will be introduced and adapted to suit the circumstances of each body. As a member of the Local Government Committee, I was pleased when Frank McAveety, the Deputy Minister for  Local Government, said: "Councillors are elected and members of public bodies are appointed; but both serve the public. It is right that they should be seen to be governed by the same standards." The Local Government Committee welcomes the general principles of the bill. We are pleased that, in light of responses to the consultation process, the Executive has made several changes to the draft bill, including the extension of the powers of the standards commission to cover members of relevant public bodies as well as councillors. We are also pleased that the commission will have the power to impose sanctions on those individuals who are found to have breached the code. However, I join the committee in expressing reservations that a number of advisory bodies, such as local enterprise companies, further education colleges, housing associations and tourist boards, will be excluded from the proposals. As we know, individuals in those organisations are responsible for the management of considerable public funds and, like councillors, make policy decisions. The public must have confidence in the integrity of those officials. I noted with interest the minister's comment that the operational framework of some LECs, boards of further education colleges and the like is autonomous from the Executive, but I would welcome Executive amendments to the bill to make appropriate arrangements for appointments to such bodies. It must also be noted that the three public bodies appointed by the Crown—the Mental Health Commission, the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historic Monuments of Scotland and the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission—are excluded from the bill's provisions. In the spirit of accountability for all public bodies, it is important that representations are made to the Crown to allow those organisations to be brought within the remit of the bill, by whatever arrangements can be found. Public confidence in standards in public life is an important issue and one that is central to public bodies, local authorities and this Parliament. It is a matter for each and every individual in public life. I urge members to support the bill.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made on developing multi-modal transport initiatives in Lanarkshire. (S1O-1507)

Is the minister aware of a proposed development at the Mossend rail freight terminal in my constituency, which is aimed at expanding further the road-to-rail initiative that she recently supported at the Safeway depot in Bellshill? Is she aware of any obstacles to that development which might be the result of a restrictive interpretation of plans for the neighbouring Eurocentral site? Surely the development of both sites is possible and should have the support of ministers. Continued progress will assist in the growth of the manufacturing and service sectors in Lanarkshire.

I welcome the opportunity to endorse the minister's speech. High standards in public life are an important issue, not only for us as parliamentarians, but for the ordinary working people whom we serve. Just as they want to have faith in elected politicians, they must have faith in public appointments. I welcome the creation of the role of Commissioner for Public Appointments, which should achieve the aim of avoiding political interference while ensuring that independent scrutiny is implicit in the system of appointments.  The promotion of equal opportunities is also important in any system of public appointments. The Labour party manifesto for the Scottish Parliament election committed us to celebrating the diversity of Scotland's people. However, in Lanarkshire and elsewhere, we have failed in the past to ensure that our public appointments system was representative of the diversity of the communities served by those bodies. We know that public bodies comprise mainly white, professional males. Although we recognise the wealth of talent and experience already employed in those organisations, we must deliver a system of public appointments that reflects the diversity of Scottish society. I welcome the Executive's agenda on that matter. The Parliament welcomed the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Committee as a sign of our commitment to equality in Scotland. I am pleased that the Executive is expanding the values on which the committee was founded by promoting and enshrining those values in our public bodies to make them truly representative of the public. Without disparaging any individual or group of professionals, I often wonder whether my area of Lanarkshire is mainly populated by middle-class professionals. Even a cursory look at the background of the people who serve on public bodies would indicate that the personnel are drawn from too narrow a section of society. Where are the women, the ethnic minorities, the disabled and the ordinary working people? At the moment, those groups are under-represented, if they are represented at all. That issue must be addressed, which is why the Executive's initiative is so welcome. The issue is not only about proportionality or social exclusion, or about whether 75 per cent of appointees are of one gender or another; it is about fiscal competence. As such bodies account for approximately £6.5 billion of public money, there is a good case for a scrutinising role for the Commissioner for Public Appointments. Having the right people to make the correct decisions about such large sums, along with other prerequisites, will lead to potentially greater fiscal competence, by better matching needs to available resources. It is my earnest hope that through the introduction of those initiatives, the profile of public service will be raised in the eyes of the general public, which in itself could encourage more people than ever before to consider offering their talents for the country's benefit. I believe that the Executive is determined to fulfil its commitment to the equality agenda and that we will continue to strive for greater diversity of  representation on public bodies. Jack McConnell's proposal goes a long way towards creating a climate of greater trust in our appointees and towards independent scrutiny becoming a reality. There is still much to do, but we recognise the work that has already been done. The minister's proposals are good for public confidence in appointments, for Lanarkshire and for the people of Scotland whom we serve. I commend the motion.

I have not a speech, but a question for the minister. It has been suggested that this is a technical area. Can definitions be promoted that do not fall within the bill, in the form of guidance or a management executive letter? Is it possible for the minister to confirm today that a mail document will be published that will contain the definition, or an explanation of the bill, in relation to the British Medical Association guidelines?

rose—

We are all aware of the importance of the census. As has been said, it provides decision makers at all levels of government with valuable social and economic information on which to base policy. It also  provides information on the changing nature of our communities and society and so is valuable in gauging how effective, or otherwise, the Government has been. This will be a landmark census: the first to be conducted since the establishment of the new Parliament and the first of the new millennium. It will also be a landmark census because, during the debate in February, in our committees and in other meeting places, there was much discussion about its nature, the areas that it should cover, the questions that it should include and how those questions should be asked. Members present today led the call to include further questions—on religion, ethnicity, language spoken in the home, the Scots language and income. Those questions were thoroughly debated by the Equal Opportunities Committee, where there was agreement on the need for the Executive to review the possibility of including further questions. Having taken evidence from the Deputy First Minister, the committee, to its credit, was able to persuade the Executive of the need for a question on religion and for further information on ethnic group. Jim Wallace is right to say that decisions on which questions to include are about priorities. We know that there are many demands from many quarters for the inclusion of the new question; we also understand the need to limit the census so that it is not so lengthy that people are dissuaded from completing it. In co-operating with the Executive to deliver sound policies for equality, the Equal Opportunities Committee recognises the importance of the additions. Our intention was never opposition for opposition's sake. Our position was based on what the committees were established to do—to help the Executive to develop good policies and legislation. The additions are not simply about counting the number of Catholics, Protestants, Muslims or any other group. The question about religion is designed to deliver important information on inequalities. Likewise, the further information on ethnicity is not about counting how many people belong to an ethnic group but about delivering important information that will help the Government to develop better policies. Without pre-empting the conclusions of the discussion of section 28 in the Equal Opportunities Committee, I must express my deep disappointment that representatives of the Catholic and Muslim communities—communities that these additions are designed to help—could come to the committee meeting on Monday and so blatantly ask for discrimination against another section of our society.  It is to the credit of the Executive, the committee system and this Parliament that the new questions will be included if the bill is passed. Their inclusion highlights how the Parliament is working, how consensus politics is developing and how the Executive is listening—contrary to what may be reported in the media. I am aware that some members will be disappointed that some questions, such as those on the Scots language and on income, will not be included on this occasion. I am also aware of the arguments for and against the inclusion of those questions. However, as the date of the census is fast approaching, I urge members from all parties to recognise that it is vital that this important bill is passed as soon as possible. The inclusion of the questions on religion and ethnicity is an important step forward. Although there will be time in future to revisit the issue of whether to include further questions, there is little time before the census process is scheduled to begin. This is a landmark census, which will provide valuable information to our new Parliament. It is important that the census is conducted on time, so it is important that stage 1 of the bill is agreed to today.

Mr Wilson is concerned about the money that is being given to local authorities for  schools. North Lanarkshire Council is rationalising so that it does not waste money on half-empty schools and Andrew Wilson has been promoting a campaign in north Lanarkshire against that policy. That means that he wants the local authority to waste money on such schools.

Does the First Minister agree that the vast body of mainstream Scottish opinion needs to know that the Executive is prepared to listen to it? Does he also agree that his statement today proves that the Scottish Executive has listened to public opinion on this issue and has provided reassurance when that reassurance was called for?

The importance of the national census for 2001 cannot be understated. The results will ensure that our decision makers and service providers have the tools they need to develop new strategies and, in some cases, to assess the impact of existing policies well into the new century. The reason for a regular census is to reflect the changing status of the population and to update the statistical record on which the Government, the business community and others rely heavily. If we accept that census data must be updated regularly to provide a dynamic view of society, we must consider the nature of the information gathered by it. On 10 January, the Deputy First Minister said: "This will be a landmark census - the first to be carried out under the Scottish Parliament and the first in the new millennium. We have taken decisions on which questions to include and which questions to leave out following extensive consultation." That, he might have thought, was that. However, in this new form of government, which we now embrace and which continues to develop, it is possible, through our committee structures, to expand the debate and to include new material for consideration by ministers. I am pleased that ministers have shown strength not only by listening to the Equal Opportunities Committee but by adopting a number of the committee's views and recommendations—however late they came to that position. The term "listening government" may be scoffed at by cynics and opponents, but I am grateful for that example of what a listening Executive can bring to this chamber and to the legislation that we will develop on behalf of the people of Scotland. I believe that it is the wish of the majority of MSPs to include in the census additional questions on religion and ethnic group, which I am  pleased have been accepted. Today, given the time constraints, it is not possible to make detailed, individual arguments for all the additional questions that were, I believe, dealt with adequately by the Equal Opportunities Committee during its recent meeting with the Deputy First Minister. It is clear to me and, indeed, a large number of leading academics, that information gained from the questions on religion and ethnic background could provide the basis for accurate research into religious bigotry and racism in Scottish society. On the labour market, for example, the public could be reassured that we are indeed a tolerant society, depending on the census findings. However, if it is shown that discrimination does exist, policies can be targeted specifically at the areas identified. I make no apologies for asking that those questions be included in the draft order, as I believe that we must confront the truth, whether good or bad, and provide each of our citizens with confidence, in the knowledge that we will tackle the difficult issues, that we care and that we listen to them. I welcome the decision of the minister and the Executive. More particularly, I welcome the creation of a more dynamic census, in which the information gathered will be of greater benefit than ever before. I remain committed to having all the additional questions that we have heard discussed today included in the census at some point in the future, although I am pragmatic enough to recognise that the concessions that the Executive has made represent real progress for all concerned. I commend the Executive and my colleagues on the Equal Opportunities Committee on playing their part in arriving at this sensible conclusion.

To ask the Scottish Executive what reports have been received from the police and fire services regarding arrangements for the millennium and what lessons may be learned. (S1O-981)

I thank the minister for his reply. I welcome the fact that there will be a review of the services, but will the review contain information on, for example, drug-related crime over the millennium period and the deaths and injuries caused by fireworks? Will the review cover  potential problems with future date changes such as 29 February?

From across the political divides in the chamber, we have all witnessed the scourge of drugs and their effects on our constituencies, our communities and our people, in particular our children. Drug abuse is not unique to Scotland and is no respecter of geographical or political boundaries. As well as being a national and international problem, it affects all our communities. The key to the fight against drugs is effective research and information that will allow resources to be targeted efficiently. That is why the Executive was right to target £41,000 to fund the research by police in Strathclyde and Fife into the links between drugs and crime, and to increase health board provision for drug treatment services by £2 million a year. Such money allows the production of reports such as "Behavioural Patterns of Illicit Substance Users in Lanarkshire"—not a very snappy title, but an important document—which was published in 1998 by the Scottish Centre for Infection and Environmental Health. The report was funded by Lanarkshire Health Board and studied a representative sample of drug users in Lanarkshire. Its findings, helpful though they were in planning strategies to tackle drug abuse, made alarming reading, especially for me as a Lanarkshire MSP. The average age of drug users in Lanarkshire is 24 and 79 per cent are male. The preferred drugs of those who participated in the study were heroin and cannabis; 53 per cent of cannabis users stated that they used the drug daily. Ninety-seven per cent of cannabis users and 53 per cent of heroin users said that the drugs were "very or fairly easy" to obtain.

There is always a problem with statistics, and the one mentioned by Margo is important, but the ones that I mentioned are included in that particular report. I am pleased that reducing the availability of drugs—of whatever type—is the new drugs enforcement agency's primary objective.  Far more alarming is the fact that the average age of respondents, when they first encountered drugs, was 14 and a half. Further, the centre for drug misuse research at the University of Glasgow reported in October 1997 that 32 per cent of pupils at Lanarkshire schools said that they had consumed an illegal drug. The offering of drugs to children is not acceptable in any decent society. We know that drugs misuse does not stand alone, but is often linked with problem drinking. Other reports have shown that 83 per cent of respondents in Lanarkshire use drugs and alcohol simultaneously. In Lanarkshire, it is estimated that there is one alcohol-related death each working day and alcohol misuse costs the area's industry about £20 million annually. Margo MacDonald was right to say that the statistics are important across the board. We must recognise that both drugs and alcohol cause significant problems that must be challenged. We know all too well that the battle against drugs is about more than statistics. Unfortunately, behind every statistic there is a person, who also has family and friends. One such person in my constituency was Annette McCallum, a 21-year-old mother from Viewpark, who died in November last year after taking an ecstasy tablet in a local disco. As my local newspaper, the Bellshill Speaker , stated this week when it launched its anti-drugs campaign, "It's easy to remember the faces of the victims, but people quickly forget about those who are left behind." I welcome the newspaper's initiative and its commitment to people such as Phyllis Woodlock—whose son Andrew was Britain's youngest drugs victim when he died, also after taking one ecstasy tablet—in her campaign to ensure that her son's tragic death would not be in vain. The Scottish drugs enforcement agency represents an innovative approach to tackling drugs. For the first time, Scotland will have an organisation that is dedicated to tackling and smashing organised drug crime in a co-ordinated fashion. The battle against drugs requires a range of responses involving a multi-agency approach. That includes dealing with the economic circumstances that might lead to people taking drugs in the first place. As Phyllis Woodlock said, "There is a need for us to find things for young people to do to keep them away from drugs." That is absolutely right. It is important that any new resources are not aimed solely at high school pupils. Drug education information packs should be made available in primary schools. That is central to communicating  the anti-drugs message. To educate our children, we must start from an early age. Eleven per cent of S1 pupils in Lanarkshire are reported to have consumed an illegal drug. That is alarming enough, but the figure rises to 55 per cent by the time they have reached fourth year. I hope that the cross-party consensus will continue in supporting the Executive's cross-cutting approach and the implementation of "Tackling Drugs in Scotland", and in sending a clear message from this Parliament that the scourge of drugs is not acceptable in this nation.

rose—

We all welcome the fact that the Equal Opportunities Committee has been set up. The complaint that has been made of it is that the SNP spends too much time addressing what that committee cannot talk about rather than what it can talk about. We need a positive agenda in this Parliament, which we are not getting.

Just as I was corrected earlier, I hope that Alex Neil will accept this correction. The monarch is not denied the right to marry a Catholic; they are just not allowed to succeed to the throne if they do.

Let me make it clear from the outset that the Act of Settlement is an anachronistic anomaly that runs contrary to the principles of inclusion and equality. As a member of a party founded on the principles of social justice, I am pleased to say that I know of no member of this Parliament—from the Labour party or from any other party—who would argue against the view that the act has no place in a modern Scotland. However, the real question before us today is not whether members believe that to be the case, but whether a debate on the repeal of that age-old legislation should take precedence over the priorities of the Executive. Wrong as it is, the act has little relevance to the lives of ordinary Catholics. I believe that to be the case because I have spoken to fellow Catholics—those whom I meet every day in my constituency, the parents whom I meet at my children's schools, my friends and fellow parishioners where I attend mass every Sunday. We were elected to this Parliament in May to deliver on education, health, creating jobs, combating poverty and tackling crime. Labour is  busy in both Parliaments—here in Edinburgh in coalition with the Liberal Democrats—pushing through bills that will have a positive impact on the lives of all our people, including the Catholic community. Labour has radically updated the British constitution, devolving power to this Parliament as promised, so let us dismiss the argument that Labour is slow on constitutional reform. That is a weak contention that holds no water. It is true that Labour did not include proposals for a debate on the repeal of the Act of Settlement in its election manifestos for Westminster or for Scotland. Neither, however, did the nationalists, the Tories or our Liberal partners. The view was that the act had little relevance to the lives of ordinary Catholics, and I believe that that is still the case. I wonder, therefore, why there is now such urgency to debate that irrelevancy. Where did it come from and how genuine is it? I can only conclude that the nationalists, in deciding to hold this debate, believe that repeal of the Act of Settlement should come before the people's priorities.

I accept that point and apologise for being wrong. As we saw during the previous debate on equality, the SNP members seem intent on spending their time complaining about what this Parliament cannot do, rather than showing what it can do. They believe that we should concentrate on outdated legislation affecting one privileged family, rather than delivering for all our families. They want the matter debated in the Scottish Parliament, not for the right reasons, but rather to divide our Parliament. Rather than debating the real issues that affect Scotland's people, they seek to use valuable time in the Scottish Parliament to debate an issue that is the preserve of another place.

I will not give way. I would like to make progress with my speech. We must ask why we are debating this matter, when the Parliament had previously made its position clear. A majority of members, including myself, have already signed a motion condemning the Act of Settlement. The view of Parliament has been stated clearly. When I originally approached Mike Russell on this issue to seek out his motive  in raising the subject, he promised that, if a simple majority of MSPs signed the motion, it would act as a statement of this Parliament. No debate, he said, would be required. In spite of Mr Russell's assurances that it was not his aim, his party's apparent desire to exploit any populist issue appears to supersede the need to preserve Mr Russell's integrity. If members doubt that this matter comes down to politics, I refer them to an article in the Scottish Catholic Observer of Friday 3 December. The writer, clearly puzzled at the emergence of this subject as a political issue, turned to Dr Peter Lynch of the University of Stirling for an answer. He argued: "This is a great wedge issue for the SNP . . . Either they lever the Scottish Catholic vote away from Labour or they push a wedge between Labour in England and Scotland." Dr Lynch hit the nail on the head. I support the journalist's conclusion that it is because of politics that this "Parliament is debating a matter over which it cannot legislate, while Catholics are being courted over an issue on which they mostly couldn't care less". As the reporter on the Equal Opportunities Committee looking at this issue, I spoke to the Catholic Church. I agree with it when it said: "we think this Act is silly and it should be changed, but we recognise that the Government has other legislative priorities at the moment." As a Catholic, I concur when it states: "we are not going to be manipulated by any one political party on this issue." The Equal Opportunities Committee agreed that it was for our representatives at Westminster to decide what is more important. It is for them to decide whether the priority should be health, education, jobs and poverty, or amending some outdated piece of legislation to benefit a select few who are, or aspire to be, members of the royal family. In putting forward its amendment, I am confident that the Executive seeks no party advantage. We are a coalition, and no single party in the partnership gains from the amendment, nor do any of the Opposition parties lose. All we seek is an honest debate on the real issues facing Scotland's Catholics. I have spoken to representatives of the Catholic Church, and believe that that is also its view. I urge members to support the Executive's amendment.

Can Mr Russell tell us why he wants to raise this issue now, when all the time there have been Scottish National party members in the Palace of Westminster, none of them has tried to raise it?

Jamie McGrigor was right to highlight Martin Luther King's famous speech in which he asked for people to be judged by the content of their character, not by the colour of their skin. That speech, so radical in its time, should echo in this Parliament and stand as a reminder to all of us of the necessity to ensure equality of opportunity for all Scotland's people. Although I would not claim to be as eloquent or as prestigious a speaker as the Reverend King, I want to express my deep support for the framework for an equality strategy that was announced today. As a member of the Parliament's Equal Opportunities Committee, I welcome the Executive's commitment to create a fair and just society in which all individuals, whatever their background, have equal rights and opportunities. Those values, which I know are shared throughout the chamber, are primarily Labour values and will take us and our country into the new century. I want to draw members' attention to inclusion in education. Many young people with difficulties have a restricted choice of educational establishment. They are often deemed not suitable for mainstream education and are placed in more  specialist settings instead. The culture of diverting so many young people to specialist educational establishments is not consistent with the Executive's strategy of inclusion. In many areas of Scotland, there is the presumption that special schools are better—but better for whom? Surely not for the children. Segregated education brands children with disabilities as second class and is not an equal, but a different, education. Although children can be offered specialist support, they are denied the opportunity to grow with their able-bodied peers. That proves a missed opportunity to educate children in mainstream schools, who must also be given the opportunity to learn with those with disabilities and, by doing so, learn to see the ability in those people. Mainstream inclusive education must be the way forward for children with disabilities. Such children must not be branded as different; they are different only in that they have a disability. If a child needs an auxiliary, a speech therapist or specialist equipment, that should be provided for the child in a mainstream setting. I know from experience the difference that such help can make to young people. Instead of excluding them and tearing them from their friends and communities, the Executive should ensure that resources are available to provide our children with choice. Let me make myself clear. I am talking not about dumping special needs children in mainstream schools without support, but about supporting their needs in schools within communities by transferring resources from specialist units to those schools. I urge the Executive to take positive steps to transfer resources from the costly two-tier system to equip professional teachers with the skills to support our future generations. Rather than perpetuate prejudice—as the Equity Group says—we must move to a system such as Sweden's which is the opposite of the current system in Scotland. In Sweden, special needs children are automatically supported in mainstream schools and placing children in specialist learning centres is the exception rather than the rule. That should be the way forward for our country. I do not advocate the abolition of specialist centres—they do valuable work—but we must give parents a clear choice, which they do not often have at present. We must provide Scottish parents and children with information to make such choices, which is why I welcome the work of Enquire, the information service run by Children in Scotland. We must transfer the resources allocated to specialist centres to enable integration to occur. I believe passionately in equality of opportunity; I  have supported it all my life. I recognise the commitment of ministers—Jackie Baillie and Wendy Alexander—in the Scottish Executive and the commitment that exists throughout the chamber, regardless of party, to equality of opportunity. I hope, therefore, that the Parliament will support the Executive today. The framework for an equality strategy is rooted in the traditions of tolerance and understanding, which is welcome. I urge the Executive to move forward in partnership with all interested parties, including the Equity Group, which campaign for real inclusion and equality in our education system. Once equality is achieved, we will truly be able to say, in the words of Martin Luther King: "Free at last! Free at last!"

The Scottish economy is in good shape, despite the all too frequent attempts by nationalists and Tories to talk down the achievements of countless thousands of working Scots, managers, inward investors and the development agencies.

I am not aware of the report to which Kenny refers. We are improving on what was left to us. The situation may have been bad in the past, but things are better today. That is the point that I am trying to make. Yet again the SNP is trying to talk down the achievements of the Government. Kenny has just made my point for me. It is clear that sound fiscal control and good economic management by the Scottish Minister for Finance and by the chancellor at Westminster have been the cornerstones of the stability that we currently enjoy. That fact goes against the grain of John Swinney's amendment and his argument about the sharing of macro-economic responsibilities between Scotland and the rest of the UK. In almost all the key areas of the economy, the news is positive. Lloyd Quinan may say that the figures are regurgitated, but why should we hide good news? Output in our production industries was up 1.8 per cent in the second quarter of 1999. The manufacturing sector, which is so important to constituencies such as mine in Lanarkshire, also showed a 1.2 per cent increase over the second quarter. Output in the electrical and instrument engineering sectors rose by 8.7 per cent in the same period. Total manufacturing exports in the second quarter of 1999—

We can argue about the statistics, but manufacturing is improving. The SNP does not want to see the improvements. The member can talk them down, but I want to talk up the good news in the economy. In the second quarter of 1999, the level of export sales in the manufacturing sector increased by 6.4 per cent in real terms compared with the previous four quarters. We have low and stable inflation—the lowest for 30 years. The retail prices index is low and has varied within a tight band of between 2.1 and 2.7 per cent during the past year. The story continues.

I keep being interrupted. I have only a couple of minutes, so I hope that the member will not mind if I carry on. The Scottish Executive is delivering a stable and modern economy that is helping to increase prosperity for everyone. For more than 200 years, Lanarkshire has been the manufacturing heartland of the nation and of Scotland's economy. The heavy industries that once dominated in  Lanarkshire have been disappearing, but they are being replaced by new, modern workplaces in high-tech sectors such as engineering, electronics and services. The people of Lanarkshire have faced many hurdles over the years in the search for prosperity—I do not want to recount them here—but those same people, whom I represent, have adapted to the new era. They have equipped themselves to take advantage of the new opportunities that are encouraged by the strong, modern economy that the Executive is delivering. We know what businesses in Lanarkshire and elsewhere need—this may upset John Swinney, given his earlier comments—because we have listened to them. They want a modern, strong and fair economy, backed by a modern and credible Government that is committed to working with industry and to modernising the country. Employers know that the Government strategy for economic growth is serving Scotland. The Government has delivered the lowest ever business tax rates, with the main rate of corporation tax cut from 33 to 30 per cent, small business rates cut from 23 to 20 per cent, and corporation tax for the smallest companies cut to just 10 per cent from April 2000. As a result, 11,000 companies from all over the globe and based in Lanarkshire know that they are better off under this Executive. In Lanarkshire, as elsewhere, we know that we must not only attract inward investment—valuable though that is—but encourage indigenous businesses to flourish, which will utilise the immense talents of the people of the area. Nearly 12.3 per cent of Scotland's population lives in Lanarkshire. Those people welcome the Scottish Executive's commitment to create 100,000 new indigenous businesses by 2009. That is a promise from this Executive to Scotland's people. Businesses will be well served by a modern Lanarkshire that is home to prestigious international business locations, such as Eurocentral, Tannochside park, the Strathclyde business park and the technology park in Hamilton. The Executive is committed to Scotland's economy. It is initiating a Scottish labour market unit, creating 20,000 modern apprenticeships and a university for industry, and introducing a new business mentoring scheme. Scotland's Executive is working with Scotland and with the UK Parliament to deliver for business and industry in Scotland. It is delivering a modern economy for our people and for the people I represent. That agenda, Lloyd Quinan, includes working with the trade unions in every sector of the economy.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will identify the factors that have resulted in the improvements in survival of breast cancer patients in Scotland. (S1O-522)

I thank the minister for that answer. Is the minister aware of the current review of Tamoxifen, the modern cancer-combating drug? It is known to have a number of side effects in some cases, including thrombosis, cardiac problems, cancer of the womb and liver cancer. Does she know when that review is expected to report? Has she any further information on the safety of that drug?

As a member who represents a constituency whose electorate has seen dramatic changes in the industrial landscape over the past few decades—and as a former welder—I am all too aware of the impact of those changes on the individual, the families and the communities that I serve. Scotland's manufacturing base has declined from employing 611,000 in 1978 to employing 303,000 today. The sector now accounts for only a sixth of all jobs in Scotland. Manufacturing jobs are still essential to the success of our diverse international economy, however. In many areas, manufacturing is still the base for economic activity. Indeed, it is linked with many other sectors. The growth of service sector jobs in particular is most welcome and its importance cannot be underestimated. Scottish Enterprise statistics show that 60 per cent of all service sector jobs in Scotland depend on manufacturing. As the sector's main market remains the rest of the UK, I am determined to ensure that those jobs will not be put at risk by the isolationist policies pursued by the Scottish National party. However, I recognise that the downward trend experienced by  the manufacturing industry is worrying. That is why I am in favour of a comprehensive strategy to support manufacturing industry. In my native Lanarkshire, 38 per cent of all industrial output is manufacturing based, with engineering accounting for 23 per cent of that figure. We have seen the arrival of a large number of electronics firms, such as Chunghwa Picture Tubes, Orange and Cellnet. However, it is predicted that manufacturing growth will weaken as growth in the electronics sector slows—we need look no further than the example of Lite-On to illustrate that point. Service sector growth is anticipated to be headed by a growth in hotels and the catering and distribution sectors, which are expected to experience high growth in the Lanarkshire economy in the next few years. We can also expect growth in the transport and communications sector, with the proliferation of call centres bringing firms such as Kwik-Fit Insurance Services and Cable and Wireless Communications to Lanarkshire. Sixty per cent of all production in the North Lanarkshire economy is non-manufacturing based. Employment overall is expected to rise on the back of non-manufacturing jobs, while manufacturing employment is expected to decline. That is not only my view; it is the view of Lanarkshire Development Agency, as expressed in a constituency audit for Hamilton North and Bellshill earlier this year. With that in mind, I urge the Scottish Executive to advance manufacturing strategy in two ways. First, it should seek to defend and expand the existing manufacturing base. Secondly, it should continue to promote the growth of new industries. It is important that incentives are available to our existing manufacturing industries to encourage them to invest in new technologies and new methods of production. Our industries must be able to accommodate the challenges ahead in what are ever-changing markets. I envisage that the new industries of the future will result from organic growth. It is essential that erstwhile entrepreneurs are not stifled at the idea stage because of a lack of funds or good advice. I commend Lanarkshire Development Agency for its work in that area but I encourage additional focus on it. Allied to the creation of an investment bank to provide funds for new—primarily manufacturing-based—business projects, that will provide a strong platform for growth and replacements for industries that are in natural decline. The extension of enterprise zone status or its equivalent for manufacturing industries could go a long way to easing Lanarkshire's fears about 2003, when enterprise zone status is phased out. The world's strongest and most durable economies are those with a good history of  sustained growth, particularly in the manufacturing sector. The best guarantee for improving employment prospects in Lanarkshire—and in Scotland—is to strengthen our manufacturing base. If that can be achieved at a time when industrial growth is expected, I would have great confidence in the enduring stability of the Scottish economy.

It is with some   trepidation that I rise to speak because, for me, religious practice is a private matter and I guard that privacy carefully. Nevertheless, since I have some concerns that I hope Mr McCabe will be able to answer, I feel compelled to contribute. I agree with the saying that the only difference between the sacrilegious and the sanctimonious is that at least the sacrilegious have a sense of humour. I hope my comments are not seen as either. I hope that when we vote we do it for the right reasons. I agree that if prayers are to form part of the procedure of the Parliament, they must include all denominations in this country. If we are to be representative, so must the prayers. I am concerned, however, that the debate is more about gestures and perceptions than about the actual form of the prayers. If we are to pray together, it should be to our and the country's spiritual benefit; political perceptions must be set aside. As a Christian I would like to refer to teachings of the Bible which guide my views. In Matthew, chapter 6, it says, do not "parade your uprightness in public" and "when you pray, do not imitate the hypocrites: they love to say their prayers ... at the street corners for people to see them." We are further told to: "go to your private room". I am also aware that the Bible teaches us not to judge and I am trying not to do so. If prayer is considered to be a private matter and one that should be left to the Churches, then the motion should be opposed. I do not want to do that, but I am concerned that we have here an attempt to posture and to gesture. I only ask that when we vote we do so for the right reasons and that we vote to make this an inclusive Parliament—I am concerned that that might not be the case. When  members vote, please be honest.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it intends to promote patient-centred health care in Scotland. (S1O-60)

I thank the minister for her answer and I welcome the Executive's commitment to patient-centred health care. Will she give me a specific illustration of how that care can be implemented?

I welcome the First Minister's statement and congratulate the Executive on bringing forward a legislative programme that will ensure that this Parliament makes a good start in addressing the needs and concerns of the Scottish people. Without directing my attention to any specific area of the programme, I say that, as a Labour member, I am delighted with my party's commitment to social inclusion; equality of opportunity can be clearly identified throughout the proposals that have been presented today.

Although SNP members are keen on debating skills, their listening skills are obviously not as good. A transport bill; improvements in education; national parks, which will create jobs; land reform to deal with feudalism; affordable housing, which is a priority for the creation of stable communities; improvements in the health service; the Government's approach to working with local authorities, public agencies and the private and voluntary sectors-those things are a start.  It is only right that the first aim of this Parliament is the creation of prosperity for this country. However, if we do not work to ensure that nobody is in any way excluded from access to that prosperity, we will undoubtedly fail the people. We should accept that we will not achieve change  overnight, but we can at least lay down the foundations of the means by which everyone can feel included, regardless of which community they come from. This legislative programme can be the foundation of what we can achieve in the long term as well as delivering much immediately.  The causes of social exclusion are many: poverty and deprivation; unemployment; low incomes; poor housing; broken homes; and bad health-the list is, unfortunately, too long. My main concern is with social exclusion as a result of discrimination. In particular, I want the practices of institutions and individuals that prevent disabled people and people from ethnic minorities from playing their full part in society to be eradicated. That will not be easy; it involves changing society's attitude to the way in which we treat each other as citizens.  We must make everyone realise that we have a duty to be tolerant and respectful of one another's differences. Intolerance is rife in Scotland. We have to challenge that, and I am confident that in its proposals the Executive has given the Parliament enough scope to allow us to make a good start in tackling the problem. It is the responsibility of each of us in the chamber to monitor the progress that is made towards social inclusion. We have to identify and implement effective anti-discrimination strategies in all areas of legislation, where appropriate. Disabled people and ethnic minorities in Scotland deserve no less.  I will give an illustration of the difficult task that we face. On Sunday night, I was at a gathering of a group within the Asian community. The guest speaker was Mr Salmond and I hope that he will concur with what I am about to say. While social exclusion is often seen as a euphemism for poverty, the number of Mercedes-Benz, BMWs and Daimlers in the hotel's car park gave no outward sign that this was a gathering of the socially excluded, if poverty were to be used as the criterion. However, as one speaker after another talked of their fears and concerns about their community in the wake of a series of racially motivated attacks, especially in the west of Scotland and including the death of Imran Khan, the sense of exclusion felt by the Asians in the room became tangible to the rest of us.  Regardless of their financial status, the members of the Asian community who were present on Sunday night clearly believed themselves to be shut out from the rest of society. Parliament must focus on the needs of vulnerable groups that feel ostracised. We must always promote social inclusion and work to prevent social exclusion from happening in the first place. I am confident that this legislative programme will allow us to do that.