4. To ask the Scottish Government what powers local authorities have to exempt care-home residents from council tax payments on their unoccupied properties. (S4O-02860)

Is the minister aware that East Dunbartonshire Council is demanding council tax payments of up to 90 per cent from care home residents whose unoccupied properties are on the market for lease?

6. To ask the First Minister what assessment the Scottish Government has made of recent reports on how the United Kingdom Government’s economic strategy is impacting on inequality in Scotland. (S4F-01843)

I am sure that the First Minister is aware that Professor Tony Travers, of the London School of Economics and Political Science, said in the Financial Times this week: “London is the dark star of the economy”. That followed similar comments from the UK Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills, Vince Cable. Does the First Minister agree that independence is, as he said, the only way that we will be able to rebalance the economy to achieve a fairer country?

Is the member aware that article 7(1) of the Discretionary Housing Payment (Grants) Order 2001 says that we cannot do anything more than multiply by 2.5? It is just not allowed.

The facts.

Will the member take an intervention?

We are talking about the local authorities’ duty of wellbeing towards their residents. How does Jenny Marra feel about East Dunbartonshire Council, which is a Labour-Tory-Liberal Democrat coalition that said, up until Christmas eve, that anybody who wanted to apply for a discretionary housing payment had to produce the receipts for their messages? Is that about wellbeing for the tenants?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to mitigate the effects of the so-called bedroom tax. (S4T-00561)

The minister said that the Government is mitigating the bedroom tax by up to—as it is legally allowed to—a maximum of £20 million. I am sure that she will be aware of the comments of the Scotland Office minister, David Mundell, that the Scottish Government is able to exempt everyone in Scotland who is affected by the bedroom tax. Therefore, the coalition Government is no longer just content with inflicting the bedroom tax on struggling families; it is now demanding that the Scottish Government clear up the coalition Government’s mess. I therefore agree with the minister; it would be useful were she to elaborate on the fact that only with independence can we do away with that dreaded tax.

As a serial member of private bill committees, it is appropriate that I thank the committee members and the convener in particular, the committee clerks and the legal team that provided us with advice. The City of Edinburgh Council (Portobello Park) Bill has been perhaps the most complicated private bill that I have considered so far, not only in a legal sense but because the committee has, in its quasi-judicial role, had to walk a very fine line in responding to the deluge of emails that it has received from the public. We have found it very helpful to have our convener supporting and leading us in our work. I will focus on three areas with regard to our committee report on the bill: the alternatives to a private bill; the precedent that may be set by such a bill; and—if I have time—the consultation process that was undertaken. When the City of Edinburgh Council suggested to the Parliament that a private bill was the correct route to go down, it listed the alternatives that it had considered, which the committee convener went through in her opening remarks. I draw members’ attention to paragraphs 74 to 96 of the committee’s report, in which we comprehensively go through the alternatives that the council considered and the reasons that they were rejected, and conclude that a private bill was the correct route to follow. Paragraph 97 on page 18 states: “The Committee is satisfied that the Council was justified in pursuing the private bill process and none of the other possible alternatives to achieve its objective.” We took a lot of time and care in coming to that conclusion. Much has been made of the notion that, if the private bill proceeds and is passed, we will be setting a precedent that other councils throughout Scotland could follow. The convener has already addressed that concern, as did Cameron Buchanan. I refer members, when they are making their decision, to paragraph 68 on page 13 of the report, which shows that to some extent that can already happen. Motherwell, Kirkcaldy, West Dunbartonshire, South Lanarkshire and North Lanarkshire authorities have all used various routes to enable them to take inalienable common good land and use it especially for educational purposes. What the City of Edinburgh Council proposes to do in the Portobello park private bill is not unique, and follows a tradition. The bill will not set a precedent, as it is not the first time that such a route has been followed. We commented at paragraph 120 of our report—as the minister mentioned in his remarks—that we thought that the City of Edinburgh Council had gone through a fairly comprehensive consultation process, but that some mistakes and areas in which it could have been better had been identified. We noted, however, that some of the problems that had occurred at the beginning of the process had since been rectified. A lot of the emails that we received highlighted that the City of Edinburgh Council went out and consulted young people and pupils. I do not see that as a negative—it is entirely positive. There is no reason why young people and pupils should not or cannot be consulted on their future. I commend the report to Parliament.

I thank members across the parties for supporting my motion so that we could debate it in Parliament, and I welcome to the gallery members of Optometry Scotland and some local opticians in my constituency. I am pretty sure that I can spot that Peter Ivins from Bearsden is here, and can I see Neil Drain from Kirkintilloch? I thank those gentlemen very much for coming. It was partly a visit to my local optician that made me want to have this debate today. I met representatives of Optometry Scotland at the Scottish National Party conference in October and learned about the amazing amount of extra work that I did not know opticians do. As many of you will know, I used to work in the health service, but I was surprised by what I learned, because I still thought that an optician was someone who dispensed glasses and that was it. I learned from the Optometry Scotland stall at the conference what is going on, and then I visited both Peter Ivins and Neil Drain in my constituency to find out just how much opticians are moving into eye healthcare, rather than just giving us the pair of glasses that we need in order to read. What I found was inspiring. I learned about optometrists becoming independent prescribers. I have found it quite difficult to get figures, but I understand that from 10 to 25 per cent of optometrists in Scotland are now trained and registered as independent prescribers via Glasgow Caledonian University. Of course, that means that our optometrists are not just dispensing glasses and diagnosing ill health in our eyes but are able to treat the ill health in our local communities. It was interesting to hear about the teach-and-treat clinic at Stobhill hospital, where local opticians can work with a consultant ophthalmologist to learn the skills that they need to provide treatment in the community. I also found out about the Scottish Government funding for digital fundus cameras, for example, for every practice in Scotland. Another thing that really caught my eye when I was out meeting the optometrists was the Scottish care information gateway electronic referrals. I understand that the electronic patient referral programme was launched in 2010 as part of the integration of eye care services and that it has funding of £6.6 million for 10 years from the Scottish Government. I know from my years in the health service of the benefits of electronic referral. It means that our independent prescribing optometrists can treat us locally but, when they diagnose something that goes beyond that treatment, they can appropriately refer us on to secondary care. Of course, the biggest benefit in that for any patient is the reduced time from diagnosis to referral to treatment. It is a great step forward that our optometrists are now an essential part of primary healthcare in our communities. I understand that 20 per cent of out-patient appointments in hospitals are for eye problems. If optometrists are doing a lot more diagnosis and treatment and referring to hospitals only when appropriate, that 20 per cent figure will come down. I have read that, since we introduced the programme in 2010, there has been a 6 per cent increase in referrals to out-patient appointments for eye care in the national health service in Scotland but that the figure in England is 20 per cent. We are therefore seeing the benefits of appropriate referral and treatment being done as locally as possible. Many members will ask what my interest is in the matter. I am obviously enthusiastic about it. Why am I so enthusiastic? It is great when I find out something new and find out that, yet again, Scotland is world leading in a healthcare area. However, for me, it is part of the preventative agenda whereby those of us with eye problems are being helped in our local communities to prevent them from getting worse. It is about community care and the best patient journey that we can have. It is incredibly important now because one in 30 of us in Scotland suffers from significant sight loss. Because of our ageing population—you will all know that I take a great interest in that issue because of my constituency interests in Strathkelvin and Bearsden—significant sight loss will double in 20 years. The optometrists’ treatment work is part of the preventative agenda that looks to the future by saying to patients, “How well can we care for you? How can we care for you where you want to be cared for?” Treatment for preventable sight loss in older people is not just about sight loss, because other health problems come with visual impairment. For example, an elderly person with visual impairment is more likely to have falls and end up being hospitalised. Interestingly, they are also more likely to have poor nutrition, because if someone has a visual impairment and they cannot see their food, they do not enjoy it, so they do not eat it, and that has knock-on effects. We should also remember the loss of independence that visual impairment brings, especially for older people, and the social isolation that that can bring. It was for all those reasons that I wanted to bring this debate to the chamber. I have been so impressed by what I have seen and, through this debate, I wanted to recognise and promote the work that community optometrists do. Perhaps I can best sum up what I want to say by talking again about when I went to see Neil Drain and Peter Ivins. They talked about all the years that they spent training to be optometrists and said that they are now using all their skills in being healthcare professionals and not just people who sell others their specs. I thank members for their support for this evening’s debate. I look forward to hearing everybody else’s contributions. Thank you.

l start by referring members to two entries in my register of interests: I am a member of the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals and the chair of the Scottish Library and Information Council. I thank Stewart for bringing this debate—and not just on behalf of the library users of Moray and the campaigners who are here with us tonight. The passion of the library users of Moray was shown in the march and rally that Stewart referred to. For me, as a librarian, it is wonderful to be at a debate where I am listening to people such as Stewart Stevenson and Rhoda Grant laud libraries and say how important they are. I am sure that other members will impress me just as much with their enthusiasm for libraries. To be very technical, when we look at library services, we have to go back to the 1887 legislation, which states that local authorities must provide an adequate library service for all. There is no definition of what an adequate library service is, but for many years SLIC has looked at how we assess a library service and how we allow such services in Scotland to benchmark themselves against each other in order to reach at least a working definition of adequacy of library services. Stewart Stevenson’s motion talks about the public library quality improvement matrix, which we use to carry out assessment and benchmarking. I want to get a bit technical and refer to the matrix. As Stewart Stevenson’s motion states, the matrix is under review and one of the things that will be reviewed is its name. We will not call it PLQIM anymore; its name will be clear. There are seven quality indicators for assessing libraries in Scotland. Previously when we looked at libraries, Moray came out as one of our five-star services. I found it quite interesting to take my seven quality indicators and cross reference them with the paper that Moray Council wrote on 10 September 2013. I want to highlight a few indicators to show that Moray’s five-star library status is definitely in danger. Indeed, not only is its five-star status in danger; I believe that it will no longer be providing an adequate library service. Therefore, Moray Council will not be meeting the legislative requirements, whether we have a definition of adequacy or not. Quality indicator 1 is on access to information and refers to access to current information resources. A library service would get a very low rating if “Access to current information resources is limited ... Minimal provision is made”— and— “This provision is not actively promoted by staff.” The council’s paper states in paragraph 3.1 that it will end up providing “a library service at the minimal level required by the Council”. I do not have time to go through the other six quality indicators, but that one example shows, I think, that Moray Council really has to think very carefully before it proceeds any further along this route. Librarians campaigned for library services, not for buildings. The demise of the book has been predicted for almost the whole of my library career of over 35 years and it has not happened in the digital age, so the buildings in which libraries are housed are still important, because we cannot yet provide a virtual library service without libraries to provide it from.

Will the member give way?

10. To ask the Scottish Government whether it would support a national “dementia-friendly” accreditation scheme. (S4O-02696)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his comprehensive answer. The £25 million from the Life Changes Trust is incredibly welcome. I am sure that he is aware that a lot of good work is happening around the country to build dementia-friendly communities, including work in my constituency by East Dunbartonshire Council. However, my great concern is that we will all go off and do our own thing. I have looked at the Fairtrade accreditation model. Does it provide an example of a way to accredit dementia-friendly communities?

Going back to the original question about providing support for carers to use information technology, I take this opportunity to make the minister aware of the fantastic work that Carers Link East Dunbartonshire is doing in my constituency through one-to-one IT training, the link and learn project, and the meet and geek group. We are already skilling our carers greatly to be able to use IT.

I rise to speak in the debate with little expertise in this subject, but with a great interest in it. That interest stems partly from my years as the chair of East Dunbartonshire children’s panel advisory committee. I note that Kenneth Macintosh and I are again speaking in a children’s debate, and I wonder whether there is an umbilical cord taking us both back to that very first Education, Culture and Sport Committee in 1999 that means that we just cannot leave the subject alone. I would like to consider three areas: early intervention; prevention; and, particularly, the idea in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill of a named person. I would also like to consider how the voice of the child is heard in this process. Given my background, which I have just explained to the chamber, I would also like to speak about the role of children’s hearings in the process. Planning for permanence and the elimination of what I understand is now being called drift runs through everything that we are discussing in relation to looked-after young people. I note that those issues were a theme in the minister’s opening remarks. A lot of my speech today is based on recent reading and research. The information that went into the committee’s report was useful and important. Running through the report and the minister’s opening remarks is the idea that GIRFEC is the foundation of everything that we should do in this area. There is a great deal of evidence that early intervention and the preventative agenda are best not only for young people but for their families. When I was a member of the Health and Sport Committee, the chief medical officer told us that, in his view, it is the nine months before birth and the nine months after birth that set the foundation for a person’s life. That is extremely clear in what we are talking about today. When I was looking for evidence on which to base my speech, I found that there was a lot of specific evidence about how the early intervention agenda is important when taking children into care. As someone who likes to find evidence, I found it comforting, at an intellectual level, to learn about all the work that the Scottish Government is doing to support teams that are conducting research so that there will be a strong evidence base for all decisions that are made. The work of the permanence and care team and CELCIS, which was founded in 2011 at the University of Strathclyde and which Clare Adamson talked about, is important. We need to ensure that, when decisions are made, either legislatively or by a social worker on the ground, they are based on evidence. For me, that is why the named person is so important. My understanding is that the named person will allow for integration across the child’s life. It will ensure that there is consistency and co-ordination of help and support for every child in Scotland. In his speech, Colin Beattie listed the multi-agency involvement in the lives of vulnerable children. That stresses the importance of the named person. As someone who is not at the heart of the debate, I say absolutely genuinely that I cannot understand why Kenneth Macintosh and others in the Labour Party say that they have reservations about the named person. To me, it looks like a crucial measure. Having a named person will be supportive for every child in Scotland, but it will be vital for vulnerable young people and their families.

I will, but I probably will not understand Mr Macintosh’s point.

I am a parent, like Ken Macintosh, and we never know when we might find ourselves vulnerable as a family. I do my absolute best as a parent, but that is not to say that it would not have been helpful for me and my son, who is now an adult, to have had someone to whom we could have turned.

I know that we have plenty of time, but Mr Macintosh and I could end up having a debate across the chamber.

You have been generous, Presiding Officer. That was a one-and-a-half-minute intervention. My comments were genuine—I do not understand Ken Macintosh’s point. I do my best as a parent and I have my support networks. However, I registered my child with a general practitioner not when he was ill, but so that there was a general practitioner to take him to if he became ill. For me, a named person would have provided similar support—a resource that I could have turned to if my own family network had not been available. The named person will be a fantastic advantage for every child and family in Scotland but is an absolute necessity for vulnerable children and families, given the multi-agency involvement that Colin Beattie described. When I was researching my speech, I found not just that there is evidence of the need for a named person but that there is almost universal support for the proposal. Seventy-two per cent of the respondents to the consultation on the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill supported having a named person. When Children 1st surveyed kinship carers, 90 per cent of those who responded said that every child in Scotland should have a named person and 78 per cent reflected on their own situation and said that, if they had had a named person, it would have been helpful to them and their family. The support for having a named person exists as well as the evidence for it. I am a great fan of article 12 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child—I used to have the T-shirt—which is all about the child’s voice needing to be heard in the process. I found the evidence that Who Cares? Scotland gave to the committee interesting. Who Cares? Scotland is good and supportive at an organisational level, but the young people whom we met through it just blew us away with the stories that they told us. I quote from the evidence that Who Cares? Scotland gave to the committee: “Young people should be better informed and included in the decision making process before, during and after leaving care”. I would have liked to concentrate on the children’s hearings system at this stage. With your indulgence, Presiding Officer, I will do so. When I was in children’s hearings, I often used to hear that the child’s presence would be dispensed with. For me, however, as article 12 says, that is where the child’s voice must be heard. Therefore, it has been lovely for me to find out about all the work that has been done recently, such as the Scottish Children’s Reporters Administration setting up a participation in hearings group in 2009, the children’s hearings improvement partnership being set up in 2010, and the involvement of the Children’s Parliament. It has been lovely to come across a fantastic document entitled “Hearing Scotland’s Children” and to read about the changes made to the hearings system, including to the waiting rooms and the format of the information that goes out to young people. It has been useful for me to learn about all those things. What I have learned in researching for the debate is that the policy is a work in progress. It looks to me that the intent is there by all parties, so I hope that we will all keep on the path and ensure that we get it right for every child.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to promote carers’ rights day. (S4O-02648)

Although the First Minister’s announcement of a carers’ rights bill at the carers parliament in October was very welcome, can the minister advise on the powers that can be used now to make councils such as East Dunbartonshire Council follow their duty to give carers their assessments?

I am sure that, like me, the Deputy First Minister believes that democrats across the chamber and throughout Scotland will be incredibly excited by the opportunity that independence gives Scotland finally to have a written constitution. Given the historic and social significance of that, I ask her what thoughts have been given to making writing that constitution a truly participative process, with innovative engagement techniques, so that everyone can feel and be part of the process.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has had with the First Minister regarding the economic opportunities arising from his recent visit to China. (S4O-02588)

With that impressive list, I presume that the cabinet secretary will agree with me that encouraging trade and investment links with China will be a boost to the Scottish economy.

It is interesting that in this debate on transport infrastructure for the 21st century, so far almost everybody has referred to motorised transport, although I note that in his opening remarks the minister talked about the money that is going to the national cycle network. I want to talk about delivering safe streets for cyclists and pedestrians, because I believe that that is intrinsic to our 21st century transport infrastructure. The issue is about shared space for different modes of transport, equality of access to that space and prioritising who gets that access. I want to be very clear in this short speech that to talk about cycling and walking as modes of transport is not to be fanciful—this is not Fiona going back to her hippie roots—but to be incredibly practical. Among other things, this is about climate change, which the minister talked about in his opening remarks, and in order to address climate change we need to effect behaviour change and bring about modal shift. It used to be that talking about modal shift meant talking about getting out of cars and on to the bus or the train, but increasingly we need to talk about getting out of motorised transport and on to your feet or bike. A big behaviour change or shift that we have to make is to convince the public that they have a false sense of security if they think that when they are in their car they are safer than they are on a bike or out walking. That is especially the case when asking parents to get their kids to walk or cycle to school. How do we make the change so that people understand that shared space equals safe space for all the users of an area? I am very proud of two of my parliamentary colleagues: Sandra White and Dennis Robertson, with their proposed members’ bills on responsible parking and use of blue badges. They are getting us to think about how we all share and use the space of the streets in which we live. I want to talk about something much bolder and broader in my constituency: a huge attitude shift. In Bishopbriggs there is a strong lobby of people who want Bishopbriggs to be the first 20mph town in Scotland—not a zone or limited area, but a 20mph town. Some fantastic campaigners are working on that. In the chamber I have often referred to East Dunbartonshire’s Cycle Co-operative, which has achieved the amazing figure of 20 per cent of primary school pupils cycling to school every day. That is quite something to have achieved—and that is without a 20mph town. ED’s Cycle Co-operative is talking about how to get the parents of the other 80 per cent to believe that it is safe to let their children walk or cycle to school. I am absolutely delighted that ED’s Cycle Co-operative has just received from the climate challenge fund £160,000 to go towards a project called good moves Bishopbriggs. The Cycle Co-operative is a group of people who know what they are doing and are already effecting change. However, they have been defeated in their attempt to get 20mph as the limit throughout Bishopbriggs. I have to get a bit technical here, Presiding Officer, members and minister.

It is fair to say that the guidance for setting 20mph limits can be confusing and requires much cross-referencing across a number of documents and traffic regulations. In 55 seconds I could not possibly list all the pieces of legislation that must be looked at. However, it comes down to focusing on whether physical or psychological calming measures are necessary in order to have 20mph zones. Paragraph 5 of Scottish Executive development department’s “SEDD circular no 6/2001: 20MPH speed limits” states: “It is for local traffic authorities to decide on the number and type of measures which should be employed in each particular case.” The problem in Bishopbriggs is that we cannot, even with all those different pieces of legislation, convince East Dunbartonshire Council to do that. It keeps on saying that it is not possible and that the regulations do not allow it to take that action. However, “Cycling Action Plan for Scotland 2013” clearly says that we want more 20mph zones. In Bishopbriggs, we want a 20mph town. I therefore ask the minister whether the regulations could be simplified and the guidance made clearer so that we can stop buck-passing and achieve that modal shift to safe shared space.

The ambition to have person-centred healthcare is not new, as I know from my many years as a health service librarian. More than 20 years ago, I worked in palliative care, and more than 14 years ago the centre for integrative care was opened in Glasgow on the Gartnavel hospital site. I warn members now that my speech is very much that of a health librarian—with evidence and references. That is where I want to start. It is fantastic that that ambition now has a great body of evidence behind it to show that person-centred healthcare is the way forward for treating our patients, and I am also pleased that there is such great Government support for patient-centred healthcare. The cabinet secretary said that it would take him three hours to list all that the SNP Government is doing to support person-centred healthcare; I have half a page of examples in my notes, but I refer members to the list that Nanette Milne read out and the examples that Bob Doris and Aileen McLeod gave of the work that the SNP Government is doing around the person-centred initiative. For me, the core of person-centred healthcare is health literacy. I always used to quote a phrase from Confucius: “I hear and I forget. I see and I remember. I do and I understand.” That is the core of person-centred healthcare, whereby the patient does healthcare for themselves and therefore understands what they are doing. There are two aspects to person-centred healthcare that we must consider. The first aspect is the therapeutic relationship, in which the patient is a partner in their healthcare. Nanette Milne referred to the dark days of the 1950s and 1960s, when patients were talked at rather than talked to and with. The other aspect is therapies. When we talk about patient-centred healthcare, we need to consider the therapies that are used and the therapeutic environment in which patients are treated. We need to look at the whole person and their holistic care, rather than just the treatment of the illness with which they have been diagnosed. On the therapeutic relationship, we often talk in terms of the expert versus the passive recipient, that is, the doctor versus the patient. Many people would say that the patient is the expert in their illness—George Adam talked about that in the context of multiple sclerosis—but that does not mean that the patient does not have such a relationship with their clinician, because the patient is the expert in their illness and not in the medicine that is needed to treat it. If patients are to be partners in their healthcare, access to high-quality information is fundamentally important. The clinician and the patient must both have access to the evidence base for the treatment that will be followed. Many years ago, in 2003, I left the Scottish Parliament after losing my seat and went back into health librarianship. I discovered that in the four short years in which I had been a member of the Parliament—hey presto—the e-library had been developed. The e-library was the most amazing resource. Every health professional in the NHS in Scotland could access it via a computer and find the peer-reviewed evidence base for everything that they did in their work. The e-library is now called the knowledge network and it continues to grow. I would love it if not just every clinician but every patient could get access to it. However, there would have to be health literacy, so that people could not just access but assess the information and work out how it applied to them. We have to look at holistic therapies when we look at patient-centred healthcare. I would like to read out a few quotes that relate to the fact that we are talking not just about medicines and operations, but about holistic, integrative healthcare. It has been said: “There is a growing body of evidence for integrative interventions such as Mindfulness-based therapies, self-efficacy and self-management strategies, and wellness enhancement”— that is a lovely expression— “which all build self-awareness and inner resource development skills” for patients, and that “The ethos of this approach is to enable a person to rediscover or rebuild their own inner resilience, strength, and creativity, in order to engage with effective self-care and self-management. It is an inherently individualised, person-centred, and whole-person approach. Evidence from interpersonal neurobiology empirical research into compassion and empathy forms much of the bedrock of this approach. Current research indicates that the activation of a person’s self-care abilities can trigger lifestyle changes e.g. healthy nutritional and exercise choices, as well as attitudinal shifts supportive of successful long term outcomes and the ability to ‘cope’.” When we talk about person-centred healthcare, it is incredibly important to talk about the whole person. I want to move forward from the whole person or patient and talk about carers and their family, as well, because if we are doing person-centred healthcare, the person will come with their carer and family. To quote again: “there is empirical evidence that the involvement of carers in a patient self-management initiative significantly improves therapeutic adherence, with resulting improved outcomes”. That is what person-centred healthcare is about, and that is what I as a professional 20-odd years ago was working towards. I am delighted that we now have a fantastic evidence base to prove that person-centred healthcare is the way forward. George Adam talked about not recognising the health service that Neil Findlay referred to. I agree with him. Neil Findlay and Nanette Milne talked about the casework that has come to them about people with problems in the health service. That casework is reflected in mine, but I remind members of Mark McDonald’s intervention. The casework that we get is from the approximately 10 per cent of patients who have had an unsatisfactory experience in the health service. I refer to my experience as the carer for my mother, with her multiple morbidities and possible five healthcare emergency admissions a year. She and I are among the 93 per cent who are satisfied with the care that they get from the NHS in Scotland. Patient-centred healthcare is about patients as partners. That ultimately leads to fewer patients, and it also leads to effective and engaged practitioners. Is not that the way that Scotland would want to see its NHS?

It is extremely important that the minister talked about the fact that article 31 of the UNCRC mentions that every child has the right to play. That is the right way to start any contribution to the debate. The minister talked about the fact that play is also about learning, in that it can lead to young people being able to learn about independent choice, collaboration and co-operation, and risk-benefit assessment—that is a horrible term, to which I will return. Play also teaches young people about the consequences of actions. Those are surely all skills for life but, above all, as the minister said, play is fun. Many members have reminisced; I want to do a bit of reminiscing, too. I also want to point out the intergenerational fun that we have when we play with children. James Dornan reminisced about his childhood, which sounded very like mine—it involved getting up in the morning, going out and not coming back until someone came and got you when it got dark. Looking back at the play experience that my son—who is now 23—had when he was young, I think that the dirtier he was when he came home, the happier he was. I am now in the same position with the dog. Ken Macintosh mentioned his family’s Wendy house. Being politically correct, in my house—as we had a little boy—we had a play house. I remember how he used that play house with his granny. He used to play Mugdock cafe, which would involve him serving his granny the cup of tea that she had when they went up to Mugdock to play. It was wonderful to watch them interact in that way. Of course, he was also learning. He was learning about how to co-operate with someone and how to listen to what they wanted. A few months after I watched that one afternoon, the children of one of my friends, who was the same age as my son—about three—was diagnosed as a late speech developer. Lo and behold! The speech therapist told his mum to go out and buy a tea set, on the ground that that would get him speaking and co-operating. That is exactly what Kenneth had been doing with his granny without anyone telling him to do it. I have one last story that I must share with members, which relates to intergenerational play. My son had a much younger cousin, so he was able to keep playing for many years into his teenage years, not because he wanted to play, but because he was doing it for Cameron. He loved that. We had foam swords, which are not terribly politically correct—although at least they were not guns. I gave in on that one. We used to go out at night time in the summer and they would go wild with the foam swords and have great battles. One day, we took a friend’s mum. My goodness, did that unleash the inner scary mum! She just went wild with the foam swords. It was great to watch that truly intergenerational play. I can tell anecdotes and talk about my childhood and my son’s childhood but, as a librarian, what I am delighted about—members would expect me to say this—is the fact that we now have an evidence base that tells us how important play is in the development of young people. That is extremely important, because it allows us to play officially. That comes into the action plan at section 9.3. Being able to play because the evidence says that we can also allows people to invest in play, and we see that in section 9.12 of the action plan. Many members have talked about how important it is that we involve young people in development of their play areas. In my constituency, there is the Kirkintilloch skate park, which I think is now about 10 years old. It was young folk who said that they wanted it. They got together and got support from the adults. Ten years on, the skate park is still incredibly well used. My local nursery school takes the kids into my mum’s care home, which means that the old ladies get to watch the wee ones play; I am sure that it will not be long before they get down on the floor and start playing with the children. It is important that such initiatives are allowed officially and can be invested in. The Scottish planning policy says that planning authorities should protect valued open space, which is incredibly important. Many members have met my constituents and fellow villagers from Westerton, who are fighting hard to maintain the 100-year-old green space there. I wanted to pick up on two more subjects, but I do not think that I will have time to do so, so I will concentrate on health and safety. My husband has a background as a health and safety professional. Health and safety is not about being risk averse but about managing risk. It is not like the modern urban myths—Liz Smith raised one with Ken Macintosh—such as the idea that people cannot play conkers if they do not have safety specs on. That is not what health and safety is about; it is about wearing head protection and not having scrums when young children are playing rugby. That is managing risk, not being risk averse. I have a brilliant quote from the Health and Safety Executive. In 2008, it said: “We need to focus on finding ways for things to happen, not reasons to stop them—a sensible approach to managing risk focuses on practical action to tackle risks that cause real harm and suffering.” That approach is embedded at points 9.10 and 9.11 of the play strategy action plan. I talked about intergenerational play. Members should look at what Finland is doing with not outdoor gyms but outdoor play parks, where all go to play together. From the minute they are born, we play with our children and they learn from that play. I hope that today is another of the days when the hashtag #Scotlandbestplacetogrowup is trending across the world.

Following the minister’s remarks about the importance of local authorities, I bring to his attention just how many of my constituents come to me, as carers, never having been told that they are entitled to a carer’s assessment, never mind having had such an assessment. That is under the Labour-controlled East Dunbartonshire Council.

I add my thanks to Claire Baker for bringing this important debate to Parliament. There have been a lot of interesting facts and figures from previous speakers but I come to the debate very much from the heart rather than from the head. I adopted my cat Sophie from the SSPCA in 2002 and we were not allowed to take her home without accepting that she would be microchipped. Two years later, when I bought my Dalmatian, Rona, my first thought was that she must be microchipped. Claire Baker talked about the fact that in Scotland, more than 2,000 dogs a year are not reunited with their families. That must be heartbreaking, and one of the simplest things to do is to microchip your dog. I also remember the story of my next-door neighbour’s westie, Hamish. This is more than 10 years ago. Hamish was not chipped and he was stolen—he did not stray; he was stolen. About two weeks later, Hamish’s owner was driving along the road and saw Hamish. He got out of the car and challenged the people and they gave Hamish back to him. Hamish was not microchipped. I think that Hamish was returned because his owner was in a police uniform when he challenged the people who stole Hamish. Would it not have been so much easier if Hamish had had his chip? The owner could have got Hamish back without having to exert his authority in that way. I also remember when I was young, about eight years old, a lovely mongrel that we called Sally came into our street. Sally was adopted by the Windrams and she became part of our street and part of everybody’s family, but it must have been awful for her first owners, who never got Sally back again. We had the joy but they did not. Malcolm Chisholm referred to some of the claims about the alleged health risks of using microchips. In the whole time of the debate, I have had only one email from someone raising rather dubious health risk claims about microchipping dogs. Being the librarian that I am, I went away and did a bit of research and Malcolm Chisholm is absolutely correct. There is very good evidence to show that microchipping is useful for social purposes and is not harmful to the individual animal. Evidence and emotion mean that microchipping makes sense. I am really pleased that the Scottish Government announced earlier in the year that it is going to undertake a consultation. I understand that the cabinet secretary spoke to the British Veterinary Association on the matter in June. I urge all dog lovers to take part in the consultation when we get it. I say to people such as Christine Grahame, who have doubts about the proposal, to get involved in the consultation so that, at the end, the evidence shows clearly that this is something that we want to do for ourselves and for our animals.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what mechanisms are available to enforce nature conservation legislation regarding marine protected areas. (S4O-02355)

Does the cabinet secretary believe that the development of new technology will play an important role in helping Marine Scotland and enforcement officers to ensure that there are continuously effective compliance and enforcement arrangements?

I begin with a declaration of interests: I am a life member of Historic Scotland. Perhaps the fact that my life membership number is 555 reveals that the historic environment has been a passion for a long time in my life. I was one of the organisation’s very early members. My passion is the Scottish tower house. I could spend the rest of the debate enthusing members with that passion, but I will not. A couple of things have occurred to me as I have listened to the debate. My greatest tally was visiting five castles in Speyside in one day—my husband survived. James Dornan mentioned fireplaces. At one time, I got obsessed with fireplaces in castles; I am not terribly sure why—in fact, I am. As well as being a depiction of the splendour of the artistry of the people who made them, they reveal a lot about the social history of the dwelling. They are extremely important. As a history graduate, such things were important to me.

That was my husband’s reward. My passion for this area goes way back. I found it interesting to listen to Liz Smith. From yesterday’s coverage of the 500th anniversary of the battle of Flodden, there seems to be a bit of revisionism going on in relation to James IV and the idea that that was the end of Scotland as a cultural entity until the union. This is not meant to be a political point. The great hall that James IV had built at Stirling castle is stunning. He was making sure that Europe knew that we were not a tiny little dark nation on the edge of the European continent. Then James V built the palace within Stirling castle, which has just been all done up—it is beautiful. That is another example of the fact that Scotland was never a tiny little country on the edge of nowhere. I am sorry—that was the subject of my final-year essay. I feel that I have done my wee bit for the historic environment in Parliament through my role as convener of the National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill Committee. I did my wee bit to ensure that the governance of one area of the historic environment would continue effectively. Aside from my own passion, my constituency—which is often seen as just a suburb of Glasgow—has a fantastically rich tapestry of listed and scheduled ancient monuments and buildings, from iron age forts all the way up to arts and crafts villas. Clare Adamson mentioned the Antonine wall, which is a thread through my constituency. Since 2008, it has been a United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization world heritage site. I remember the discovery of the Roman baths in Bearsden at a building site for flats. I was doing Latin at school, and we were all marched down to that building site to see history coming alive and rising up out of the mud before our eyes. I live in Westerton garden suburb, which is having its centenary this year as Scotland’s first garden suburb. I hope that all members will visit our stand in Parliament in the first week in October so that they can learn more about my village and what we have been doing for the past year to celebrate its centenary. Huntershill house in Bishopbriggs in my constituency was the home of the father of Scottish democracy, Thomas Muir. The 250th anniversary of his birth will be in 2015. Friends of Thomas Muir has been working hard to ensure that we recognise his place in history and in the democratic tradition. Turning to the draft strategy—it cannot all be about me and my constituency—I want to pick out a couple of points, the first of which is the fact that the town centre review will now understand the importance of the historic environment. I know that that will be very welcome to my constituents who are working hard on the preservation of at least the facade of Kirkintilloch town hall. I was really pleased to hear mention of joint working in the strategy. I mentioned being the convener of the National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill Committee. It is incredibly important across the historic landscape that we all work together. I was particularly pleased when the cabinet secretary talked about the use of volunteers and the voluntary sector for the strategy. Those of us with a passion want to do what we can and be part of the preservation of our historic environment. I think that the proposed merger of Historic Scotland and the RCAHMS is sensible. That is from a historian’s point of view, looking at how we record and preserve the past and present it to the future. I do not really see any worries in the charitable status. The National Library of Scotland, for example, is a registered charity, so I do not see why the proposed new body cannot be a charity. I put down in my notes “Name?”, because I like the name Historic Scotland. I am sure that the name aspect will be part of the debate, but I think that that name sums up what the body is all about. I have loved hearing some of the words that members have used in the debate, and those that are used in the strategy. We have talked about the richness of our heritage and the inspirational buildings and how they help the wellbeing of individuals and societies. We have talked about their value—their economic value and their worth in their own right. We have talked about conserving. However, above all, we have talked about celebrating Scotland’s historic environment. That is something well worth doing and something that I have done for many years.

I add my thanks and congratulations to Graeme Dey on securing this important debate for Parliament. I also thank him because it means that we get to talk up our constituencies and the work that they are doing. As Ken Macintosh said, fair trade is a grass-roots movement, so it is appropriate for us to take such an opportunity. I also give Graeme Dey and other members my apologies; I have to leave as soon as I have made my speech. In Strathkelvin and Bearsden, my constituency, fair trade has a long history. The Balmore Coach House, which has been on the go for more than 20 years, has now raised more than £1 million by selling fair trade goods. East Dunbartonshire achieved Fairtrade zone status a few years ago, and that status was renewed this year. Lenzie is now a Fairtrade town, having achieved that status this year, and on 3 October we will celebrate that achievement with a savour the flavour evening with the Co-op. That reminds me that Bearsden and Milngavie have a very strong and hard-working team who are working towards that status. I am reminded because one of the first events in Bearsden and Milngavie was a savour the flavour event and I ended up as the chef’s assistant for the evening. Nobody got food poisoning, everything was made with fair trade food from Sainsbury’s and I was given an apron in appreciation, which I definitely appreciated. I was interested to hear Graeme Dey talking about a fashion show, because I thought that Bearsden and Milngavie were the first to do a fair trade fashion show, but we were not; we were the second. This June, East Dunbartonshire cycle co-op, which has a festival every year in Bishopbriggs, decided to make it a Fairtrade cycle festival. It managed to do that and get the accreditation for it, so well done to it. I will pick up on two other issues. One is about procurement and follows on from what Ken Macintosh said. I have a constituent who is working really hard on fair trade school uniforms. She has got into quite a few local schools where people buy the sweatshirts and so on through the parent teacher associations. However, like Ken Macintosh, she sees the procurement bill as her way to get the whole issue debated in Parliament and perhaps to get people to realise that there are reasons other than pennies and pounds to consider when deciding where to purchase from; there is a moral reason, too. We have another groundbreaking area in East Dunbartonshire: we have the first suite of fair trade nurseries. That is a useful point to finish on because if we can talk to two and three-year-olds in a way that they understand and ensure that their snacks are made with fairly traded products, then we ensure that young folk can understand the message, which is where it all starts, is it not? Ken Macintosh talked about young kids in Pakistan making footballs. When children are two or three years old, they can begin to understand that if it is presented to them in their kind of language. Fair trade makes us as individuals feel good but, more important, it is about what we as a country can do to support parts of the world that do not have the riches that we have.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what assessment it has made of the latest employment figures. (S4O-02329)

I am sure that all members across the chamber welcome the good employment figures. However, as the cabinet secretary has said and as I am sure he agrees, we could do even better if we had the full economic powers that only independence can bring us.

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether there is a mechanism for insisting that local authorities follow Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People’s guidance on consulting children and young people on school closures and other significant changes. (S4O-02292)

I thank the minister for that answer. Can I draw his attention to an aspect of yet another saga of East Dunbartonshire Council’s informal consultation on school closures? The council is sending local authority officers into classes of children as young as primary 1, which directly contradicts the advice on page 18 of the commissioner’s guidance, which states that “a genuinely independent person is essential for the process to be respected by participants, parents/carers and other relevant adults.” I add that I have recently found out that officers are handing out forms to pupils with a pre-ticked box against the statement, “I agree with this”.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what mechanisms are available to the Forestry Commission Scotland for the support of social enterprises. (S4O-02213)

I thank the minister for his answer; it was really interesting. Will he give me more detailed information, perhaps in writing, so that I can help my constituents in Lennoxtown, led by the redoubtable Susan Murray, who are looking to develop Lennox forest, in particular to run an aparthotel as a social enterprise to go along with the cycling development that the group is considering?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what impact a reduction in winter fuel payments would have on older people in Scotland. (S4T-00382)

In light of that response, does the minister agree that proposals to remove winter fuel payments are the latest in a series of cuts to the fuel poverty budget that started under Labour and which have continued under the present coalition?

I am put in mind of one of my predecessors in my constituency—my mentor Margaret Ewing—who first campaigned for a winter fuel allowance more than 30 years ago. Will the minister join me in seeking to preserve my predecessor’s legacy?

I will concentrate on the level 3 programmes for pain management and specifically the requirement for a residential facility. First, however, I pay tribute to Jackson Carlaw and Hanzala Malik for their speeches. I suffer from chronic pain, and both members summed up the importance of the debate. I had a dreadful episode with my sciatica at the weekend—I was not sure whether I wanted to murder other people or myself. Pain is an important and serious issue. We heard about the residential centre in Bath, which is attended by about 27 patients from Scotland at a cost of about £251,000 per annum. I was delighted when, following the GRIPS report in 2003, we set up a short-life working group, which met for the first time on 1 March this year. I understand that it met again this morning to discuss producing an options paper by mid-June in relation to the need for a residential pain management service in Scotland. I was delighted when the cabinet secretary said that he will go out to consultation on three models of level 3 pain management. Looking at the Labour amendment, I think that if a short-life working group is set up in March and the cabinet secretary tells us today that he wants the results by September, six months later, that shows a degree of urgency.

I am sorry, but I am very short of time and I want to concentrate on a suggestion that I want to make to the cabinet secretary. First, though, what is a level 3 programme? Level 3 programmes are about therapeutic care for those with pain and about teaching us pain management skills. It is delivered by interdisciplinary teams. What we are hoping to achieve through that is not just the reduction of pain but the reduction of the impact of that pain. At the end of it, we want each individual who suffers from chronic pain to be able to live the fullest life they can. At this point, I would like to make an entirely personal contribution to the consultation. I believe that we have a residential facility in Scotland that could become the residential pain management centre. I quote: “This purpose-built, fifteen bed hospital ... is a place of calm, light and healing. A superb project incorporating creativity within tight controls and a fine example for future healthcare buildings to emulate.” That is the description in Scottish Enterprise’s dynamic place awards in 2002 of the Glasgow homoeopathic hospital, which had opened fairly recently, in 1999. As many will know, nowadays the Glasgow homoeopathic hospital is the NHS centre for integrative care. The hospital building, with its 15 beds, is capable of treating 10,000 out-patients and 500 in-patients a year. I worked there as the librarian from 2004 to 2008, so I have an interest. However, I also have an understanding of the services that are delivered in that NHS building. In the years that I was there, the hospital set up the chronic fatigue syndrome/ME project and service delivery. After I left, it moved on to the wellness programme. Those are holistic, multidisciplinary, allopathic and complementary services. The hospital treats people with long-term chronic conditions. In fact, many of the patients at the hospital at the moment were considered untreatable and incurable. The hospital has done so well in its work over the years that its physio, Stephanie Wilson, has won awards for the delivery of her programmes for ME and wellness. I should say that Stephanie Wilson is a close friend of mine, but she well deserves the accolade that she received a few years ago. We have the building, the staff, the reputation and the beds. I hope that the cabinet secretary will consider that building as part of his consultation on looking for a centre for pain management in Scotland.

I, too, thank Margaret Mitchell for bringing the debate to the Parliament. In following Siobhan McMahon, I remember her members’ business debate in November 2011, and I remember speaking about a charity that is very close to my heart, which I will speak about again today. That charity, Lucky2BHere, was established in Skye in 2007 by a friend of mine, Ross Cowie, when he had just suffered an almost fatal cardiac arrest. As a result of its fundraising, nearly 30 defibrillators have been put in since 2007, especially in the Highlands and Islands but also in the central belt. An important point is that Lucky2BHere not only raises funds and puts defibrillators in public spaces; it always gives training, too. When a community says that it wants a defibrillator, it joins up with heartstart and everybody is trained to use a defibrillator. Siobhan McMahon talked about the British Heart Foundation’s work on ELS in schools. I loved her description of “a generation of life-savers”. That is very fitting, and it is what we should be working towards. I was delighted last year at the Scottish National Party conference when not only Alex Neil, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, but Alex Salmond, the First Minister, signed the British Heart Foundation’s petition on ELS in schools. We have a Government that is committed to doing this and I am sure that it will happen. To Margaret Mitchell, I say that Lucky2BHere’s 30-odd defibrillators are all mapped on its website. When you click on it, you get the address and a picture of the building in which the defibrillator is located. If you are panicking, at least you can see the picture of where you have to run towards. This has been a short contribution to a really good and important debate. I always like to highlight the work that Ross Cowie and Lucky2BHere do on this issue.

It is only a short month since we debated the preliminary stage of the bill in Parliament. At that time, as committee convener, I thanked a number of groups and I reiterate my thanks at the final stage of the bill. I thank my fellow committee members and the witnesses who gave written and oral evidence. I especially thank the clerks and the Scottish Parliament information centre staff, who supported us throughout the short bill procedure. At that preliminary stage debate on 23 April, I rehearsed the background to and the necessity for the bill. Members will recall that it was the 2008 financial crisis within the National Trust for Scotland that precipitated a lot of the problems that the bill seeks to solve. In that financial crisis, it was discovered that a lot of the problems were rooted in poor governance procedures within the National Trust. That led to the setting up of the Reid review under our former Presiding Officer, Sir George Reid. His report, which was entitled “Fit for Purpose”, was published in 2010. In that review, Sir George was clear that there was a need to restructure and to refocus the trust’s governance procedures. Much of that has taken place in the three short years since the report was published but the bill completes legislatively the Reid report recommendations from 2010. It is important to add that there is still on-going work on restructuring and refocusing outwith the legislative process because the NTS has engaged in the review with a great deal of enthusiasm and commitment. It is still looking at an audit of all its assets. It seems strange that an organisation that owns or is the custodian of so much within Scotland still needs to know exactly what its assets are. One important item that I look forward to seeing come to fruition is the introduction of local assemblies. That is important when we realise that the NTS is a membership organisation that has 310,000 members. To say that it can work with all those members at an annual meeting is perhaps a little far-fetched. The introduction of local assemblies will bring that membership much more into the whole structure and function of the National Trust for Scotland. I will spend a little time talking about the consultation review process, because it is an exemplar. Sir George Reid held 32 presentations, and there were 140 meetings with small groups. There were 9,061 responses to the membership questionnaire, a website forum, email and of course old-fashioned letters. It is testament to that consultation process that the bill has come to Parliament with no objections at any stage, and with no amendments introduced either at the consideration stage or at the final stage today. The same can be said of the National Trust for Scotland’s 2010 annual general meeting, when the membership voted 424 to 2 to accept the recommendations of Sir George Reid’s “Fit for Purpose” report. I conclude this short debate by saying that the bill is small but perfect, as the process that it has been through has shown. In finishing, Presiding Officer—

I move, That the Parliament agrees that The National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill be passed.

Funding for science is international. The figures that you give are all very well, but are you saying that, post independence, we will lose all the funding that we get from bodies such as the European Union and American companies?

As a historian entering a science debate, I know that there is definitely an argument in the history community that it was the fact that we had the union that allowed the brightest brains in Scotland to flourish, because the union took away our ability to have our own politics, so we had to drive our intellect into science and technology.

Funding for science is international. The figures that you give are all very well, but are you saying that, post independence, we will lose all the funding that we get from bodies such as the European Union and American companies?

As a historian entering a science debate, I know that there is definitely an argument in the history community that it was the fact that we had the union that allowed the brightest brains in Scotland to flourish, because the union took away our ability to have our own politics, so we had to drive our intellect into science and technology.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what procedures are in place for funeral directors to attain and retain their accreditation. (S4O-02133)

That might not help me with my next question, which is whether there are plans for an information or training campaign for funeral directors before the full implementation of the Certification of Death (Scotland) Act 2011. That follows confusion that has caused constituents of mine a great deal of anguish at a difficult time.

Much of the debate is predicated on the future demographics in Scotland. We have heard the facts and figures on that, but it is important that, in looking at the demographics, we also look at the changes that have happened in healthcare in the past 20 years and those that will certainly come in future. For example, medical and technological advances allow much more day surgery and more ambulatory care and diagnostic centres. There are also advances in the preventative health agenda, through measures such as minimum unit pricing, tobacco control and falls prevention work. Legislating on such matters now will ensure that we have a healthier population in future. We must also consider the public’s changing expectations of healthcare. From many surveys and much research work in the past 10 years or so, we know that people, particularly those in the elderly population, increasingly expect that their healthcare will be delivered to them at home or in a homely setting, apart from in acute episodes.

I ask Ms Baillie please not to try to intervene, as she has done with everybody. It was her party that chose to have a very short debate on the issue. I am 90 seconds into a four-minute speech. It would have been better to have had a longer debate to produce more facts and figures but, to have a rational debate, we cannot focus entirely on bed counting or on the numbers of nurses on wards. The debate is about what the Scottish Government is doing on the redesign of the health service. It is about forward planning for the health service and the 21st century delivery of healthcare. The Scottish Government is already doing that. We have protected funding for the NHS and we are increasingly looking at moving from capital to revenue spending, because that is where we need the services. We are looking at the integration of health and social care, so that we ensure that the elderly population in particular have all their care needs met in one package. I have talked about the preventative health agenda. I want to introduce some evidence into the debate, so I will talk briefly about North Lanarkshire’s hospital at home project, through which 80 per cent of elderly people stayed at home rather than being admitted to hospital. The NHS Forth Valley reablement service resulted in a 20 per cent reduction in care needs and a 35 per cent reduction in falls. Crucially, 58 fewer long-term care beds were needed. Ms Baillie’s talk about the numbers of beds must be viewed against that background. We need to consider numbers in the round, not numbers in the raw.

In 2002, research by Foote and Stanners found that, in 20 to 30 per cent of cases in which over-75s were admitted on an acute occasion, the admission was inappropriate. I think that Mark McDonald referred to that. Not only were the admissions inappropriate, they resulted in longer stays in hospital. What I do not understand is this. Jackie Baillie obviously gets what we are talking about—the change in the kind of beds we need. She made that point herself in her intervention on the closure of Lennox Castle hospital, although she forgot to mention that her party shut Stobhill hospital. Sarah Boyack also got it when she talked about the need to build care homes. We need beds in care homes—that is the future. I will finish by saying that the cabinet secretary has got it right. We need the health professionals and the delivery, but it will be in different places and with a different emphasis.

I take great delight in taking part in the debate and in the comments that have been made about the voluntary sector. My speech will be about my experiences as a volunteer and working in the voluntary sector. It must be a good 13 or 14 years ago that I was one of the volunteer founders and youth workers at Westerton junior youth club. Before that, I was the volunteer librarian at the Marie Curie Huntershill hospice in Springburn. After my son went to school, I was fortunate that the voluntary sector came to me and asked me to come and work for it. I worked in East Dunbartonshire Council for Voluntary Service, which is now East Dunbartonshire Voluntary Action as a result of the merger of Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire and East Dunbartonshire Council for Voluntary Service. I also worked in Carers Link in Milngavie. A lot of the comments that I will make today come out of that work, instead of my usual facts, figures and evidence. It is interesting that Gavin Brown talked about the fact that there is no great evidence base for how we fund the voluntary sector, and I support the call for us to go out and get that evidence. Funding is important to the voluntary sector—the SCVO 2012 sector survey showed that. Funding, especially three-year funding, was recognised at paragraphs 7 and 8 of the 2009 joint statement on the relationship at local level between Government and the third sector. Each of those publications talks about something other than funding that my experience also supports, which is the third sector and the voluntary sector being recognised for what they are—skilled providers of services and support to the most vulnerable in our communities, as my colleague Gil Paterson said. I was pleased to hear the cabinet secretary talk about another aspect that is incredibly important. The third sector and voluntary organisations are recognised as equal partners in the delivery of services, the development of policy and their role of advocating for the vulnerable communities that they support and serve. I was pleased to hear the cabinet secretary say that today. When I was on holiday in Skye last year, the Cabinet was there and, at the meeting in Portree, the citizens advice bureau asked the cabinet secretary a question from the floor. People left that meeting having heard the cabinet secretary say how much he values and supports the third sector and how he sees third sector organisations as partners in delivery. I was pleased to hear that again today and I know that the third sector recognises that. I am also pleased to see that such recognition is coming through in legislation, such as the proposed procurement reform bill. I was in the chamber for the debate on that and it was interesting to hear members and the cabinet secretary talking about it. It is important that that is recognised in the Scottish Government’s guidance note on community benefits in public procurement. I will not quote it, but I guide members to it to see how important it is. I am pleased that the Government recognises and understands the importance of the third sector. It is incredibly important that, after today’s debate, local authorities and other public agencies do exactly the same thing.

I was pleased that the minister mentioned housing—which I understand falls under the fourth principle—more than once. I want to talk about a rather different form of housing from the one that the minister has alluded to. I understand that Scottish Canals is planning to have houseboats at Kirkintilloch marina in my constituency. Has any consideration been given to whether those boats will meet the affordable housing needs criteria?

As convener of the National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill Committee, I thank, among others, my fellow committee members, those who took the time to give us evidence—both in writing and as witnesses—and, especially, the clerks and the Scottish Parliament information centre for all the support that they gave us. I will use my tight six minutes to talk about the background to why this private bill is before the Parliament and about its broad principles. The other members of the committee will talk about specific aspects of the bill. In its preliminary stage report, the committee clearly stated that it was satisfied that a private bill was necessary, as it must do under rules 9A.8.1 and 9A.8.3 of standing orders. On why this private bill is before the Parliament, I am sure that many members remember the headlines back in 2008 when the National Trust for Scotland was at a crisis point and standing at a crossroads. We were looking at closures of some of our best-loved properties and even at sales of some of them. At the same time, the Office of the Scottish Charities Regulator criticised the governance of the National Trust for Scotland in “Who’s In Charge: Control and Independence in Scottish Charities”. That all led to a major strategic review of the National Trust for Scotland in 2009 and 2010, led by our former Presiding Officer, Sir George Reid. In his report, entitled “Fit for Purpose: Report of the Strategic Review of the National Trust for Scotland”, Sir George pulled absolutely no punches about the state in which the National Trust for Scotland found itself. He talked about the “byzantine” governance structure: a structure that led to there being no strategic direction for the trust and, sometimes—even worse—an inability to tackle problems as they arose. Sir George’s report, which covered a two-year period, followed, to use his words, “a massive programme of engagement, participation and consultation”.—[Official Report, National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill Committee, 12 March 2013; c 15.] I was impressed to see that, so well conducted and inclusive was that consultation that, at the National Trust for Scotland’s 2010 annual general meeting, the reforms proposed in the report were endorsed by a vote of 424 to two members of the trust. Therefore, when we began to consider the bill, we were reassured that it had the support of the people who really knew what it was about. Since the 2010 AGM, many of the reforms have been implemented and there have been a good many benefits to the National Trust for Scotland. It now has a single governance structure with a board of trustees of 15 members. Previously, the two boards and two methods of governance had, I think, a total of 87 members. Members of the Parliament can understand why the trust was so unwieldy and unable to make strategic decisions. The reforms that have been implemented since then have received OSCR’s approval. Perhaps most significantly for members of the public who, like me, are passionate supporters of the National Trust for Scotland, it now has reserves of £21 million. I therefore hope that we will not look again at the dreadful situation in 2008, when the question was whether we would have to sell things off to manage. At the preliminary stage, we heard in evidence from Sir George Reid that the bill is “the final milestone in the process of reform and revitalisation of the National Trust for Scotland”. The current chair of the board of trustees, Sir Kenneth Calman, talked about its being “vital” as “the last part of the jigsaw”.—[Official Report, National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill Committee, 12 March 2013; c 14, 23.] Before I finish, I have to mention the National Trust for Scotland Order 1935, which set up the National Trust for Scotland. The trust’s actual name in legislation is the “National Trust for Scotland for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty”. I have talked about the National Trust for Scotland throughout and am sure that most of us who visit its properties call it exactly that. The bill ensures that the shortform that we all use will be legally watertight and we will not have to always talk about the great big long title in the 1935 order. My committee and I are pleased to have played our small part for a much-valued national institution. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc.) Bill and agrees that it should proceed as a private bill.

9. I draw members’ attention to my entry in the register of members’ interests as chair of the Scottish Library and Information Council. To ask the Scottish Government what its plans are for book week Scotland 2013, following the successful launch of book week Scotland in 2012. (S4O-01973)

I thank the cabinet secretary for telling us that the plans are in development. The Scottish Library and Information Council looks forward to working in partnership to ensure that 2013 is as successful as 2012.

15. To ask the Scottish Government when the Scotland route of the Queen’s baton relay will be announced. (S4O-01939)

Will local people be prioritised to carry the baton in their home town? Will there be any costs to the participants? My questions arise from constituents’ experiences as Olympic torch bearers, which left some of them out of pocket and others many miles from home. They still enjoyed the experience but I hope that we can learn from it.

It is traditional to thank and congratulate the member who brought the subject of a members’ business debate to the chamber. In so congratulating Jackie Baillie, I would like to add a few personal thanks of my own. I thank the Bearsden resource centre of Alzheimer Scotland. On a personal level, the staff there have supported me in my journey as a carer, and the carers group that they hold on a Tuesday evening is incredibly important to my constituents. I also thank Tommy Whitelaw, whose journey has very much reflected mine. I will try hard not to cry at this point, because the first two times I met Tommy he moved me to tears. When he came to Parliament in 2011 to present to Nicola Sturgeon—then the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy—the letters that he had collected on his journey, I ended up crying in a toilet because I had become quite upset. On our second meeting, a few weeks later, when Tommy came along to talk to the annual general meeting of Carers Link East Dunbartonshire, I once again ended up crying in a toilet, because it is incredibly difficult, emotionally, to read those letters and hear about the difficult journey that people who care for people with dementia go on. I think that my getting upset at the time had to do with the fact that, at that point, I was at a difficult place in my personal journey as a carer, which is no longer the case. My third meeting with Tommy was much more joyous. It was in Bellahouston park, on a sponsored walk that had been organised by Kris Rodden who works for the Bearsden resource centre of Alzheimer Scotland. I went along with my Dalmatian, Rhona, and we had a nice day out. Those thanks from me are personal. However, as the MSP for Strathkelvin and Bearsden, I say that looking after and supporting people who care for people with dementia is incredibly important. It is estimated that, by 2035, the number of people aged 75 and above in Bearsden will have risen by 88 per cent, from 9,000 today to more than 17,000. Given that more than 6 per cent of people aged over 75, and 20 per cent of those in their late 80s, are likely to have dementia, it is clear that a lot of people in my constituency will be caring for a lot of people with dementia. That support for carers is absolutely vital. Someone who cares for someone with dementia is often that person’s voice, as they are the one who can delve inside and remember what the person with dementia would want to happen, even though they cannot say what it is. Carers Link supported me as a carer and also had the courage to employ me as a peer support worker for nine months. Carers Link supports 932 carers. In recent years, it has realised that 44 per cent of those carers look after someone with dementia. Already, in my constituency, we can see the numbers rising. I want to highlight Carers Link’s day cafe, where people who are caring for folk with dementia can come together every month to get support from each other and learn from each other’s journeys. I will conclude by making a suggestion that I have made before during debates on dementia carers. We have talked about creating a card that young carers can use, because it is often difficult for a young carer to be recognised as such. Once again, I suggest that we have a dementia carers card because, no matter how many times I turned up in the accident and emergency ward, waving my power of attorney, I was not always recognised as the voice of the person who could not answer for themselves, especially in an accident and emergency situation. A wee card that says “I am caring for this person with dementia” would perhaps give us a bit more access to health professionals.

I will be mindful of our standing orders and confine my speech to the content of the motion. In 2003, along with 100,000 people in Glasgow, a million people in London and tens of millions of people in 60 countries across the planet, I marched and shouted, “Not in my name,” to an illegal war predicated on lies. No matter what Labour Party members want to say today, no revision of history can say that the war was a humanitarian one, because it was an illegal war predicated on lies. Why did I march in February 2003 and why was I kettled in Sauchiehall Street in March 2003? Unlike Kevin Stewart and Elaine Murray, I am a pacifist. I know that violence is never the answer. In this Parliament, we have zero tolerance to domestic violence, sexual violence and bullying. Very few members would not agree with that statement of zero tolerance. Therefore, I say that war is never the solution. War dehumanises people. We have heard the statistics on the loss of life on and around the battlefield in Iraq in the past 10 years. More than 5,000 servicemen and women and perhaps 120,000 Iraqi civilians have been killed. War dehumanises and leads to torture. We have heard of the horrors in Abu Ghraib and we are hearing of other horrors through the Al-Sweady inquiry. What does war do to women and children? It is not just bombs and bullets that affect women and children during a war, as they have the unique and hideous extras to contend with of rape, sex trafficking and prostitution. That is what has happened in the 10 years since the beginning of the war in Iraq. Another effect on women is that, in war situations, primary healthcare is replaced by casualty and trauma units, which leads to a rise in infant mortality. In war zones, infant mortality doubles and there is a rise in epidemics. We forget to immunise people, because we do not have time for public health. In war zones, tuberculosis quadruples. Professor Patricia Hynes, formerly of Boston University, has said: “a full accounting of the harm of war to civilian women is needed in the debate over whether war is justified.” We have heard the statistics. The average figure for the number of Iraqi civilians killed as a result of the war is perhaps 150,000. However, the World Health Organization reckons that, in the past 10 years, 690,000 Iraqis have died because, as a result of the war, there has been no healthcare that is aimed at the civilian population.

No, I do not think that it is appropriate to give way so that the Tory party can revise its stance and morality in this debate. Last weekend, the Sunday Herald had a two-page spread headlined, “The courage of ‘cowards’”. The article was about the call for recognition, with medals, of world war one conscientious objectors. I say very clearly that pacifists are not cowards. Pacifists are defenders of human rights and that is what today’s debate in the Parliament is talking about. Ten years on from an illegal war in Iraq, we are still defending the human rights of people in Iraq. That statement would be supported by the Organization of Women’s Freedom in Iraq, which says that, 10 years on from the end of Saddam Hussein’s dictatorship, the life of a woman is worse than it was. I close my contribution to the debate by saying, again, that the war was not in my name. I also say, proudly, that the debate has a constitutional angle. After 2014, we can be sure, confident and certain that an illegal war will never happen in Scotland’s name.

I add my thanks and congratulations to Mark McDonald on securing the debate. I will pick up on two aspects of the “Count us in” report: partnership working and challenging negative attitudes. I will marry those aspects to the national autism strategy, which the Government produced 18 months ago. My remarks will be based on the Asperger’s end of the spectrum, because I know quite a lot about that. The parliamentary reception that Mark McDonald hosted and to which he referred was an affirming event to attend. At the reception, I met young men with Asperger’s. They were there, whereas most of the young men in their 20s with Asperger’s whom I know would find it difficult to get out and come to an intimidating place such as that reception. It was really interesting to meet those young folk and hear about the support that the National Autistic Society is giving them. A couple of the young men were constituents of mine. Their parents were also at the reception, and I heard from the parents about the support that the society had given the young men to take them through school and through the transition to being young men in their 20s who, as a group, go to the pictures and can come to the Parliament on the train, for instance. It is important to mention that, because folk do not understand what autism can do to people—people do not understand how isolating it can be for individuals who are on the autistic spectrum. In relation to partnership working, I am pleased that one goal of the third strand of the national autism strategy is to work towards meaningful partnerships, which are important. Meaningful partnerships are also important in challenging negative attitudes. “Count us in” makes a big thing of talking about ensuring that we challenge negative attitudes in the public. Mark McDonald referred to the autism meltdown in the supermarket. Any toddler meltdown is awful, but that one is worse than most. It is also important that we challenge negative attitudes among our services. Partnership working will perhaps lead towards that. I remember a way back when a two-year-old with undiagnosed Asperger’s and his parents were told by his nursery teachers that he was a rude boy. The labelling of any two-year-old as rude tells us something about the people who are working with that child but, when the child has autism, there is a fundamental issue. That should have been a trigger to make professionals say, “Wait a wee minute—what’s going on here? Should we investigate further?” Twenty years on from those nursery teachers, I am sure that things are a lot better. With partnership working, I am sure that we can challenge negative attitudes in professions as well. I see that goal number 4 of the second strand of the autism strategy is that people with autism should be “met with recognition and understanding”. That approach cannot come quickly enough. I do not want to bring too much dissent to the debate—actually, what I am saying is not dissent. Under the welfare changes, people who are on the autistic spectrum and who receive incapacity benefit and disability living allowance will face reassessments by a computer-driven system that is run by Atos Healthcare, and they will find it incredibly difficult to have their needs understood. I congratulate Mark McDonald and thank him again.

I thank Christina McKelvie for bringing the debate on this innovative and interesting initiative to Parliament. I join Christina McKelvie and Malcolm Chisholm in congratulating Dougie Baird and his fellow tweeters. I am not a prolific tweeter, but I look forward to, on Wednesday 27 March, becoming one of the audience of half a million who will take part in #Scotlandhour. It is appropriate that it is here in this very modern Parliament, which speaks for Scotland, that we are talking about something so innovative and interesting. Members will not be surprised to hear that I want to spend most of my speech talking about the fantastic tourism opportunities that we can tweet about in Strathkelvin and Bearsden. The theme for 27 March is Scotland’s playground, as Christina McKelvie mentioned, and I will be tweeting about Lennox forest in my constituency, where I regularly walk the dog. There are great trails in Lennox forest and beautiful views of the Campsies. In the future, we hope to have mountain biking in the forest through a social enterprise called Rebound. On Wednesday 29 May, the theme is walks. That is a hashtag for me, as walking is my favourite pastime. I have already mentioned the Campsie fells in my constituency. Next week, I will meet the Forestry Commission to hear about the work that it is thinking of doing at the back of Clachan of Campsie. I find it interesting that we are managing to get different agencies to work together on the theme of tourism. When I was young, the Forestry Commission was just about growing trees to cut them down and turn them into paper, but now when it does that core business, increasingly it also talks about trails, waymarks and so on, so that folk can be brought out to the countryside. Then there is Wednesday 26 June and #water. Kirkintilloch is the canal capital of Scotland, so we will definitely be tweeting then. Members will be interested to know that, tomorrow, Parliament will have the first marine tourism conference, which will last for the whole day. I think that around 100 delegates will attend. Therefore, we get the significance of marine tourism. I need a historic hashtag, and I ask the innovators behind the idea for that. As most folk know, I am a history graduate. In my constituency, we have the Antonine wall, which Christina McKelvie mentioned, which is a UNESCO world heritage site. I see that we do not have a historic night in the months up to December. As a history graduate who loves Scottish castles, I put in a plea to have #historicScotlandhour next year, please. Again, I thank Christina McKelvie for bringing a really interesting topic to us, and I thank those who are involved in #Scotlandhour. I look forward to being one of the half a million people who will take part in #Scotlandhour.

I will start by being positive and quoting from Professor Siddiqui, who spoke at today’s time for reflection. She said: “The most rewarding life is a life of giving.” That is relevant to today’s debate about demographics, and that is how we should look on the demographic challenge that is facing us, because our older relatives give us a great deal. I want to concentrate on housing for older people. The chamber will not be surprised that I want to deal with that issue, given that Strathkelvin and Bearsden has one of the fastest-rising elderly populations in Scotland. We have heard a lot of the projections for 2035 for the whole of Scotland. For East Dunbartonshire, the registrar general’s projection is that there will be a decline in all age groups—I somewhat doubt that—except the 65 to 74 and 75-plus groups. By 2035, it is expected that the 75-plus age group in East Dunbartonshire will rise from the current 9,000 to more than 17,000—an 88 per cent rise in 22 years of those living beyond the age of 75. My family are doing well at contributing to that at the moment. My mum, a resident of Strathkelvin and Bearsden, is 84, and my father-in-law—who also resided in the area—died just five weeks short of his 100th birthday last year. We should be incredibly proud of those figures and the fact that people are living longer and better lives. It also deserves forethought and planning. There is a lot of evidence of the importance of appropriate housing for older people to ensure that we live those long and better lives. Appropriate housing for older people not only maintains independence but prevents social isolation.

I thank Ms White for taking away a whole section of my speech. On the importance of appropriate housing for older people, we have heard about the need to lessen emergency hospital admissions, which currently cost us £1.4 billion a year. Appropriate housing could cut into that, especially when it comes to falls prevention. We know that the preventative agenda can save quite a sum.

I do not think that I could find anything to say in favour of the bedroom tax. Coming back to the debate, the Scottish Government’s strategy for older people’s housing, which Kenneth Gibson and the cabinet secretary mentioned, recognised the importance of appropriate housing for older people. The Government’s strategy also recognises that there needs to be choice in housing options. That was echoed at East Dunbartonshire Council’s engagement events on older people’s services, which were held throughout the council area in 2012. There we heard a call “to provide a range of housing options to meet the diverse needs of older people.” I refer to East Dunbartonshire Council—which Strathkelvin and Bearsden is within—because it is easier to use those figures. Across the council, there are 423 sheltered housing properties. Members will recall that in 22 years’ time there will be more than 17,000 people in East Dunbartonshire over the age of 75. It is fair to say that 423 sheltered housing properties will not satisfy the future housing needs of older people in my constituency. It is also fair to say that we cannot expect public finances to build all the sheltered housing that we will need in my constituency. We need to start paving the way now for one solution, which is owner-occupied sheltered housing. That is specific not only to my constituents but in at least three or four other constituencies throughout Scotland. Paragraph 7.2 of the Government’s housing strategy for older people, “Age, Home and Community”, states that 75 per cent of people aged 60 and over are home owners. There is a higher level of home ownership in that age group than in the general population. Most people in that age group want it to stay that way. As they progress through life, they want to remain as home owners, but they need homes that are fit and appropriate for them. Increasingly, many of them will want to buy their own sheltered housing. That would have a benefit at all levels of the housing ladder. The briefing from McCarthy and Stone tells us that, when an older person moves out of the family bungalow that they have lived in for many years, that frees up seven moves on the property ladder. I could give personal examples of that, but I will not stretch the Presiding Officer’s patience. We need to look at planning conditions with a view to ensuring that we build now to provide a choice of appropriate homes for our older people. I hope that what I am suggesting chimes with what my constituents want and is a no-cost option for the Government.

On widening access, does the minister agree with Robin Parker, NUS Scotland’s president? He said in September last year, following Johann Lamont’s cuts commission speech: “With tuition fees, we will have no hope of ever making university open to people from all backgrounds in Scotland”.

Will Education Scotland give any weight to the informal consultation in the East Dunbartonshire Council area, which has been deeply flawed and has caused a great deal of misery?

I thank Jim Eadie for bringing this incredibly important issue before Parliament today and for his eloquent and informative speech, which I am sure everyone enjoyed and got a lot of added information from. I congratulate Lothiansound on its 25th anniversary, but I hope that it will not mind my using this opportunity to highlight talking news provision within my constituency. Members will not be surprised to learn that the ability to provide access to information and recreational reading for those who are finding it difficult to read print is incredibly important to me as a librarian. I first came to know about talking news in a personal rather than professional capacity. When I was an MSP way back in 2000, Strathkelvin Talking Newspaper Association, which covers Kirkintilloch and Bishopbriggs, invited me along to read. As Jim Eadie said, reading for the talking news requires a very professional ability—I was not invited back, so I do not think that I was that professional. However, I was invited back in 2011 to celebrate the Strathkelvin Talking Newspaper Association’s 30th anniversary—I promise that I am not trying to do a one-up on Lothiansound. I thought that I was going along to present certificates for long service and to thank the volunteers for what they did. However, as well as doing that, I had to spend the next two hours serving tea at the coffee morning to make up the money so that the association had funds to continue. Of course, I did not mind doing that. We have a fantastic team at Strathkelvin Talking Newspaper Association. Our new chair, Sandra Ketteringham, is doing a fantastic job in taking over from the past chair, Alistair Aitchison. More than 100 recipients in Kirkintilloch and Bishopbriggs now receive the Kirkintilloch Herald since we went digital in 2011, so the association provides a much-valued and well-received service to my local community. Although the Strathkelvin Talking Newspaper Association is the group that I know best, in my constituency we also have BEAM, or Bearsden and Milngavie Talking Newspaper Association, which since 1990 has been recording the Milngavie and Bearsden Herald for more than 40 recipients in the area. Of course, I have spoken before in the chamber about Cue and Review Recording Service, which is based in Bishopbriggs in my constituency and which was established in 1982 by a young man when he was still at school. In 1991, it became a company and now more than 5,000 people across the United Kingdom receive audio tapes or digitised media for boom boxes, or whatever they are called. More than 5,000 visually impaired people across the UK benefit from that company in my constituency. I thank Jim Eadie and congratulate Lothiansound. I add my voice to those saying that it is an important resource and that we must all do as much as we can to support it.

I thank Dave Thompson for bringing this incredibly important topic to Parliament. As Dave Thompson said, the elderly are often the target of these ruthless criminals. Those in the chamber know that my constituency, Strathkelvin and Bearsden, encompasses one of the fastest-rising elderly populations in Scotland. At the moment, 22 per cent of the population are aged 60 years and over. It has been interesting to read what people have written about older folk and their vulnerability. In 2006, Help the Aged found that older people are three times more likely to become victims of property crime than of personal crime. We all worry about the old lady being mugged and having her handbag stolen, but property crime, which relates to cold calling, is more common. The Alzheimer’s Society found that 15 per cent of people with dementia had fallen victim to cold calling, scam mail and misselling. In November 2009, in my constituency, it was reported that police had received calls about cold calls every day throughout the month. One call was from an old person who had already lost £10,000 to cold callers, and it was only the intervention of the police that prevented that from reaching the sum of £17,000. In East Dunbartonshire, we are taking the issue seriously. Dave Thompson has extolled the virtues of trading standards officers, and I will do the same for the ones in my area, who have decided to trial an item called trueCall, which is a call-blocking system that can be added on to a telephone and which enables people only to receive calls from people from whom they want to receive calls. It is quite an expensive piece of equipment, but the trading standards officers have got some in so that older, more vulnerable people in my constituency can give them a try and see whether they help to keep them safer in their homes. In March, in Bishopbriggs, the adult protection committee is going to hold a whole-day conference on financial safeguarding. That shows how seriously the issue is being treated. Trading standards officers have entered a year-long partnership with the police across my constituency, stopping and checking traders to determine whether they are legitimate and using intelligence-led policing to take patrols past vulnerable households where they know that old folk have been targeted. I am terribly sorry, Presiding Officer, but I am not sure how much time I have left.

Thank you. This is not just about money or the attack on property. When this happens to older, vulnerable people, they lose their confidence and, often, their sense of independence. We must take it seriously. In my constituency, a dreadful incident was reported in the local papers last year. An elderly lady in her 70s was persuaded into a car. When the police stopped, the chap took off and abandoned the car with the elderly lady in it. Eight police cars and helicopters and dog units went after him. The old lady was left in the back of the car, terrified and upset, all because this man thought that he could take her to an ATM and get money out of her.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what transport options are available for care home patients who are discharged from accident and emergency departments at night and what guidance is given to national health service boards regarding this. (S4O-01732)

Is it worth developing guidelines and distributing them to care homes?

I and some other members of the Scottish Parliament have volunteered to be volunteers at the Commonwealth games. Will the cabinet secretary join me in encouraging employers to help folk to attend training for being volunteers for the wonderful opportunity in 2014?

The member talked earlier about reducing the stigma of mental ill-health. Does he think that it is unhelpful to continue to refer to antidepressants in the way that he has done, which leads to stigma? We would not have a campaign to reduce the use of insulin for people with diabetes.

I want to confine my remarks to mental health problems in older people. Dementia is very much the headline mental health problem for older people. The dementia strategy was welcome and was well received but, as Richard Simpson explained, more older people experience mental health problems such as depression and anxiety than suffer from dementia; I add that I am in no way playing down the worries about dementia. I have a huge number of statistics to provide, but given the time pressure I will go with the statistics and figures that Dr Simpson gave. Instead, I will turn to some of the remarks that Mary Scanlon made. If someone who is in their 80s needs antidepressants and has needed them for 60 years, they need them; it is not a laughing matter.

Given that we are very short of time and that I have already cut my speech, I hope that the minister will be able to respond to some of that, which was nonsense. I would like to talk about why more older people are suffering from mental ill health. There are a number of reasons for that. We talk about multiple morbidity. It is a fact that many of us are living longer, but we are living longer with ill health, which can often be mental ill health. Many people are living in loneliness and isolation, and many are living with financial worries. Mental ill health is a serious problem among the elderly. I cannot read out all the facts and figures that I wanted to read out, but I will mention one statistic, which relates to something that Dr Simpson said. The highest incidence of suicide is in men aged over 75. Indeed, the incidence of suicide is 11 per cent higher in that age group than it is in young men—and we know that we have a problem with suicide among young men. It is a startling fact, which we should bear in mind when we talk about mental ill health in older people and its consequences. I thank Dr Gillian McLean, a consultant in old age psychiatry, who gave a powerful and informed presentation to the cross-party group on mental health last week. What can we do about mental ill health in the elderly? One of the first things that we must consider is the diagnosis of ill health in the elderly. I refer to our success in diagnosing dementia in Scotland—we are world leading in that regard. We need to build on that success in diagnosing other forms of mental ill health in the elderly. We need to raise awareness of mental ill health as a problem in the elderly. As we grow old, there are many neurobiological changes, which can affect our mental health. We should not regard anxiety and depression as just a fact of old age—we must move beyond that attitude. People take multiple medications nowadays, so we must train our medical workforce and carers to be aware of that. A person needs to be trained to watch out for signs of an impact on their mother’s or father’s mental health each time their prescription is changed or added to. Many conditions mask mental ill health in the elderly. For example, urinary tract infections can cause confusion. However, when an older person is confused and forgetful, we must not always say that it must be a UTI or dementia; we should explore the person’s mental health and not regard the issue as just the effect of natural ageing and cognitive decline. We should also alleviate external factors that can lead to depression and anxiety in the elderly. I mentioned that loneliness and isolation can be a contributory factor. That is a good argument for continuing to offer concessionary bus fares to the elderly, which is one way of alleviating isolation. There are also genuine financial fears. Old folk have always worried about the pennies, but we need to realise the effect on people of the coming welfare reforms and cuts and Labour’s talk of a cuts commission and a something-for-nothing society. We need to move away from using such language. I would have liked to have had time to talk about social prescribing and the physical activity that SAMH promotes through its get active programme. I will finish with a message that emerged from the cross-party group’s meeting last week: clinical mental health services should be delivered not on the basis of someone’s age but on the basis of their mental health needs. I hope that the mental health strategy will enable us to live long and happy lives.

I echo the words of the convener and Graeme Pearson. The cross-party groups are an incredibly important part of the Parliament. They are part of the way that we engage with wider Scotland, transfer knowledge into and out of the Parliament and share knowledge with interest groups to inform MSPs in their parliamentary duties. As such, they are incredibly well respected throughout Scotland and they work very well. The Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee undertook a review of cross-party groups not because there was a problem with them, but because of the high standard of their work and the high respect in which they are held. We decided to review the code of conduct so that we could maintain that level of integrity. The convener has already alluded to some of the revisions to the code of conduct that the committee proposes. One of the important ones about which he talked is section 6.1.1 of the revised code, in which we set out the general purpose of cross-party groups. Some people would ask why that is necessary after all these years—we are in our fourth session of the Parliament—but it is necessary to write down what a cross-party group is for. Also, at section 6.1.2, we state what cross-party groups are not: they are not official committees of the Parliament. It is important that we lay that down so that people who come to the Parliament and engage with it through the cross-party group mechanism understand the informality of the process. In section 6.3.2, we talk about the need to outline the issues that the cross-party groups plan to consider over the next year. That is all about engagement with wider civic society and the rest of Scotland. We hope that, if the website says what the cross-party groups hope to consider over the next year, we will garner more information and knowledge through the cross-party groups and that there will be more participation in them. In the same vein, section 6.4.9 says that the minutes and agendas will all be on the Parliament’s website. It seems amazing that we have not done that before now. That is about engagement and transparency. Section 6.4.5 says that two MSPs must be at a cross-party group meeting to make it quorate. That is an important point. Cross-party groups are cross party. Therefore, cross-party representation must be present for them to be quorate and make decisions on various issues. I hope that the well-respected cross-party groups will continue to inform and engage outwith and in the Parliament for a long time.

I would like to concentrate on peatlands. The minister and Rob Gibson, the convener of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, have already spoken about the importance of peatlands and biodiversity. The convener gave us a lot of figures on peatlands, and members should expect me to add to them, because the importance of peatlands must be recognised. It is said that a third of the world’s entire terrestrial carbon deposits are held in peat bogs. Each peat bog can contain 5,000 tonnes of carbon per hectare, and each peat bog absorbs 0.7 tonnes of carbon per hectare per year. That shows just how important peatlands and peat bogs are in our fight against global climate change. Of course, Scotland has a globally unique and important position in that regard. Four per cent of Europe’s total peat carbon is in Scotland, along with 15 per cent of the world’s blanket peat bogs. Of the 175 peatland nations across the world, Scotland is 12th. Those figures and facts further demonstrate how important our peatlands are to the world, not only to Scotland. Of course, I cannot mention the subject without talking about my constituency—Strathkelvin and Bearsden. Across East Dunbartonshire, we have seven lowland peat bogs, and Strathkelvin and Bearsden has four of them. We have Lenzie Moss, which is a site of importance for nature conservation, or SINC—someone might have to help me on whether that is the correct term. In Bishopbriggs, we have Low Moss, High Moss and the smaller Cadder Yard. I spend a lot of time walking on the mosses. People start to get affectionately close to their local peat bog, and then they learn about the threats to it. In the past, the threats included the extraction of peat for commercial use in our gardens. I learned about that 20 years ago and, as a keen gardener, I gave up using peat and used alternatives. I have been involved in dealing with the encroachment of birch trees on Lenzie Moss. Our peatlands are not just natural and to be left to get on with it; we must manage them to ensure that they can do their job. Birch trees encroach incredibly rapidly on peat. I have been there and done that—I have tried hacking down birch trees and digging them up. That is a terrible job, but it must be done. The threat in my constituency increasingly involves building on our peatlands, about which we have heard from others. We must ask why we are doing that. The issue in my area involves building housing. Nigel Don gave an example from down in England, but my problem is that somebody wants to build houses on Lenzie Moss. When we look at such threats and problems, I always look at our priorities. What is the worth of the peatland or bog? Does it have worth for commercial profit or as part of global health? Increasingly, we should not look at commercial profit from such pieces of land, because they are worth more than they can ever make for housing. Their worth is in what they can deliver to help us to combat climate change across the planet. I recognise Scotland’s significant position in that regard. To realise the worth of peatlands as carbon sinks, I have a suggestion, which I must tell the minister comes from my love of the bogs rather than my knowledge of how any such proposal would work. I will take the opportunity to make the suggestion and see whether it is possible. Nigel Don gave an example of offsetting that sounded ludicrous, but I wonder about using our peat bogs for carbon offsetting and giving them a financial worth, so that they can become part of carbon trading. Those who wanted to preserve, say, Lenzie Moss could say to the folk who want to sell it for house building, “Okay—you’d make £X million from selling the land for housing, but you could use it to allow the house builder to offset carbon emissions, which could make money to preserve the bog.” I do not know whether that idea is possible, but it sounds like a win-win situation. I would like to make our aims happen, because peatlands and peat bogs are important for the planet and are good for local flood defences. They are a living natural archive of everything that has gone on for hundreds of thousands of years in our areas. I cannot finish without reminding us all that peat gives whisky its distinctive taste, and we do not want to lose that, do we?

In his discussions with the NFUS, has the subject been raised of research into Neospora caninum, from dog faeces, which causes neosporosis in cattle?

As I rise to follow many of my fellow members who used to be scientists, members must be wondering what a history graduate and a proud librarian can contribute to the debate. Of course, librarians of my generation are also called information scientists. The scientists and the researchers go out and find the evidence, and the big thing that we do is ensure that everybody can access the evidence so that we can have evidence-based public policy. I will, therefore, confine my remarks to how we access and use evidence—not necessarily just scientific evidence—in public policy. I hope that that is acceptable to the chamber. What does the phrase “evidence-based” mean to those of us who are not scientists? It is interesting to look at the website of EBSCO, which is a major scientific literature publisher in Europe. It talks about the following meaning of “evidence-based”: “Conclusions can be based on the best available evidence only if the evidence is consistently and systematically identified, evaluated and selected”— which is the role of the librarian. I was thinking of that when listening to Murdo Fraser’s comments about eugenics in the early part of the 20th century. In the context of the systematic evaluation and selection of evidence, eugenics may have had its day as a fad but it was never consensus science at any time in the scientific community. We should all understand that. Why is it so important that we have evidence-based public policy? I came across some fantastic quotations from Paul Nurse, who won the Nobel prize in medicine. Professor Nurse commented in the New Scientist in 2011—I am sorry, but members must expect that I reference almost every quote that I give; I am in librarian mode and we must have the evidence—on the run-up to last year’s American presidential election and the use of “science” by many of the candidates to justify some of the more ludicrous positions that they were taking. It is important to keep in mind what Professor Nurse was commenting on when we talk about using evidence to produce public policy. He said that “the scientific process is such a reliable generator of knowledge—with its respect for evidence, for scepticism, for consistency of approach, for the constant testing of ideas.” Is that not what we—as politicians—should always do? When I was researching for the debate, I was struck by the fact that the Health and Sport Committee’s work on minimum unit pricing last year could be taken in the round as an excellent example of the evidence base driving public policy. Originally, the Scottish National Party Government politicians looked at evidence in other areas of public health and saw that price affected the consumption and use of products. Having had a theory about minimum unit pricing, they then set out to see whether there was any evidence to back up that theory. They went to the University of Sheffield, which carried out theoretical modelling. We were fortunate that, at the same time, Professor Stockwell in Canada was finding empirical evidence based on more than 20 years’ worth of statistics to show that the Sheffield model and the Scottish Government’s theory worked. We therefore had scientific evidence-based policy for minimum unit pricing. When I was a member of the Health and Sport Committee, I was amazed when Labour refused to accept that evidence. Today it is again refusing to accept the evidence that is in front of its face. It is telling us—caught up in its constitutional hang-up and fears about independence—that we would not get good science in an independent Scotland. The evidence is not there to back that up; in fact, the evidence is to the contrary.

I will give way briefly, but I am about to list three levels of evidence, with the references.

I refer Mr Gray to paragraph 12 of the Royal Society of Edinburgh’s publication, to which many Labour members have referred, which provides exactly the evidence against the assertion that he makes. The funding that we have put in place in Scotland, and—it is not just about the money—the creative way in which we have got the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and the universities working together to prioritise research in our universities “critically prove to be a powerful attractor for international academic talent into Scotland ... a model worthy of notice.” We are attracting investment and scientists because we are good. It is vital to point out that the scientific academic community is a global community, so why can the Labour Party not get out of its narrow UK straitjacket? I have much more evidence, but I see that the Presiding Officer wants me to wind up, so I will finish with a last quotation from Professor Anne Glover—she has already been quoted today—from volume 59, number 5, page 33 of The Biologist. She was talking about politicians not interfering with the evidence.

Professor Glover says that she must ask that politicians be “transparent about why they have not used the evidence available.” That is the question that we must ask the Labour Party today.

Will the member give way?

First of all, I refer members to my register of interests as the chair of the Scottish Library and Information Council and as a member of the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals. So, yes—Mr Campbell was correct. I am going to talk about book week Scotland. I usually speak as a very high-tech librarian and talk about evidence, references and citations. However, I am also a book lover. As a result, I want to start with a quotation with which I agree utterly and which I was surprised the cabinet secretary did not use in her speech. In her press release for the launch of book week Scotland just a few weeks ago, she mentioned “reading’s unique capacity for” empowerment “enrichment, education, solace, pleasure and growth”. I am sure that everyone in the chamber agrees with that sentiment. There are so many aspects to our first book week Scotland. The cabinet secretary talked about it being an inclusive and diverse celebration. I would like to highlight just a few of the areas of book week Scotland, which started on Monday and finishes at the end of the week. Something I want to highlight as being most important is the league of extraordinary booklovers. I had lodged a motion through which I had hoped to get a members’ business debate on book week Scotland. I had hoped to fly into the chamber for my members’ business debate, replete with my league cape and mask, but of course that would not have been appropriate behaviour in a parliamentary chamber. However, I have them in my bag, so I will wear them later. The league of extraordinary booklovers is a group of people who have been recruited in the past year and who will be online all this week. If members need any ideas about what to read, or need to find out about a particular genre or author, they should email the league. Its fingers will fly over the keyboard and make sure that members get back suggestions to keep them busy this week. I thank my constituent from Milton of Campsie, Lindesay Burton, who is one of that extraordinary league. The cabinet secretary referred to the reading hour, which is at 11 o’clock on St Andrew’s day. I do not suggest that everybody stop working then, but it would be nice if we could all, from the long list of celebrations that the cabinet secretary read out, take a quiet moment at 11 o’clock on St Andrew’s day to read a piece of Scottish literature. Of course, in my members’ business debate, I could have said, “Right, everybody, get your books out and read,” and we could have had a quiet 45 minutes. I will also highlight something that I particularly like, which is the family pack of three books that will be presented to every primary 1 pupil in the country. It is so important that we start children reading at an early age and that we encourage their parents and carers to read with them and to introduce a love of literature. I have a constituency connection again: one of the books in the pack is “Jack and the Flumflum Tree” by the children’s laureate, Julia Donaldson, who is one of my constituents. There are lots of local events in my constituency. On the theme of introducing Scottish literature to young folk, I am pleased that we are having bookbug sessions in Bishopbriggs, Lennoxtown, Lenzie, William Patrick and Westerton libraries. All the bookbug sessions this week will be on Scottish themes. The cabinet secretary referred to the book, “My Favourite Place”. I, of course, have a copy with me, although I am not going to ask all members to read it now. We were all given copies of it. In a motion that I lodged in October, I suggested that although members should of course stay at home and read their copies, they should also think about where they could take them afterwards to donate to others. I have decided this year to take copies to care homes and sheltered housing in my constituency. When I got the book, I saw that it could perhaps be difficult for someone with arthritic hands to read, so I spoke to Booktrust. There is an audio version of the book on its website, which it is happy for us to download on to a CD and take along to older or visually impaired people. We should make sure that literature is there and available to all of us. In true librarian fashion, I turn to my bookmarked page in “My Favourite Place”. One entry that particularly caught my eye was “Island of (South) Rona” by Valerie Mcilreavy, which is about an island off Skye that I visit every year and which my Dalmatian dog is named after. It is a lovely poem to read. Of course, members would not expect me to finish on anything other than Howard Swindle’s little ditty, “Mobile Library Man”. Please enjoy book week Scotland. It will be back next year, and I hope that I will get a members’ business debate then.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank James Dornan for bringing the motion to the Parliament for debate. I also thank the members of the St Andrew’s Ambulance Association who are in the gallery and the many volunteers around the country who, in their own time, provide the many services about which we have heard. One of the startling things that I have learned is the national figures for last year: 18,729 people were trained in first aid techniques and more than 3,000 events throughout the country were attended. That is a phenomenal number of volunteers giving up their time to do exceptionally good work. In doing my research for the debate, I was delighted to find that there is a thriving St Andrew’s branch in my constituency—the Strathkelvin branch, which has a long history. The internet is a wonderful thing. I found that the Strathkelvin branch used to be called the Kirkintilloch section of the St Andrew’s Ambulance Corps. A man called James Gordon, who lived in Kerr Street in Kirkintilloch, joined that corps on 8 April 1933. On the internet, you can find an image of the booklet that showed that he was a member and a trained first-aider. The organisation’s history is quite amazing. To bring it completely up to date, this year the local branch attended—among other events—Kirkintilloch gala day, the East Dunbartonshire cycle festival in Bishopbriggs and the Bearsden and Milngavie highland games. The Strathkelvin branch would not, of course, have attended that last event; it would have been the Milngavie branch, which is not based in my constituency, but covers it. One of the really nice things that I learned about the Strathkelvin branch is that it has a St Andrew’s cadets branch, which is a programme for 11 to 15-year-olds. They not only learn first aid but attend events as observers and helpers, which is a great way to recruit volunteers for the future. I hope that St Andrew’s First Aid does not mind my mentioning two other organisations with which I work closely on first aid and emergency life support. The British Heart Foundation has made a call for emergency life support to be taught in every school, as Drew Smith mentioned. When it conducted a survey, it found that 78 per cent of children would like to do that training. I was at an event on ELS with the BHF in October. The next day, I was in St Machan’s primary school in Lennoxtown, where all bar one of the primary 7 pupils said that they wanted to do that first aid training and ELS training if it was offered to them. I tell Drew that one thing that I managed to do over the October recess was not only to sign up to the BHF call myself but to get the First Minister to do so. I hope that we are moving towards the realisation of that training in every school. I will also mention another organisation of which I am a member—Lucky2BHere, which is based on the Isle of Skye. It was formed in 2007 by my friend Ross Cowie after he had a serious cardiac event. That voluntary organisation now has more than 23 defibrillators in public places throughout Scotland. However, it not only puts in defibrillators, but ensures through the heartstart programme that everybody in the local community is trained to use them in the event of an emergency. That is something that I intend to do. The next time I am on Skye, I will get my training and, I hope, become one of the band of volunteers who are confident to do first aid when it is called for.

I want to make my speech perhaps a bit more reflective than some of the previous ones because I feel that, at its heart, this debate is about social justice and values—the Scotland that we want and the Scotland that we aspire to. In essence, this should be a philosophical debate, and I was a bit concerned when I heard from Duncan McNeil the revelation that the Labour-Liberal Executive for eight years was only chasing political votes when it made decisions about what benefits it should accrue for the people of Scotland. I also believe that it is a fundamentally flawed theorem—

Mr McNeil clearly said that the Labour-Liberal Executive brought in a lot of policies because it was chasing votes. That is the expression that he used and that is the expression that I wrote down. I want to be more reflective about this issue. I believe that it is a fundamentally flawed theorem that in hard times it is inevitable that there will be harsh cuts. It is in hard times that we have to go back to first principles and to what Beveridge talked about—the duty of individuals to combine as a society with the strong supporting the weak. In hard times, that is more important than at any other time. This has become a debate that is very much about universalism versus means testing.

I would rather not because I am trying to be reflective about the position that we are all in today. There is a lot of evidence on universalism versus means testing. Universalism is less costly to administer as it removes judgment, which is an incredibly important point. We cannot possibly go back to the early 20th century, when we talked benevolently about the deserving poor. Universalism ensures that judgment is removed and that all are protected from the ills of society. There was a lovely piece of research by Korpi and Palme in 1998 on what they call the paradox of redistribution. In that, it is clearly evidenced that, in targeting, we are less likely to reduce poverty and inequality. It is universalism that ensures that we work towards the ending of poverty and inequality in our society. I would say that a welfare system is a normal, first-line function of a modern civilised society—the kind of society that I would like to say that Scotland is now and that I certainly expect it to be after 2014.

The cabinet secretary has pointed out that the member is not right about the free central heating scheme. However, I would like to return to my argument, rather than sit on the sidelines watching someone else’s debate. Beveridge referred to the five great evils: want, disease, ignorance, squalor and idleness. Let us hold firm to the absolute belief that, in policy and practice, we will see the end of those great evils. The only point of controversy that I will raise is that I find it abhorrent that quotes from politicians going back 20-odd years are still being promulgated today—Bob Doris has already mentioned some of them. Mrs Thatcher said that there was no such thing as society; Johann Lamont said that Scotland is a “something for nothing” society; and Ruth Davidson said that 88 per cent of us in Scotland do not contribute to the economy. Such statements are an insult to the people of Scotland; they are also anathema to the people of Scotland. That is why the people of Scotland, in 2011, voted for the SNP Government and its social contract, and that is why, in 2014, the people of Scotland will vote yes. My great desire to see a welfare state that exists to ensure that all are protected is epitomised by my profession as a librarian. Libraries were one of the first and earliest universal benefits for society—Innerpeffray library was founded in 1680. If we were having a debate about whether people should start to have to pay to access knowledge through their public library, I hope that everybody in the chamber would unite against that. I hope that, at the end of the day, everybody unites to support the welfare state continuing in Scotland.

I thank Rod Campbell for bringing this debate to Parliament today and for inviting the Vivarium Trust to have a stall here a few months ago. I found it fascinating to learn about the trust. I wanted to be in the debate today more to listen and learn than to make a strong contribution, but when I tell members about the population statistics of my constituency, they will understand why I want to listen and learn so much about housing that will help us as we grow older. Presently, the numbers of 60 to 74-year-olds and people aged 75-plus in East Dunbartonshire, which encompasses my constituency of Strathkelvin and Bearsden, are 2 per cent above the national average, but the registrar general for Scotland’s projections for 2035 show a decline in all age groups in East Dunbartonshire except for 65 to 74-year-olds and people aged 75-plus. We are facing an explosion in the population of those aged 75-plus from the current 9,196 to 17,090, living well, long and healthy lives but requiring housing that is appropriate to their needs. One of the things that struck me was that the number of households in East Dunbartonshire with someone aged 75-plus will have risen by 88 per cent by 2035. That tells us something about the housing needs in my constituency. Currently in Strathkelvin and Bearsden, there are 423 sheltered housing properties, but in 20 years’ time there will be 17,000 people aged over 75. Members can see from that why I am interested in this debate and in what the Vivarium Trust does. I am so delighted to hear that there is going to be a project that we can all go along and see and learn from. Reading up for this debate was so exciting, because I found out, for example, that 8 per cent of Danes live in co-housing—so it is happening already and in good numbers—and that there are 230 co-housing schemes in the Netherlands. It is therefore not just pie in the sky, because it is really working. I got so excited the more I read about it and I think that a lot of my constituents will as well. The idea of an intentional community that combines the autonomy and privacy of the individual household with the mutual support offered through a degree of collaborative living is right up my street and the street of many of my constituents. I came across a lovely quote that stated that people have to start thinking about this when they are in their 50s and 60s, so that it is there for when they really need it. I intend to go out with my dog-walking group, which is a bunch of women in their mid-50s who had the sense to have dogs and not late babies, and talk about becoming an intentional community and working on co-housing for our group. Of course, we might not want a communal house; we will want a communal kennel. I am being serious, because some of the things that I have learned are so exciting. The fact is that the inception, design, detailed planning, building and development of the co-housing property through to its on-going operation is managed by the members themselves in a fully participatory manner. That is right up my street and, I am sure, the street of many of my constituents. It is interesting to learn that co-housing for older people is now incorporated as an option in the national housing policies of Denmark and the Netherlands. I hope to be able to explore the issue further with the Scottish Government with regard to the very particular needs of my constituency and its growing elderly population. Thank you very much and thank you again to Rod Campbell.

On that point, I wonder whether Ms Lamont would like to tell us how she would reply to NUS Scotland, which said in an e-mail to us all this morning that it is “deeply concerned by any suggestions of a return to tuition fees for Scotland’s students,” and that it is “clear that Scotland as a country and a society values the principle that access to education should be based on the ability to learn not the wealth to pay.”

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Under rule 7.3 of the standing orders, could it possibly be that Mr Henry is still refusing to conduct himself “in a courteous and respectful manner” towards the chamber?

Will the minister describe the process for local campaigners, such as those in my constituency who want rail halts at Woodilee, Woodhill and the Allander, to input their thoughts into the bid process?

Will the member take an intervention?

I join other members in thanking Kevin Stewart for bringing the incredibly important matter of work capability assessments before Parliament so that we can debate it and put some facts and figures on the record to show that there is evidence behind what we are saying. I begin by echoing something that Kevin Stewart said. I remind members that we are talking about the work capability assessment as undertaken by Atos but that it is being done on behalf of the United Kingdom Department for Work and Pensions and on the basis of that department’s contract, which was let in 2005 by the Labour Government. Atos is also working towards the Liberal Democrat-Conservative coalition’s stated intention to cut the budget for welfare such as DLA by 20 per cent.

I will not take Ms Baillie’s intervention, as she did not take mine. That sounds a bit petty, does it not? To remind members about the contract and Atos’s position, I will quote an Atos spokesperson, who has said: “Our trained doctors, nurses and physiotherapists use their clinical knowledge and apply the government’s policy and criteria to each assessment.” That means the UK Government’s policy and criteria. When I read that, I thought, “That could not possibly happen here in Scotland, could it?” Well, I perhaps thought that until yesterday, before which I thought that the Scottish political consensus was for social justice for those in need of welfare reform. To answer Alex Johnstone’s claim that the stories about assessments are anecdotal and that evidence is needed, I will use some facts and figures from the evidence that was heard at the Health and Sport Committee when we first looked at welfare reform—members know that, as a former librarian, I like my facts and figures and evidence. We found that, in general, 40 per cent of appeals against an assessment are successful and that 69 per cent of those appeals are successful when someone is represented by, for example, a citizens advice bureau worker or a welfare rights officer. Clearly, if only 30 per cent of refusals stand on appeal, the system does not work. If Alex Johnstone is looking for more evidence, he need look no further than the evidence that was presented last year to the Health and Sport Committee by organisations such as Citizens Advice Scotland and act now for autism. As a little extra, the former health librarian in me wants to remind members that case studies build towards an evidence base; evidence does not always have to be empirical. Case study is another term for anecdotal evidence. We have talked about whether we can reveal certain peoples’ experiences. I have 1,280 constituents who are in receipt of ESA, but there is one person that I can talk about quite happily and without breaking any confidences—that person is me. I have been through the assessment process and I was found fit for work. I appealed the decision and my appeal was upheld. I was assessed because I was unable to work due to depression. Some of the things that happened in that assessment included being asked to pick up a pen. Jamie Hepburn used other examples, but that was mine. My mental health and depression did not prevent me from picking up a pen. I then had my stomach examined—I am not quite sure what that had to do with my mental health. Jackie Baillie said that the systems are more about IT than people. My assessment was all about IT: the medic sitting behind the computer was only interested in the fact that his computer did not work. The system is profoundly unfair and philosophically flawed, and it must be challenged by individuals and, collectively, by society. Ultimately, however, it is a political matter. If we want a socially just Scotland where such obscenities do not continue, then, as Annabelle Ewing said, there is a referendum on Scottish independence in 2014 and we can take charge of welfare in this country.

Will the member take an intervention?

Members have already heard about the vast army of 650,000 unpaid carers across Scotland who save the Scottish purse £10 billion a year through their work. I want to speak about one large section of those unpaid carers—family carers. As a member of the Health and Sport Committee when it took evidence on the bill, I found it interesting to look at the Government’s decision to change from the payment of family carers under exceptional circumstances to payment where it is appropriate, and I welcome the minister’s comments on that. When the committee was taking evidence, it was interesting to see the sharp divide on that question. It was perhaps reflected in Gil Paterson’s speech when he talked about the risk of undue influence and coercion by family members if they became paid carers. In the evidence received by the committee, it was councils and organisations such as the Association of Directors of Social Work that, illogically, talked about the right of everybody who receives care to choose the care that they think best and then said that we have to keep in place the exceptional circumstances criteria for paying family members through direct payments. That contrasts with carers organisations and such organisations as Age Scotland, which in their evidence talked about the facts that most unpaid care is done by family members and that, when those family members are able to provide the care, it leads to better outcomes for the person who is receiving care. Reflecting on the dichotomy in the evidence that we received on the topic, I thought that I would take members in the chamber on a personal journey. For nigh on 23 years, I have been a family carer. When it happens to you, you start by thinking in a particular way: I thought that I was just being a good daughter and doing the things that my mum needed me to do. However, it escalated over the years, and I ended up doing the banking, the bills and the messages: if my mum said, “I want a pint of milk,” I went and got the pint of milk. The work escalates: you take the family member you care for to health appointments, you do emergency hospital admissions, and you receive phone calls at work perhaps four or five times a day when they are not coping. There comes a point when there is a realisation and you think, “We need a care package here. This is not something that I’m doing well.” You set off on that route, but very quickly you learn about the limitations of the care packages that are on offer through local councils: the four times a day 15-minute visit, which is inadequate for anything—not just for cooking meals but even for giving company to somebody.

As Dennis Robertson has suggested in his intervention and his earlier contribution, that is exactly what happens. If the person getting care has control through direct payment, they will choose the care that they need and not what a council says is what its resource limitations will allow it to provide. I had some other examples of the limitations, but let me just take members to the next step. The next realisation is that the care packages do not work and that what they provide is certainly not support for independent living in the community. All the time that the care package is in place, the family carer is still doing all the jobs, such as paying the bills, doing the messages and taking the cared person to hospital. It is at that point of realisation that you ask, “How do we get a personal service?” I found out about direct payments, but you have to know the system. Dennis Robertson has explained that, but I will give members a little anecdote. My son said to me once, “It feels like you’re having to beat the system, mum.” That is exactly what Christina McKelvie explained that her constituents had gone through. My son said as well, “Mum, you used to be an MSP. If you can’t beat the system, how does anybody else manage?” When someone does get their direct payment, the family member who has been giving them their care is no longer considered under the exceptional circumstances condition. If a person who needs care gets a direct payment and decides that the family member who has been giving them their care is the most appropriate person to continue to give them that care, they should be able to use the direct payment to employ that family member. I will just finish by talking about the toll on the family carer of going through all the hoops, processes and so on under the exceptional circumstances condition. You end up as a carer thinking not that you are a good daughter but that you are a bad carer. I ask members: please support this legislation and the move to the appropriate circumstances condition.

I draw Mr Smith’s attention to section 1(3), which says that a person “must be provided with any assistance that is reasonably required to enable the person” to express their views and “make an informed choice”. Is that not advocacy?

6. To ask the Scottish Government how it will use the budget to address the reductions in the block grant from the United Kingdom Government. (S4O-01251)

I look forward to seeing the detail of the budget in the coming weeks. If Westminster finally gave the go-ahead to the Scottish Government’s list of shovel-ready projects—including the University of Glasgow centre for virology research, which has been proposed for the Garscube estate in my constituency—how much of an impact would that have on construction and employment in Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I join the minister in welcoming the work that the Scottish Tourism Alliance has published in the past week, which was encouraging for me to read because the East Dunbartonshire tourism partnership that was established back in 2009 emphasises that business and community must co-operate with each other and that we have a partnership responsibility for delivering growth in tourism. That is exactly what we have heard from the Scottish Tourism Alliance. Of course, I am not saying that East Dunbartonshire got in there three years ahead of the alliance, but we are an exciting and vibrant area. On that note, I would like to take members on a tour of my constituency of Strathkelvin and Bearsden. I know that many will ask why anyone would want to come as a tourist to a suburb of Glasgow. It is extremely important that Glasgow’s strengths are realised. As well as being a top 10 European destination city and the third city in the UK for conferences, it is a place where the average stay of visitors is nine nights. Those strengths of Glasgow, my near neighbour, are something that Strathkelvin and Bearsden, its suburb, can benefit from.

My credit card will attest to that, no problem. As I was saying, Strathkelvin and Bearsden is just next door to the fantastic city of Glasgow. In fact, Strathkelvin and Bearsden now markets itself as a gateway to the great outdoors. We believe that we can benefit from all the tourism potential of Glasgow and invite folk to come to our area. I will now tell members of the wonders of my constituency. Kirkintilloch is the canal capital of Scotland. It is also a walkers are welcome town. Bishopbriggs is one of the most cycle-friendly towns in Scotland. Last Sunday, I was honoured to open the third East Dunbartonshire cycle festival. One of the sponsors of the day, Samsung, said afterwards that it was one of the most successful days that it had had in its Olympic hope relay heroes campaign. In Bearsden, we have the Antonine wall, which has been a United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization world heritage site since 2008. I well remember studying Latin at school in the 1970s when the remains of the Roman baths at Bearsden Cross were discovered. I should, of course, point out that that is not in the constituency of Strathkelvin and Bearsden; it is across the road in the constituency of Clydebank and Milngavie. I want to talk about the growth in tourism potential in East Dunbartonshire and Strathkelvin and Bearsden, where our businesses are taking things very seriously. In particular, I want to mention the rebound initiative in Lennoxtown, which I am sure I have spoken about before in the chamber. It is a social enterprise initiative that not only encourages cyclists to come to the Lennox forest for a day’s cycling but is aiming to build a purpose-built hotel. There will be cycle facilities for the people who come, but they will also be able to go out into Lennoxtown and use the pubs, restaurants and other facilities there, which will help to build the local economy. We know from the evidence that cyclists want to come for two or three days to fully explore the paths. I finish by commenting on something that is very personal to me. Radical historians and people who enjoy knowing the radical history of Scotland should come to my leafy suburb. They will not believe it. In Bishopbriggs, we have the Thomas Muir trail, and Lennoxtown had the first co-op that gave a divvy, in 1812. In my home village, the Westerton garden suburb, which will be celebrating its centenary next year, was the first garden suburb in Scotland where everything was owned co-operatively. I invite members to come with me in October, when I intend to have a staycation in my constituency of Strathkelvin and Bearsden. I am sure that a week will not be enough for me to get round all the delights.

We are in a serious and worrying situation, so I am glad that we are having this debate. We should take the opportunity to reassure the many women out there on just what the situation is in terms of the evidence. Rupture rates for the PIP implants are running at about 1 per cent with a possible maximum of 5 per cent. It is important that we put on the record that there is no evidence of genotoxicity should there be a rupture and that 1.7 per cent of the ruptures may lead to an inflammatory reaction. Those statistics are worrying, but it is important as a measure of reassurance that we have them on the record. In the motion and in Ms Baillie’s speech there was mention of 4,000 women in Scotland possibly being affected by this—I am not sure about that, because it was made clear at the Health and Sport Committee meeting on 28 February that the maximum number was probably 1,300. Again, I think that reassurance is needed.

Thank you, Ms Baillie. I confess that I was not at the Health and Sport Committee meeting that day—I was in hospital getting my gallbladder removed. However, on reading the evidence it looked as though the figure of 1,300 women was perhaps more robust. How, under a regulatory regime that crosses Europe and the UK, could we come to the position that we have been in for the past year? There are three European directives that cover medical devices. Those directives have been implemented into UK legislation by the Medical Devices Regulations 2002. They are there to regulate safety and performance and to include provision for mandatory CE markings. Under that EU framework, we have REACH—the registration, evaluation, authorisation and restriction of chemicals. Under that architecture, we have the European Chemicals Agency, which is responsible for the CE marking. Parallel to that, we have the competent authorities in each member state; in the UK, the competent authority is hosted by the Health and Safety Executive. Under the competent authority are the notified bodies, which are appointed and accredited by the member states. In the UK, the notified body is the UK Accreditation Service—UKAS—whose role is to ensure that the design and manufacture of products make them safe and compliant. Given that extensive regulatory framework, how was the fraud possible? I turn to the Howe report, which has already been quoted. Earl Howe said that the review found that the MHRA fulfilled its obligations regarding incidents that involved the implants, and that the MHRA’s work was hindered by a lack of complete or reliable evidence. Much of the information came from a manufacturer that has been found to have been working fraudulently. Given all that, Howe concludes that there is nothing to suggest that the system for regulating medical devices is unsound and that the responsibility lies squarely with the fraudulent manufacturer. I must ask a further question: is the regulatory regime flawed? When I look to see what the REACH regulation was founded on, I find that it states that it “places greater responsibility on industry to manage the risks from chemicals and to provide safety information on the substances.”

I contend that the EU and the UK have swung too far towards self-regulation and self-policing. Given that Scotland has no voice in Europe and only a small voice in the UK, I hope that an independent Scotland would ensure that it got health and safety right for workers, consumers and everyone involved.

I thank John Mason for bringing this incredibly important debate to the chamber tonight. I also thank Glasgow gurdwara and Amnesty International for the briefings that they sent us. I was pleased, as many members were, to meet the delegation from the Glasgow Sikh community that came here in March. The motion reminds me how important the stance of the community is, and how important it is to me personally. The last line of the motion states: “capital punishment is fundamentally wrong and has no place in the twenty-first century.” I think that all of us in the chamber would echo that sentiment. I understand from my reading that Sikh teaching does not encourage retribution or retaliation, which is a philosophy that I would recommend to one and all. That philosophy is very apparent in the case of Balwant Singh Rajoana, and we should view it in exactly that way. Amnesty International opposes the death penalty in all cases without exception—a category that includes the Rajoana case—and that is a sentiment that I utterly endorse and echo. Why do so many of us oppose the death penalty? Article 3 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that we have “the right to life”—it is as fundamental as that. As many members will know, I like to quote the evidence when I am making a speech, and the evidence is that capital punishment does not deter crime. That was clearly shown in surveys that were carried out in the US in 1998 and 1996. A more recent survey, from 2010, stated: “the average Murder Rate of Death Penalty States was 4.6, while the average Murder Rate of States without the Death Penalty was 2.9”. Could the evidence be clearer than that? Many members have referred to the fact that the death penalty cannot be reversed. If there is a miscarriage of justice, there is no opportunity to roll that back. The death penalty is a harsh punishment, but it is not harsh on crime. It brutalises society, and it legitimises state violence. I hope that this debate in the Scottish Parliament will convince the Indian Government to join the 96 states around the world that have abolished capital punishment.

I welcome the debate that we have had, I welcome the bill and I welcome the fact that, at 5 o’clock tonight, it will become the law of Scotland. I also welcome the fact that the Liberal Democrats and Tories have finally seen sense and have moved from oppositional to evidence-based politics. However, I am sorry that Labour is still playing politics with Scotland’s health; indeed, Labour members are making statements even today that are not based on any evidence. It is important that the Parliament remembers why we had to introduce the bill. The figures for alcohol misuse in Scotland are both stark and frightening. Last autumn, Dr Peter Rice from the Royal College of Psychiatrists in Scotland—he is in the gallery—gave a presentation to a group of MSPs. In the past 20 years, the rate of alcohol-related mortality has gone from 15 to 40 per 100,000 of the population, and the incidence of cirrhosis of the liver has climbed from 28 to 72 per 100,000 of the population. At the same time, affordability of alcohol through off-sales has similarly rocketed. Beer has become 135 per cent more affordable and wines and spirits have become 110 per cent more affordable in that period. As we see the correlation between low prices and alcohol-related ill health, so the international research going back over a century proves that raising the price of alcohol leads to consumption falling—and when consumption falls, the incidence of alcohol-related ill health falls. Professor Tim Stockwell, who has been mentioned, looked back over 20 years of pricing of alcohol in Canadian states and was able to show that a 10 per cent rise in the cost of alcohol led to a 3.4 per cent drop in consumption. Most relevant in that research is how harm reduction increases as price increases. Jackie Baillie and Margo MacDonald both referred to that, and Bob Doris went a long way in defending it. I refer any member who does not believe in the harm-reduction effects of the bill to the work that was done in 2009 by Meier et al. The highlight of that research, for me, is the finding that the groups whose consumption is most responsive to a rise in the price of alcohol are young people and high-risk drinkers. Those are the people in Scotland whom I hope we all want to help and support out of alcohol abuse. In 2006, Scotland was bold with its ban on smoking in public places. We should again be proud today that Scotland learns from her mistakes and leads the way where others will follow.

I thank Jenny Marra for bringing the debate to the chamber. I will concentrate my remarks on one organisation with which I have been working over the past year, and its amazing group of volunteers. That organisation is Action on Hearing Loss—formerly RNID—which is about to celebrate its 101st birthday in a few weeks. I welcome its director, Delia Henry, and her staff who are in the gallery tonight. I have had a great year working with Action on Hearing Loss and celebrating its centenary. Last October, at the Scottish National Party conference in Inverness, I hosted an event for the organisation and ate birthday cake with its staff. A few months later, at a reception here in Parliament, I ate more birthday cake with them. My experience with Action on Hearing Loss began much earlier in the year, on one of my first official visits in my constituency of Strathkelvin and Bearsden, when I visited its hear to help project in the Kilsyth Road sheltered housing. The three-year project is funded by the Scottish Government and the Co-operative. It is volunteer led and provides a maintenance service that—among other things—replaces batteries and tubing in hearing aids. One benefit of that is that it saves audiology specialists’ time, but the most important thing that I learned from visiting the project is that it provides a personalised service for hearing aid users, either in their home or in a location that is convenient for them. On my visit to the Kilsyth Road sheltered housing, I met a fantastic volunteer called Irene Fyffe—not forgetting Muffin, her hearing dog; I hope that Mr Q does not mind my referring to another support dog. I heard just recently from Action on Hearing Loss that Irene Fyffe—whom I so enjoyed meeting—won a champion volunteer award in the “champions the cause” category earlier this year. She also manages the service at the Golden Jubilee hospital in Clydebank, which was a runner-up in the Patient Experience Network national awards. It is evident that the volunteer-led personalised service from Action on Hearing Loss is not only doing great work for individuals in our communities, but is being recognised throughout Scotland and the United Kingdom for that marvellous work. As members can see, I am finishing by trying out my BSL in order to say, “Thank you” to Action on Hearing Loss and to all the volunteers who are involved in it.

5. To ask the Scottish Government how it promotes better transport links to public facilities. (S4O-01003)

In relation to the £0.25 billion that is spent on buses, will the minister comment on the fact that Strathclyde partnership for transport has decided that MyBus cannot be used to access hospital appointments, as opposed to hospital visits?

I hope that my declaration of interests does not take up my whole two minutes, so I will abbreviate. I am a member of the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals and chair of the Scottish Library and Information Council. Liam McArthur was asking for a rebellion. Here is a rebellious librarian who can see sense and argue about what is before us, rather than about flights of fantasy and conspiracy theories as elaborated by Labour, which accepted the cabinet secretary’s comments at stage 2 and in fact voted down the two amendments at stage 2. At stage 1, I said that I was a proud and fierce defender of the independence of libraries. I maintain that I am, and that the two ministerial powers of direction in no way interfere with that independence. Section 2(3)(c) is about ensuring that there is always accessibility to libraries and their collections—any librarian would go to the wall to ensure that—and that the National Library will continue that tradition. Section 2(2)(d) is about collaboration and good practice. Why do members think that I accepted the post of chair of the Scottish Library and Information Council? I did not do so so that I could tell librarians what to do or what to stock; I did so so that I could be part of the library community and could go on the shared journey to excellence. As a profession and a public service, we achieve most when we learn from each other and when we work together within and across the library sectors. The bill is about our National Library. I want to be sure that the National Library will fulfil a leadership role, when appropriate. With the proposed power of ministerial direction, I am sure that it will continue to do that, so I urge members to reject amendments 4 and 5.

I welcome the Government’s acceptance of an increase in the minimum board size, on which I commented at stage 1. I do not understand the positions of the other parties—especially Labour, given its change between stages 2 and 3—on the powers of ministerial direction. I will use my three minutes to say that the ministerial power of direction is limited to two areas. Ministers will be able to give directions in relation to section 2(3)(c), on “promoting the diversity of persons accessing the collections”. I would have thought that all members would want to ensure that the National Library’s collections are always open and accessible to everybody, wherever and whoever they are, and that the minister can always guarantee that our national collection can fulfil that obligation. Ministers will also be able to give directions in relation to section 2(2)(d), on promoting collaboration. I am a library professional and, as I said during the debate on amendments at stage 3, when professionals collaborate they produce their best work. I do not understand why members would not want the Scottish Government ministers to be able to ensure that the National Library provides such leadership for the library profession in Scotland. For me, that is very important, as libraries are very important to the people of Scotland. We heard Clare Adamson’s figures, which show how valued libraries are in Scotland. In difficult times such as we are in, libraries can offer much more for people. As a professional, I have to say that there are many different ways in which libraries can provide a vital public service nowadays. It is about access to information. It is not necessarily the buildings that are so important; it is about what we do with information and it is about making it as accessible as possible to people of all hues and abilities. We have heard about rebellious librarians and eco-librarians. I want to end on a positive note. As a librarian, I am delighted to hear that the public’s affection for libraries is reflected across the chamber. Long may our MSPs’ and the Government’s commitment continue for our library services.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what support the Student Awards Agency for Scotland offers to formerly looked-after young people entering a higher education course with a further education qualification that does not admit them into the second year. (S4O-00925)

I thank the minister for that answer on behalf of a young constituent of mine, by whose drive to succeed I am greatly impressed. The problem that he faced related to a law degree, but I am delighted to hear the minister say that he can apply for a care leavers grant. Thank you.

I will quote what Ofcom said in answer to the question, “What is community radio?”. It stated: “Community radio stations are radio services which provide community benefits and run on a not-for-profit basis. Generally stations are focused on broadcasting to and involving their own particular community ... Stations involve local volunteers in providing the service, and bring community benefits such as training and community news and discussion. They generally have a small coverage area (usually up to a 5km radius).” I wanted to quote that because it is a great introduction to East Dunbartonshire Radio in my constituency. East Dunbartonshire Radio is taking its first, tentative steps from the Bishopbriggs media centre, which is the home of Cue and Review—“Print Speaking to the Blind” and is where national newspapers and magazines are recorded. In October this year, it will celebrate its 30th anniversary. What better way of celebrating an anniversary than taking to the airwaves, rather than just with discs and tapes? At this point, we should pay tribute to the founding chairman of Cue and Review, Alastair McPhee. In July, East Dunbartonshire Radio will begin broadcasting from 8 am until midnight every day of the week. There will be a trial in mid-May. I hope that many folk will listen to it, join in over the internet and send in their comments. East Dunbartonshire Radio really is working hard to fulfil all the criteria in Ofcom’s description. It already has nearly 30 volunteers, who are working to get the station up and running in July. Audio, video and media graduates have volunteered and are using the skills that they have learned at university to pay back their community. The station also hopes to involve the pupils of Bishopbriggs academy. One thing that delights me about East Dunbartonshire Radio’s work in my community is that it has worked with the East Dunbartonshire community volunteer service, which I worked for a few years ago. That has given it access to more than 400 voluntary organisations throughout my constituency. Like Ms Grahame, people in those 400 voluntary organisations will be able to put on their blue suede shoes and broadcast across my constituency to let folk know the good work that they do and the services that they offer to my constituents. An exciting thing that East Dunbartonshire Radio proposes is the setting up of a Scottish radio training school in which there will be courses offered for complete beginners all the way through to advanced-level courses. The courses will be highly practical and will feature a mix of lectures, workshops and one-to-one coaching. East Dunbartonshire Radio is holding its hands out to the community and offering something back to it. I wish East Dunbartonshire Radio well in its trial in mid-May. I hope that when it begins to broadcast in July, the people of my constituency and people throughout Scotland will enjoy the benefits of that radio station.

I join other members in welcoming this Green party debate. It seems to me that there are three strands in this debate about cycling. We are talking about cycling as transport and cycling for leisure, and underpinning it all is introducing children to safe cycling. I want to give three examples from those areas from my Strathkelvin and Bearsden constituency. I will talk about East Dunbartonshire’s Cycle Co-op, which is based in Bishopbriggs, the rebound initiative in Lennoxtown, and pedal on Parliament, which has already been mentioned. I thank Dr Brennan, who is a constituent of mine, for his work in making that happen next month. East Dunbartonshire’s Cycle Co-op is a not-for-profit social enterprise team led by the redoubtable Mark Kiehlmann. It is a team of certified bike ability tutors and cycle mechanics. Those people have done many things. Among them, they set up the East Dunbartonshire bike library to assure parents that, when their children start to learn to cycle, they cycle on a bike that is fit for purpose. Over the team’s few years of working, the most remarkable achievement it has seen has been Bishopbriggs becoming the first town—indeed, as far as I know, it is still the only town—in which every primary school has received a Cycling Scotland cycle-friendly school award. That achievement is even more remarkable in light of the fact that only 2 per cent of children in Scotland cycle to school. At St Matthew’s primary school in Bishopbriggs, 20 per cent currently cycle to school daily. Double the 2020 target is being achieved in Bishopbriggs in 2012. It is therefore not surprising that when the BBC and other media outlets are looking for someone to go to to highlight the benefits of cycling, they go to East Dunbartonshire’s Cycle Co-op. As a result, Bishopbriggs has received a lot more publicity than a small town of its size would perhaps normally expect to receive. I thank the many MSPs who supported my motion S4M-01910, which highlighted the work of East Dunbartonshire’s Cycle Co-op. I turn to cycling for leisure and the rebound initiative in Lennoxtown. The plans are ambitious for a not-for-profit social enterprise. We want to see a cycle tourism hub in Lennoxtown that utilises the Forestry Commission tracks around it, and—most importantly—taps into the central Scotland cycling route network and uses the Forth-Clyde canal, which goes through my constituency. A community consultation was held in March, which more than 80 people attended. There were nothing but positive comments from the questionnaires and the ideas board that day. I know that we are short of time, so I will conclude. I hope that those examples of local initiatives in my constituency show what can be done across Scotland.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding the withdrawal of attendance allowance for residents in care homes in Scotland who are supported by free personal and nursing care contributions. (S4O-00862)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her response and also for her efforts on the attendance allowance. I was going to ask her for an estimate, but I understand from her answer that £300 million has been taken out of the pockets of older people in Scotland as a result of the petty “you’re no havin it” attitude of the UK Government. Will she advise how we could repatriate the powers to Scotland to ensure that that no longer happens? [Interruption.]

I begin by making two declarations of interest: as many members know, I am a member of the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals; and, since November, I have been proud to be the chair of the Scottish Library and Information Council. In that role, I am delighted to say that SLIC welcomes the bill overall and feels that it provides a platform to deliver a National Library of Scotland that is fit for the 21st century. There are three aspects of the bill that I would like to comment on but, before I do so, as a librarian I cannot possibly give up the opportunity to say thank you to the many members who have extolled the delights and virtues not just of the National Library but of libraries in general. Neil Findlay talked about the fact that libraries are cherished, and I am delighted that he realises that. I point out to him that, in 21st century libraries, we do not say, “Wheesht!”—we just chuck you out. In the last year, it has been demonstrated that libraries really are cherished, because borrowing figures and visits to libraries have increased. Libraries are powerful at all times, but especially in times such as these, when people are feeling financially pressed. I cannot move on without saying to Mark Griffin that of course the National Library of Scotland holds our treasures, and “Oor Wullie” is definitely one of them. I want to comment on three aspects of the bill. Although they have largely been dealt with, I want to welcome some of the responses. I want to talk about the size of the board, ministerial direction and charging. If I have time, I would like to pick up on electronic legal deposit, as other members have done, although that issue is not covered in the bill. I am delighted that the cabinet secretary has announced that the board will have a minimum of nine members. That is hugely welcome, and that was SLIC’s recommendation. The reason for that is that we must ensure that those on the board have a mix of skills and that there can be sectoral representation on the board. With a very small board, people can have trouble in covering absences—members have not covered that point—and there can be a worry with governance if a small board makes decisions when some people are absent. I am therefore delighted by the cabinet secretary’s announcement, but I ask her to clarify whether the minimum number of nine means eight plus the chair or nine plus the chair. It will be interesting to hear the answer to that question. On ministerial direction, I am sure that many members will know that librarians are proud and fierce defenders of the independence of their libraries. That is because our core function is the collection and dissemination of information. Our core function is to collect and disseminate everything for everyone without direction, fear or favour. As a librarian, I had a long, hard look at section 8(1), which says: “The Scottish Ministers may give NLS directions”. I am happy that that is tempered by section 8(2)(a), which focuses that ministerial direction on section 2(2)(d), which is on collaboration between libraries, and section 2(3)(c), which is on the promotion of diversity. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary said that a letter will go the committee to give much more of an outline especially of what is meant by section 2(2)(d) and the promotion of collaboration between libraries. I know that that letter will be eagerly awaited far beyond the committee, including in the library profession. I thank the cabinet secretary for her extra clarification. A shiver goes up a librarian’s back when charging is mentioned, but I was reminded of the reality. My first job in a library was in 1975, when our collection was thought to be free and accessible for everybody to borrow, but it was not. In those days, we had the add-on of big clunky videos, which we charged for. It seemed appropriate to do that, as the service was an add-on to our core service. When computers went into libraries 20 years later, we initially charged for access to the internet, as that was a cost for libraries. The Parliament and successive Governments have to be thanked for our having free internet access in every public library in Scotland now. I am pleased with the cabinet secretary’s commitment, which she reiterated in the committee and today in Parliament. The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring free access to our collections. She has also said today that that free access cannot be interfered with by any ministerial guidance under section 2(1), which is on the general functions of the National Library, and section 2(2)(b), which refers to “making the collections accessible”. Statutory weight has been given to that commitment, and I thank the cabinet secretary for that. On electronic legal deposit, there is the UK Legal Deposit Libraries Act 2003 but, nine years on, the librarian profession is still waiting for regulations. Libraries and librarians need those to allow us to do our jobs properly. I hope that the UK Department for Culture, Media and Sport will heed the cabinet secretary’s approaches and give the committee report due respect. I welcome the bill.

Further to Mark McDonald’s question of last week, does the First Minister have any updated information on the sister company to Sangs, Calanike, which is headquartered in Kirkintilloch, in my constituency?

I join fellow members in commending Stewart Maxwell for bringing the debate to the chamber this evening. Holocaust memorial day is a relatively recent date in our calendar, but it is an important one. As a history graduate, for me it is important because it is, “Lest we forget”. In 2012, the theme of speak up, speak out is another important milestone in the journey. It is important for those who have survived, but it is also important for those who must hear. Stewart Maxwell talked about the chain of evidence going down the generations, and I take great pride in the young people in my constituency who are hearing and speaking out. Katie McKenna and Dominic Bradley, who are ex-St Ninian’s high school pupils from Kirkintilloch, have been mentioned more than once. As members have said, they led time for reflection last week. Stewart Maxwell and I had the honour—I think that honour is the right word—of having lunch with Dominic and Katie beforehand, and they shared their memories with us, as they did later with the chamber. Siobhan McMahon has highlighted one of Dominic’s key memories—the smile as, hopefully, a statement of self-worth—and Liam McArthur has just repeated Katie’s concluding remarks about using our voice responsibly to speak up for those who cannot speak for themselves. I am delighted that that is also happening this week in Kirkintilloch high school. Kirkintilloch high school sent Andrew Anderson and Caitlin Thomson to Auschwitz-Birkenau in 2011, and they shared their memories and feelings of the visit across the school. For the past four years, Kirkintilloch high school has held a week-long Holocaust project, which involves every year and every subject across the school. Members will not be surprised to hear that, as an ex-school librarian, I am delighted that the school library is involved in that project throughout the week to ensure that the young people receive evidence and not prejudice or misinformed stories, as can happen. The project is viewed within Kirkintilloch high school as an integral part of the respect agenda. It was interesting that last year’s assembly left the pupils with a clearer understanding of the scale, the horrors and the tragedy of the Holocaust. It also ensured that the pupils’ respect for others and for themselves will continue to flourish in that school. As a history graduate, I conclude by supporting the work of Holocaust day and the Holocaust Educational Trust. Long may such learning continue on humanity’s journey to peace.

Does the minister agree that the decision by the Labour-Conservative coalition in East Dunbartonshire Council to provide care only for those whose needs are assessed as substantial or critical not only is dangerous but defeats the preventative agenda?

I rise to declare how proud I am of the SNP Government’s work, energy and vision and its commitment to looking at learning across people’s lifespan. The cabinet secretary gave us many examples of the good work and results that are being achieved; I will highlight a few. In the pre-school years, there has been a 20 per cent increase in free nursery provision. I must say, however, as the member for Strathkelvin and Bearsden, that it is regrettable that East Dunbartonshire Council has chosen to put restrictions on parental choice in access to that free nursery provision. In primary schools, 99 per cent of primary 1 classes are of 25 pupils or fewer, and in secondary schools we find that, since 2007, 358 schools are new or have been refurbished. Those are achievements of which we can be proud. We have made commitments and we have a vision, and we can be proud of that. The cabinet secretary will not be surprised that I want to talk about my pride in the role of libraries and librarians in the pursuit of lifelong learning. I should make two declarations of interest: I am a member of the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals, and I am now the chair of the Scottish Library and Information Council. Libraries are natural places of learning. They are local, hospitable, trusted and well-used social institutions in the communities that they serve, and 45 per cent of people in Scotland use their public libraries for learning opportunities. We can support school learning not just through public libraries but through school libraries. Scotland is unique in that its secondary schools have qualified school librarians. I love the phrase that the cabinet secretary used; “rich attainment” sums up the contribution that libraries and librarians can make to pupils’ learning experience. We also work in partnership with public libraries, college libraries, university libraries and the National Library of Scotland. I want to concentrate on libraries’ and librarians’ speciality, which is information literacy. Information literacy is about ensuring that everybody understands how to access information, how to evaluate that information and how to apply that information in a way that brings the results and solutions that a person has set out to achieve. We could say that an information literate person is a super-googler. I use that phrase deliberately because one of the problems that we have nowadays is that people sometimes attempt to devalue the role of libraries and librarians in access to information simply because they think that through the internet we have access to everything there is to know about in the world. I turn back to the fact that it is information literacy that we have to pursue. It is a skill for life and it is a skill that all of us need throughout our lives.

I am delighted to support Liam McArthur’s intervention. I was also delighted to sign his motion on the topic. It is interesting that Mr McArthur has used the example of tweeting to bring folk into libraries. When I talk about information literacy, I am doing it in the traditional librarian sense, but information literacy leads us into what is now called digital and media literacy. A few years ago, I sat on the Scottish advisory committee on media literacy of the Office of Communications. The modern digital media are perhaps one reason why folk do not understand that libraries are part of the 21st century. We can use the 21st century media to bring in more folk to the essential learning function that a library can support. In conclusion, I commend the work of libraries and librarians. I know that I do not have to commend them to the cabinet secretary and that they have his full support, so I commend them to all members across the chamber. I also say again how proud I am of the Scottish National Party Government’s vision and commitment. If nothing else, education is about Scotland’s future—and Scotland’s future is safe in this SNP Government’s hands.

I thank Annabel Goldie for securing the debate. I am delighted to take part in the debate and to highlight the work of the Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire, which is in my constituency. As Annabel Goldie outlined, what a team we have there in the volunteer centre. Annabel referred to Paul O’Kane’s contribution at time for reflection. As she mentioned, some of the centre’s staff, including Luisa and Carol, are in the public gallery this evening. My first contact with the Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire was back in 1999, when I was a regional MSP for the West of Scotland, but my contact has continued since then. When I worked with East Dunbartonshire CVS in 2004, I worked with the volunteer centre and, as a fellow professional, learned about the work that it did. I hope that, by now, I have become friends with the staff at the Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire. Like Annabel Goldie, I love to go to the office. She likened it to a glass of champagne, and she is right: the staff and the office are always fizzing and sparkling. The people there are full of great enthusiasm. I was delighted to be able to go and present a cheque for £50 towards the centre’s funds a few weeks ago. Many MSPs do market research for companies. They offer to pay us, but I always prefer—as I am sure most members do—to give the money to a local worthy cause. There cannot be a cause much more worthy than our volunteer centre. I call them friends also because of what happened at the riding of the Parliament on 1 July. As I stood on the High Street watching the crowds go by, the Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire representatives proudly came by behind their banner as part of the riding. I could not help myself: I jumped in and joined them behind the banner. What fun we had that day. It culminated in photos with the First Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, who is here to reply to the debate. We had a great time. Why is it important that we talk about volunteers and volunteering in the Parliament? Annabel Goldie talked about what volunteers say they get out of volunteering. That is true, but I am glad that the debate gives us the opportunity to say thank you back to volunteers for what they give to local communities. In thanking all our volunteers, I extend my thanks to the staff at the Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire. The volunteer centre is one of only five partner organisations in the third phase of the Scottish Parliament’s community partnership project. At the end of this month and into February, the centre will host a stall in the Parliament. I hope that as many MSPs as possible will take the time to stop by and see the work that it does. I am glad that Annabel Goldie highlighted the volunteer champions work that we are doing in schools. It is the most fantastic thing. Having been a volunteer in my own day and having volunteered with young people, I think that it is important that we now work to encourage young people to come on board as volunteers. Annabel Goldie also mentioned the work in Turnbull high school. Luisa has now taken that into Bishopbriggs academy, where the number of pupils who asked to work with the volunteer champions project meant that it was oversubscribed. That is largely down to—no, all down to—Luisa’s enthusiasm and the support that she gives the young people in their work. Annabel Goldie also mentioned befriending. Volunteering continues for a long time. One of my friends, Sandra Renwick, began as one of the befrienders in Kirkintilloch, moved to Skye and is still befriending people in Kirkintilloch by phone from Skye. That shows how important volunteering becomes to people. I thank Annabel Goldie for bringing the debate to the Parliament and I especially thank all volunteers and all those who work in the Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire.

Given the ranting and hysteria that we have heard from the Tories today, I take this opportunity to bring us back to the information that we have heard from many people and organisations throughout Scotland. We heard of the devastating effects that this UK legislation will have on some of Scotland’s most vulnerable people. The Health and Sport Committee heard that evidence first hand from witnesses who represent a wide variety of groups—our convener, Duncan McNeil, detailed them for us. From all of them, we heard that we, as MSPs in our national Scottish Parliament, have a duty—a responsibility—to all those people to ensure that they will not, in the words of Dr Pauline Nolan of Inclusion Scotland, lose the “ability to live independently and to participate in community life.” The logical conclusion of all the evidence that we heard is that we cannot shirk our responsibility. We cannot consent to Westminster riding roughshod over those concerns. This is about community, not the constitution. On 5 October, this Parliament voted that we were “otherwise minded, subject to consideration by the appropriate committees, to oppose the forthcoming legislative consent motion”. We have now had that committee scrutiny. According to paragraphs 216 and 48 of their respective reports, the Health and Sport Committee and the Local Government and Regeneration Committee could not recommend that we give legislative consent to the bill. The logical conclusion of rejecting the LCM is that if we are to take legislative responsibility, we need to establish an appropriate committee. That is recommended in paragraph 196 of the Health and Sport Committee’s report, paragraph 38 of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee’s report and paragraph 33 of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s report. I remind members that the committees’ recommendations followed the evidence of the witnesses that came before them—and, more than evidence, the witnesses’ pleas. We are short of time in the debate, and I wanted to concentrate on the constitutional position, so I will conclude at this point to allow more members to talk about the effects of the bill on individuals in our society. As a postscript, however, if any member is in any doubt about whether to support the Government’s motion, all that they have to do is consider the UK ministers’ refusal to come before the Health and Sport Committee to explain the rationale for their policy, which will lead, as a minimum, to a 20 per cent cut in spending on disability living allowance. They refused on two occasions—the opportunity for a videoconference was also refused—and I refer members to the evidence from the civil servant they sent to do their bidding. The offhand responses that the committee received did not give us faith that the Westminster Government will consider the effects of its legislation on the people of Scotland. Let us stand up for all the people of Scotland, who are looking to us to do the right thing today.

I, too, thank Christina McKelvie for securing this very important debate, although I agree with her that it is a shame that we need to have it. Despite the constraints that the Presiding Officer has put on our ability to debate the issue—or should I say the constraints that the law has put on us—it is still important that we have the debate for our many constituents who have asked us to speak on their behalf. Given those constraints, I will put on my health librarian hat and discuss the research that has been done on the health of nuclear test veterans. I also refer members to my speech in the veterans debate on 3 November for background information. From both her Nobel prize-winning research and death from aplastic anaemia in the early 20th century, we learned early on from Marie Curie of radioactivity’s applications and radiation’s risks. Despite that, when our nuclear test veterans—many of whom, as we have heard, were conscripts—were sent in to witness nuclear explosions, there was an almost cavalier attitude to their personal protection. Although they were given no protective clothing or respirators, they were sent in to the sites shortly after the bombs exploded, had to fly and sail through radioactive dust clouds and had to clean the craft afterwards, often with paper tissues. I said that the attitude was cavalier; I wonder whether it was negligent or, indeed, deliberate. Given what those men were put through, it is not surprising that, since the 1980s, there has been a lot of research into their health. Of course, as a health librarian, I looked for information on that research on PubMed, a premier public access research tool run by the National Library of Medicine, itself part of the US National Institutes of Health. I was able to find 533 papers, but will quote from only one of them: “Blood money: the duty of care to veterans of UK nuclear weapons tests” by Sue Rabbitt Roff, which was published in the journal Medicine, Conflict and Survival. The abstract, which I have abridged, points to evidence of “deliberate and repeated decisions not to provide adequate radiation protection ... even by the standards of 50 years ago ... to most of” those “who participated in the British” nuclear bomb-testing “programme. ... The evidence lies in the minutes and memoranda of the scientists, doctors and military leaders overseeing these tests” and in “Archival material in the United Kingdom Public Records Office and the National Archives of Australia”. Despite that paper and the number of other papers on the topic, I have been unable to find any meta-analysis of all the work—and I have to wonder why. Indeed, the conspiracy theorist in me began to wonder what was happening and when I followed some links to find the medical research programmes listed, which should be on the National Information Governance Board for Health and Social Care website, I got a “404—Not found” message. We need to ask where that information has gone; in fact, I have sent an e-mail asking where the research has disappeared to. In investigating the ill health of these brave survivors, we must accord them the dignity of scientific rigour, not political spin.

Last Friday, I was at the Carers Link East Dunbartonshire annual general meeting. In the past year, Carers Link East Dunbartonshire has identified and supported 285 new carers and has directly supported 689 carers. Each of those carers saves East Dunbartonshire Council £17,242 per annum. That is a total saving to the council of £11.9 million per annum. In saluting the workers at Carers Link East Dunbartonshire, where I used to work, as I should have said to begin with, and carers across East Dunbartonshire, of whom I am one, I want to look at two areas of the carers strategy: carers’ rights and carer training. The carers’ rights charter, when it comes, will be very welcome, as it will enshrine the mantra, which we often hear, that carers are equal partners in the delivery of care. Like Alison McInnes, I am pleased that that mantra will have a legislative underpinning in the forthcoming self-directed support bill. If the bill ends the situation in which direct payments can be made to carers only in exceptional circumstances, and such payments instead become the norm, we will be able to tackle carer poverty for the first time. As Bill Kidd said, carers live in poverty. We cannot directly address the £59.35 per week carers allowance—that pittance from the UK Government, to receive which someone has to be caring for 35 hours per week—but with direct payments to carers we can help them out of poverty. With direct payments to carers, we will ensure also that we place carers at the heart of commissioning services and that they have access to appropriate training. Above all, we will acknowledge the reality that carers are doing the caring already. For most of those who are cared for by unpaid carers, be those carers family members or friends, that is who they want to be cared for by, not by the paid care workforce. The evidence shows that, if we train our unpaid carers, not only are they able to give better care to those they care for, it is better for the carers’ own confidence, ability and health. I make a suggestion to the minister that I have made on many previous occasions and will continue to make. Local authorities and health boards should include carers in their care workforce training, especially in medication management, and moving and handling. I was pleased to see in the carers strategy that the Scottish National Party Government has given £281,000 to carers organisations and that the NHS boards will be asked to make a training offer to carers, because that underlines the fact that carers should not be paying to be trained to do their caring. Carers save Scotland more than £7 billion per annum. I love Siobhan McMahon’s idea of a carers card, which I was going to suggest in an earlier debate on the back of the young carers card, which I welcome. I am not a wee, shy carer, as I am sure most members will agree, but there are often times when I am admitting my mum into hospital when I would just love to have a card to hand over that would show that I was a carer and would list her conditions. She has certain conditions that I cannot refer to in front of her, because she does not appreciate that she has them. Obviously, I will not mention them on the record. I know that I am short of time, Presiding Officer, so I will not go into detail about two local problems in East Dunbartonshire that I wanted to raise, but I will put them on the record. The Labour-Tory administration in East Dunbartonshire Council has decided that, for someone to get care from the council, their need has to be severe or critical, so the council has done away with supporting carers and those who need care in a preventative manner. Further, I heard just recently that it is being considered that respite transport costs will have to be met by those getting the respite. I welcome the minister’s announcement of £2 million for short breaks for carers. I hope that East Dunbartonshire Council will think again about introducing transport costs for those accessing respite. It is difficult to sum up in six minutes all that I have learned as a carer over the past 22 years, but I think that what we have heard in the chamber today will show that personal testimony in this area is powerful and instructive. I thank all those MSPs who have shadowed carers. Tommy Whitelaw has been referred to, and I urge members to look at his on-tour blog, which had me in tears—I had to run out of the committee room. He did it to me again last Friday at the Carers Link East Dunbartonshire annual general meeting, when he showed his blog again, and again I was out in tears. I also refer members to Kris Rodden, a young man of 28, who I went on a walk with on Sunday to raise awareness of dementia and to raise money for Dementia Awareness.

4. To ask the Scottish Government for what reason a disabled student in receipt of incapacity benefit and disability living allowance has to undertake a further assessment for the disabled students allowance from the Students Awards Agency for Scotland. (S4O-00331)

Is the minister aware of the extra pressures that the extra assessment can put on disabled students, especially those with developmental disorders such as autism? Would she consider working with representative charities and support groups to find an alternative set of criteria?

During the minister’s speech, Kevin Stewart intervened to raise the issue of the nuclear-test veterans. I take this opportunity to outline the background to the health problems from which those veterans are suffering. One of the first letters that I received following my election was from a constituent congratulating me but also raising the issue of the nuclear-test veterans’ health problems. Members can imagine my horror when I delved into the background of the subject. Between 1952 and 1962, the UK and the United States of America exploded more than 40 nuclear test weapons in Australia and the Pacific. Twenty-two thousand UK service personnel, most of whom were on national service, were drafted in to witness the explosions, although it would be more appropriate to call them guinea pigs rather than witnesses. Back in those days, the health and safety advice to those personnel was that they should turn their backs and cover their eyes. Even worse, Royal Air Force planes were sent to fly into the huge radioactive dust clouds within two hours of the explosions. Since the 1980s, there have been numerous studies on the health of nuclear-test veterans. Looking across them all, the most common health problems to appear in that group of people are leukaemia and multiple myelomas. The most recent survey, which was published on Monday, was a self-response survey in which letters were sent to nuclear-test veterans and focus groups were used. Ninety-one per cent of those people reported diagnoses of serious or long-term conditions following their service in the armed forces. Of the reported diagnoses, 60 per cent were of musculoskeletal problems, cardiac problems, genito-urinary tract problems, digestive tract problems and cancer. Those five conditions are all known to be linked to exposure to radiation. Members have spoken of the debt of gratitude that we owe our service personnel, and this is an area in which our debt is enormous, as the figures show. Australia, New Zealand, the United States, Canada, Russia and France have all acknowledged that debt to their service personnel. Not only that—they have also accepted that they owe them compensation. Sadly, as Kevin Stewart highlighted in his intervention, that is not the case in the UK. The case is live at the moment, so I cannot comment on it in detail. Nevertheless, I highlight the fact that, so far, the UK MOD has spent £5 million in legal battles to prevent the nuclear-test veterans from claiming compensation, instead of just paying it.

Mr Stewart is entirely correct and reminds me of something that I found out in the course of my research. The UK has compensated nuclear-test veterans, just not its own. In 1993, the UK Government gave the Australian Government £20 million ostensibly to clean up the Australian environment where we set off nuclear-test weapons. My first thought was that we could pay to clean up the environment but not to help our veterans who are suffering from ill health. However, when one delves into the issue, one finds that that £20 million was not just to clean up; it was also to indemnify the UK Government, through the Australian Government, against any claims for ill health in Australia resulting from what it had done in Australia. So, I advise Mr Stewart that the UK is on that list of countries—it just will not compensate its own veterans. The nuclear-test veterans very much appreciated their meeting with the minister in August and they appreciate all the work that he is doing on their behalf, which he has outlined. I am sure that everyone will want to support the estimated 70 surviving nuclear-test veterans in Scotland in their continuing campaign for justice from the Ministry of Defence.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what representations it has made to the UK Government on the possible effect in Scotland of the proposed cap on housing benefit for families that require more than four bedrooms. (S4O-00305)

I thank the minister for that answer and for the work that he has been doing on this matter. Will he raise the conflict between the cap on bedroom numbers and the requirements of section 137 of the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987 on overcrowding?

I, too, thank James Kelly for bringing the debate to the chamber. We have heard worrying statistics from the previous three speakers. My constituency of Strathkelvin and Bearsden has become a particular target for rogue and bogus traders. We have a large elderly population that is the fastest growing in Scotland. Elderly people are less likely to be victims of crime than people from any other demographic group, but they are particularly vulnerable to the crime that we are discussing. In preparing for the debate, I spoke to trading standards officers in East Dunbartonshire Council, who confirmed that the national figures that we have heard apply in Strathkelvin and Bearsden. Worries about home improvement work and uninvited traders always come top of the list of complaints that officers receive from members of the public. I praise East Dunbartonshire Council’s trading standards department for its good work. I know that its officers are constantly out and about throughout East Dunbartonshire, as I bumped into them at almost every gala day that I went to during the summer. It is important that we educate the public on the problem and give people resources in the hope of preventing them from becoming victims of such crimes. East Dunbartonshire Council trading standards officers have spot days when they work with the local police to spot the white van man of popular myth. They stop people to find out whether they are registered to do the work that they are setting out to do. One innovative approach that trading standards officers are taking is to go into schools to talk to children. We might ask why they do that, given that children will not be the victims of bogus and rogue traders, but they are the grandchildren of the people who are most likely to be victims. That is a wonderful way of working across the generations. Often, granny will listen to her grandchild when they proudly come home from school and say, “Granny, don’t let anyone into your house, because I’m worried about what would happen to you.” That is probably the best way to get information across, rather than through us preaching to older people. That said, East Dunbartonshire Council trading standards officers go into local day centres to ensure that the message is taken directly to the most vulnerable population. Some of the practical advice on the Age Scotland website, which James Kelly mentioned, is very good. As we are all making suggestions, one thing that we could look at in conjunction with Age Scotland is a little card or sticker to put on the door to remind the old and vulnerable about the people that they should think about not talking to or letting in. I hope that the debate will spur us all to work with local statutory and voluntary organisations and with our older neighbours so that we can end the scourge of bogus workers.

Would the minister like to take the opportunity to congratulate the pupils of Portree high school and the people from the Lucky2BHere charity foundation who gave a demonstration of community defibrillators in the Parliament yesterday?

It is gratifying that most members are showing their concern about the draconian measures contained in the Welfare Reform Bill. It is not just members who have concerns; it is voluntary organisations and, above all, as we know from our postbags, it is the individuals who will be affected by the reforms. I am delighted and proud that my Government has been working long and hard with a coalition of experts and has been lobbying the UK Government to ensure that the worst effects of the reforms are mitigated in Scotland. I will concentrate on the drastic effects that the reforms will have on those with mental health problems and those with developmental disorders such as Asperger’s. I thank the Scottish Association for Mental Health and Act Now for giving me the following figures: 42 per cent of those in Scotland who claim ESA do so because they have a mental illness; and 43 per cent of the decisions in Atos fitness-to-work assessments relating to those with mental health or developmental problems are overturned on appeal. Many members have already mentioned the fact that the Atos fitness-to-work assessment is completely inappropriate for those with mental health problems or developmental disorders.

No. I am sorry, but I will not. When we talk about the idea that those who are on ESA or incapacity benefit should be out working, we should remember that only 12 per cent of adults with an Asperger’s syndrome diagnosis are in full-time employment. An issue for folk with Asperger’s is that it is almost impossible for them to achieve employment without a huge amount of support and preparation. The position is made even worse when we consider that less than 40 per cent of employers in Scotland would employ someone with a mental illness. We cannot say that we are going to move folk from benefits into work unless we first provide them with the support that they need in order to meet the requirements of work. We cannot move into work those who are on ESA because they have a mental illness or a developmental disorder when employers are not offering them jobs. No one says that the welfare system is perfect. However, the reform process seems to be driven by the sole objective of reducing costs—such as the 20 per cent reduction to be achieved in DLA and the removal of the lowest level of DLA completely, whether or not someone needs it. Like other members, I believe that all that such a reform process will do is undermine the effectiveness of the support that the current welfare system provides for the most vulnerable in our society. As a member of the Health and Sport Committee, I look forward to scrutinising the LCM in the coming weeks. I also look forward to receiving more support and evidence from those in society who can inform us so much better. We cannot always make judgments based on our personal experiences or what we as MSPs get in our mailbags, although that helps to inform us. What we need is evidence to ensure that when we speak to Westminster we can tell it with a clear voice why we think that the Welfare Reform Bill is attacking the most vulnerable in our society. I cannot help but reflect that it would be hard to envisage a Parliament in an independent Scotland ever putting so many people into such a state of fear and alarm. Many of us agree that the bill before Westminster is inappropriate and ineffective, and I hope that many of us also agree that it is with the devolution of responsibility for welfare support and, ultimately, with independence that we will be able to ensure that the most vulnerable in Scotland are truly and properly supported.

Like other members, I welcome the publication of the consultation document on a new mental health strategy, which will allow many people in Scotland to contribute to the debate. As members said, one in four of us will experience mental ill health at some point in our lives, but mental ill health is still one of the most hidden illnesses in Scotland. I join members in thanking the see me campaign and in welcoming and supporting its work to try to end the stigma of mental ill health. I should perhaps also say: “See me? I’ve been there.” I have been a bit disappointed by the number of members who talked about the increasing prescribing of antidepressants as if that is a problem. As Dennis Robertson said, medicines—antidepressants are medicines—are prescribed by doctors to patients who need them.

We must all agree that doctors, and not ministers, prescribe. Jackie Baillie has led me nicely to the main part of my speech, which is on the evidence base for alternatives to medication. Those alternative therapies can be used to support the medication rather than being used on their own. I will focus on the evidence—of which I am aware from my days as a health librarian—for using physical activities to support people with mental problems. Those include t’ai chi and yoga, which I do daily. I point members towards the evidence that such activities reduce blood pressure and stress, and that the more one does them, the more cumulative the effect is. The effect is similar with more vigorous forms of physical activity: we are all aware of the evidence that exercise releases endorphins, which many of us will know as the happy hormones. They are always lacking in people who suffer from depression, which is one of the reasons why we must prescribe medication for them. There are other forms of activity that people with mental ill health can look towards, such as mindfulness and meditation. There is evidence that regular use of mindfulness as an attitude to life cuts relapse rates for depression in half. One of the areas that I particularly like is animal-assisted therapy. Many folk will know of the evidence that ownership of a pet, especially a dog or a cat, lowers the risk of heart disease and high blood pressure. I encourage members to turn on the National Geographic Wild channel and watch the dog whisperer Cesar Millan, who is one of my heroes. It is all about being a calm and assertive leader when you are training a dog. If that is not the foundation of good mental health, I do not know what is. Those are all proven therapies, and—as members might expect, given my background—they are all based on evidence such as randomised controlled trials and meta-analyses. I am talking about those therapies today not only because they are good when one has a mental illness; they are also tools to use in periods of wellness. They are long-term therapies, so they need long-term support rather than just an eight-week prescription. Perhaps all of us, rather than just those of us who have mental health problems, should practise such therapies day in, day out for a calmer and better life.

Again, I refer Mary Scanlon to the fact that prescriptions are given by doctors, who will review the medication, when necessary, for each patient. I have a small amount of time left, but there are two areas on which I want to pick up. One is mental health in old age. I am delighted to see the dementia strategy, but we must not forget that dementia is not the only mental illness of old age. Too often, depression can be dismissed as being just an adjunct to old age, but those with mental health problems in old age must be viewed in the same way as anyone else with a mental health problem. I turn to the Welfare Reform Bill that is currently going through Westminster, to which my colleague Margaret Burgess referred. The SAMH briefing that members have received states that “sweeping changes to the benefits system will impact people with mental health problems”, that “over 46 per cent of incapacity benefit recipients in Scotland have a mental health problem”, and that “the work capability assessment” that recipients must undergo “has been shown to be flawed and mechanistic and unable to capture the impact of mental ill-health on a person’s ability to work.” I have experience of that with the lovely company Atos Healthcare, which asked me when I was on incapacity benefit with depression whether I could touch my toes. I am not quite sure how that showed whether my mental health was well. I look forward to a mentally healthy Scotland, and I hope that members on all sides of the chamber can work together to ensure that the Westminster Government clearly recognises the problems that the Welfare Reform Bill will bring to those with mental ill health.

Dr Simpson perhaps missed a fantastic briefing last night, which was hosted by Malcolm Chisholm and Willie Rennie, in which Professor Tim Stockwell showed us the evidence on minimum pricing over 20 years in Canada.

I thank James Dornan for lodging his motion and for bringing the debate to the chamber. I am glad that Dr Simpson agrees with us on one thing: that this is a health problem. We can talk about the issue in terms of politics and which party says what; in terms of culture, including why Scotland drinks through the long dark night; or in terms of economics, with regard to who can tax and who will make a profit. However, at the end of it all, we must admit that Scotland is drinking itself to death. The evidence is irrefutable. We are grateful to Malcolm Chisholm and Willie Rennie for holding the briefing last night, which I mentioned in my intervention. Dr Peter Rice’s statistics were stark and terrifying. Between 1970 and 2006, deaths from cirrhosis of the liver in Scotland rose sevenfold, yet from 1971 to 2007, which is approximately the same period, all other deaths—including those from the big five, including heart disease, cancer and stroke—fell. We must ask ourselves what we should do, and what the solution is. I urge members to turn to the evidence that minimum pricing is the answer. Professor Tim Stockwell made it clear last night from the work that he has done that, in the 20 years in which Canada has had minimum pricing, it has had a phenomenal result. Meta-analysis shows that those are the facts. A Gallup poll in 2007 found that if there was a 10 per cent rise in the price of alcohol, there would be a 5 per cent drop in consumption and in the harm caused by alcohol.

As Ms Dugdale was there, she will remember that Professor Stockwell said very clearly that minimum pricing is the answer to reducing consumption and the harm caused by alcohol. Dr Simpson might want to look at another piece of evidence that we were shown last night: the 2009 study by Meier et al, which said that young people and high-risk drinkers are most responsive to pricing strategies. Minimum pricing reduces the harm that alcohol causes. My contribution is short, but I will finish with something that Professor Stockwell said last night. He said that we should never doubt for a moment the scientific evidence that raising the price of alcohol leads to a fall in consumption and harm. Let us stop the dialogue of death and the refusal to accept the evidence and, when we next meet to vote on minimum pricing in the Parliament, let us ensure that the vote is unanimous in order to tackle Scotland’s health problems.

8. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will support an awareness campaign regarding the prevention of pressure sores. (S4O-00181)

May I draw the minister’s attention to a suggestion from one of my constituents? Peter Hodge, of Lenzie, suggested that all wheelchairs should have an advice label on them that would remind people that prolonged use raises the incidence of pressure ulcers.

I must begin by making two declarations: I am a member of the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals and I am a carer who manages a direct payment. I welcome many aspects of the legislative programme, but members will not be surprised to hear that I want to concentrate on self-directed support. However, I would first like to say that I am glad that Iain Gray apologised for his flippancy about the National Library of Scotland. It is a proud, world-renowned and modern institute—so modern, in fact, that this morning it began to follow me on Twitter. The reason why we need legislation is that the library’s governance was set up in 1925 and it wants to be a 21st century organisation. I welcome the reintroduction of proposals on minimum pricing. During the election, I discovered that, in my constituency, it is possible to buy 3 litres of cider at 18p per unit. We need minimum pricing because 18p is a recipe for mayhem and alcoholism. I am delighted about the children’s rights bill, which is on an issue that I championed when I was first in Parliament in 1999. That bill seems to me to be the logical conclusion to the appointment of Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People. On self-directed support, I welcome the Government’s stated principle that the aim is to promote choice and control for those who are in receipt of social care and to promote the independence of those people. The First Minister referred to the independence generation. I would say that self-directed support will help to foster an independence generation. I will focus on five aspects of the self-directed support bill. Given my background, members will not be surprised to know that one of them is on older people. I will also consider assessment, regulation, support and carers. We all know about the demographics and the rise in Scotland’s elderly population. My constituency of Strathkelvin and Bearsden is home to the largest rise in Scotland. We spend £1.1 billion per annum on social care, but only 7 per cent of that budget is spent on care at home, although that is what most people want. Sadly, the uptake of direct payments is still lower among the older population, so I hope that the self-directed support bill will ensure greater uptake. The bill, with its promotion of independence and enablement, will be a preventative measure rather than a reactive one, as social care so often is for older folk. I hope that, if it works, that preventative measure will mean fewer admissions to acute care and more people living longer healthy lives at home. Assessment is fundamental to the success of any self-directed support and of the preventative model. Assessments for social care must encompass not only people’s care needs, but their expectations for their quality of life. I am delighted that we are moving much more to considering the success of the outcomes of that assessment, rather than outputs. The preventative criterion alone will ensure that care is always there when it is needed, rather than only when the situation becomes critical. As a constituency member, I raise the issue that if we are to ensure that the preventative element of self-directed support and care in the community is working, we must ensure that the bar for accessing care in the community is lowered so that care is provided before the situation becomes critical or substantial. That does not happen in many local authorities. If, as happens in East Dunbartonshire Council, we wait until a person is critical or in substantial need of care, we have probably missed the chance to use preventative measures to ensure that the person stays healthy. That point has been supported by WRVS in a recent report. On regulation, I refer ministers to the current Health and Sport Committee inquiry on the regulation of care. One issue that is beginning to arise from the evidence is that we need to consider not only whether regulation is fit for purpose now, but whether it is fit for the future, when, we hope, more care will be delivered in people’s homes. Many reports indicate that carers and care users find the idea of self-directed support a bit scary to begin with. I was scared when I first looked at direct payments for my mother. However, all reports show that, with support, things become manageable. We must ensure that such support structures are in place. My final theme, members will not be surprised to hear, is carers. The importance of carers runs through all reports and evidence. I am delighted that, in the national strategy, the Government recognises carers as partners in care; I hope that we will see that move further. The only item that I am disappointed about in the national strategy for care is that there will be “no drive to remove ... legislative limitation on employing family members as personal assistants”. Three quarters of a million unpaid carers in Scotland provide services worth £7 billion. As Carers Scotland said in evidence to the Health and Sport Committee, one of the easiest ways to sort out all the problems is to give direct payments to the people who are already doing the caring.

Is the member aware that there are other ways of providing connectivity besides cabling, and that we need to consider methods involving wireless and satellite technology?

It is interesting for me to take part in the debate, because my first speech in the Scottish Parliament, in 1999, was as a librarian talking about seamless access to information for all. Here we are, 12 years later, and the situation has not advanced greatly in that time. Vicky Nash, the director of Ofcom Scotland, has said that, in terms of connectivity, Scotland is a country of contrasts. Only 37 per cent of Scots have cable access, whereas the figure is 48 per cent across the UK. That leads to problems with fixed broadband not-spots, as they are called, most of which are, as members know, in rural areas. Yet, the demand exists for access to broadband. Through the broadband reach project that the cabinet secretary has spoken about, we can look at the statistics and find that there is equal take-up in urban and rural areas when broadband is available. That goes against the UK trend. There is still much to do. We have heard about the £50 million from the Scottish futures fund, but it is vital that Scotland get its requisite share of the £530 million in the UK Government’s Britain’s superfast broadband future strategy. I say “requisite share” because, as we have less connectivity, we should get more than our population share of that money. Other members have referred to the fact that figures for mobile coverage and connectivity are similarly problematic. I direct members to how Norway has managed to provide mobile connectivity through NetCom, which is a private company there. For me, this is not a technical exercise; it is about a means and a method of delivering services. I will concentrate on telehealth, to which a few members have referred. Telehealth is telemedicine and telecare in their totality. Last year, the Health and Sport Committee produced a report entitled “Clinical portal and telehealth development in NHS Scotland”, in which the committee made it absolutely clear that telehealth is of great value to Scotland and especially to our remote communities. The changing demographics of Scotland, especially our growing elderly population and the growing populations in our rural and remote communities, mean that telehealth is one of the ways of providing health and care services to the many people who need them. The Scottish centre for telehealth has reported on some groundbreaking projects—the cabinet secretary referred to one in Moray. I draw folks’ attention to the telestroke project that is centred in Orkney, the teledermatology project in the Western Isles and the telecardiology project in mid-Argyll. Those are all interesting projects that show the value of telehealth in looking after people where they live, but ensuring that they still have access to the highest level of consultants throughout the country. I have a friend in Skye who has a pacemaker in his heart that sends messages to Germany, which are sent back and analysed by his consultant in Aberdeen, who then tells his general practitioner in Portree how to treat him. That is the method and magic that we want to ensure everyone can access. One of the most interesting ways that we can move on telehealth is towards the care of long-term conditions and the remote monitoring of conditions such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and hypertension. That will enable folk to remain in their communities while still being monitored and referred, as appropriate, to their local general practitioner. Paragraph 78 of the Health and Sport Committee’s report states: “A key piece of infrastructural development necessary to support such telehealth services is the availability of high-speed broadband internet access. As with many other aspects of the public services, broadband access is especially important in remote and rural areas.” It is timely that we are having this debate to ensure that we get connectivity throughout all our rural and remote communities, not only for the sake of it but to ensure that we can get high-quality public services to everyone in Scotland who needs them. We have the vision for, and evidence of, what connectivity can deliver for our communities. Today I am speaking specifically about health, but we need that infrastructure generally. I hope that members on all sides of the chamber can work on that and agree to support the Scottish Government in its representations to the UK to ensure that we receive the necessary funding to get that connectivity.

As a returning MSP, I have to say that it is a great privilege to make my first speech in what, to me, is a new Parliament. It is also an honour and a responsibility to do so as constituency member for my home area of Strathkelvin and Bearsden. In keeping with previous speeches, I wish my predecessor, David Whitton, well in his life outside Parliament. First of all, I must declare an interest: for many years now, I have been the carer for my elderly and infirm mother, and I was an employee of Carers Link East Dunbartonshire. In those capacities, I want to thank the cabinet secretary for her personal commitment to the future planning for care of the elderly in Scotland. Members have talked about demographics and mentioned various figures. The issue is particularly important in Strathkelvin and Bearsden and, indeed, across East Dunbartonshire, which has the fastest growing elderly population in Scotland. From a base in 2001, by 2016 the number of over-65s will have increased by 22 per cent and the number of over-85s will have increased by an astonishing 101 per cent. Although that is testament to the health, vigour and vitality of many of my older neighbours, for every one person like my father-in-law, who will be 99 in three weeks’ time and still goes swimming twice a week, there are five older people like my mum, who need help with long-term chronic conditions. I am delighted to hear the cross-party support for the emphasis on care in the community. It is what our older folk want and, as a health librarian, I know that the evidence says that it is the best approach. However, as a carer and having worked for Carers Link, I must stress the amount of planning and thought that needs to go into all of this. At the moment, the theory is great but the practice is not always ideal, and the crux to ensuring that practice becomes as good as the theory is the integration of social and health services. For example, we have been talking a lot about nutrition. People who live at home can have their dinner made for them, but that means that someone will visit them for 15 minutes, stick a meal in the microwave and leave them to eat it and clean up. That is simply not good enough if we are talking about supporting older folk and ensuring community spirit; indeed, all it is good for is ensuring huge profits for Marks and Spencer, as that is where we go to buy microwaveable food for our older people. There are also what are known as tuck calls, when someone comes any time from half past 6 to half past 10 at night to put people to bed.

I apologise—I was probably being a bit flippant. All I was trying to say was that older people in such situations tend to eat something in a plastic microwaveable pack, not good home-cooked meals. The reality is that we will have to give this matter a lot more care and attention. After all, we want our older folk to be independent. As a Labour member has already pointed out, independence must mean that they are supported in their care, not left isolated in their own homes. Some of the current problems with care in the community are leading many service users to move in the direction of direct payments, so that they can get their needs assessed and buy in what they need. However, the approach has huge limitations. Many of those who are looking for direct payments need support in completing the process and actually getting a personal assistant. We need to spend a lot of time looking at that area. One quite technical issue that I have come across and which I will take up later with ministers is the way in which the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 works with regard to personal assistants. One in eight of us in Scotland is a carer, and we save the Government approximately £6 billion per annum. I very much want us to be seen as true partners in the care of the elderly people whom we look after when the integration of social and health care is being looked at. Please involve us in the planning and listen to those of us who support folk. If I may talk about another place, I note that while carers are saving Scotland £6 billion per annum, the Westminster Government is giving people £59 a week for a 35-hour week in a caring role. That has to be considered at Westminster. Last week, I raised an issue with the minister for housing, whose reply I am delighted with. A long-term strategy will be considered to ensure that we have housing that is fit for elderly folk to stay in. Adapting someone’s current home is often not the safe answer to ensuring that they can remain at home. On benefits and Westminster, finances are a big thing for old folk who live in their own home. The winter fuel allowance is welcome, but we have to make the point to Westminster that although everyone gets the same winter fuel allowance, it costs 20 per cent more to heat a house in Glasgow or Strathkelvin and Bearsden than it costs to heat a house on the south coast of England. When I was outside Parliament, I was pleased to be part of the getting it right for every child programme. Perhaps we now need to look at getting it right for every older person in Scotland. We have talked about dignity and choice. It is true that our older people need dignity and choice in life. I remind members that they also need dignity and choice at the end of life.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what funding it is making available for the development of new affordable housing. (S4O-00003)

I am sure that everyone in the chamber will welcome those figures. My constituency, Strathkelvin and Bearsden, faces a particular pressure in that it has the fastest-growing elderly population in the country. I know that the Scottish National Party manifesto made a commitment to consider the issue of housing for older people. Will the minister consider a request by an all-party group of councillors in East Dunbartonshire to meet and review the situation?

Yes indeed, I am not Mike Russell. Nor am I Irene McGugan; Irene and I are often confused with each other and I am delighted that we have, over the past few years, been able to work together on children's issues. I am not Margaret Ewing, who, as Margaret Bain, championed the cause for a children's commissioner when she was in Westminster. I am absolutely delighted that we can have this debate and that we are considering the bill. One of the things that delights me most about the bill is the fact that it is underpinned by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. I support many articles in that convention, but article 12, which says that we must listen to and hear what young people say, is one of the most important and is fully integrated into the bill. We all know that young people have strong opinions, not just on what happens to them but on the world around them. Recent events have shown just how articulate young people can be on all sorts of important issues. I am glad that that underpins the Commissioner for Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. I am also glad that the establishment of the commissioner's post comes from a positive desire, rather than, as Jackie Baillie said, as a reaction to a terrible situation in which other agencies have failed our children. We know that failures in the past have motivated many of us towards the appointment of a commissioner. It is exceptional that we are appointing a commissioner for all the positive reasons. In the past few weeks, as we have come to the end of the parliamentary session, I have been asked by journalists and members of the public which of the achievements of the past four years we in the Parliament are most proud of. I am sure that many other members have been asked that question, too. The appointment of a commissioner for children and young people in Scotland in our first Parliament in 300 years must rank near the top of our list of such achievements. If my reading of the business bulletin is correct, the Commissioner for Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill will be the final piece of legislation to be passed in the first session of the Parliament. That will be a fitting end to the first session. I wish any future commissioner well and I wish her or him many happy hours of debating with the young Scots of Scotland what they want. I would  like to issue the first invitation to the commissioner. When she or he takes up the appointment, I ask her or him to come to the big sister room of Westerton junior youth club to hear the demands for leisure facilities for young people in Westerton.

In line with Pauline McNeill's opening remarks, I congratulate the committee on its work. I also begin by apologising for introducing my amendment at stage 3. Saying that I was involved in the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Bill and the Building (Scotland) Bill is not an excuse; it is simply my explanation for missing stage 2 committee meetings. What lies behind amendment 1, which I may not press on hearing the convener's response, is the concern that I felt when I read section 6(2)(b). At the moment, the bill ensures that young people will have their views taken into consideration when the commissioner is deciding what work to undertake. I want to ensure that the voice of young people is a critical and continuing voice in the work of the commissioner. Young people should not be able to say only what they would like to see the commissioner doing; they should also be able to comment on the work that the commissioner is undertaking and to assess critically any work that has been undertaken in the past. On the annual report being laid before the Parliament, I noticed that section 10(2)(d) states that the report will include "the strategy for involving children and young people in the work of the Commissioner." Will the convener of the committee assure me that we can ensure that the spirit of the bill relating to young people's continuing and critical voice in the work of the commissioner can be encompassed under that section, rather than under section 6(2)(b), which to me says that they will be able to comment only on forward planning rather than being able to assess critically work that has been undertaken? I move amendment 1.

I am sorry that amendment 1 was perhaps not worded as carefully as it could have been. The amendment is a second draft and tries to ensure that the continuing voice of young people is heard. Given what the convener has said about that being the spirit of the bill—as I have always understood it to be—and her concern that amendment 1 would simply confuse matters, I seek leave to withdraw it.  Amendment 1, by agreement, withdrawn.

I declare my registered interest as a fully signed-up reading champion who has just undertaken four local events associated with world book day last Thursday. The minister mentioned the small grants scheme. How much funding has been set aside in total for the home reading initiative? What criteria has the minister established for achievements under the scheme?

I was interested in the minister's opening sentences, in which he said that he wants to ensure that the NHS "responds to ... the interests of local communities". In the light of that, when will he and the First Minister respond to the communities of Kirkintilloch and Bishopbriggs by accepting their invitation to come and explain to them why, month after month, they see department after department at Stobhill hospital closing and transferring to the Glasgow royal infirmary?

I declare an interest as a subscribing member of the Children are Unbeatable! alliance. Many of us in the chamber, and throughout Scotland, are deeply disappointed by the dilution and diminution of section 43 during the stages of the bill. At this point, we must say, "No further." I should like to introduce some evidence to the chamber on the effects of shaking on children and young people—I could have produced similar evidence for the other subsections of section 43. I shall give a definition of shaken baby syndrome, although, at this point, given the references that there have been to 15-year-old hulks, I should remind members that only last week a father was  convicted in the United States for shaking his 11-year-old boy to death. Shaken baby syndrome is the leading cause of death in child abuse cases in the United States. The syndrome results from injuries caused by someone shaking an infant, usually for five to 20 seconds. At this point, I will pause for five seconds to make members aware of how short a time that is. I shall give members some information from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke in the USA, which has described shaken baby syndrome. It says that the baby's brain rebounds against his or her skull, which might cause bruising, swelling and bleeding. That damage is intracerebral and might lead to permanent severe brain damage or to death. It states that prognoses for shaken children are poor. Most children will be left with considerable disability, and retinal damage might cause loss of vision. If the child survives, he or she might require lifelong medical care for brain damage injuries, such as mental retardation or cerebral palsy. To address how we prevent the problem, I shall quote from the National Institutes of Health of the United States, which states: "Never shake a baby or child, whether in play or in anger." A baby should never be shaken as reasonable chastisement, and a child should never be shaken with reasonable force. We are duty bound by morality and by our subscription to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, in particular by articles 2, 3, 19 and 28. I also remind members that we are not lawyers; we are legislators and we set the tone for the judiciary. I shall finish with a quote from the zero tolerance booklet that we all received today. It states that, in 1800, "Judge Buller ruled that a man could beat his wife with a stick as long as it was no thicker than his thumb. It was considered acceptable at this time that men would need to use violence to control and punish their wives." Change is possible; we must make it happen.

I was going to begin my speech by declaring my registered interest as a member of the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals. However, having heard the earlier speeches, I will concentrate my remarks on school buildings. As we have heard, evidence shows that a pleasant and healthy environment leads to healthy education and good educational attainment. My colleague Tricia Marwick has already quoted from the Audit Scotland report that told us that under the public-private partnership regime to which this Government seems to be wedded, we are already paying 3 per cent more in additional interest payments on the schools that we are procuring under PPP. Only last week, we heard that Amey—the company that used a PPP to build our schools in Glasgow and Edinburgh—made a 31 per cent profit on that contract.

I was anticipating that intervention from Mr Fitzpatrick. I remind him of the meeting that we both attended last week with Cathy Jamieson. At that meeting, the parents of pupils who attend Kirkintilloch High School showed their hostility towards the use of private finance initiative contracts in building public schools in East Dunbartonshire. At that meeting, Cathy Jamieson said that it was her responsibility to "spend the money wisely". Given the information we have had from Audit Scotland and  the gross profits that Amey has made from the Glasgow schools, how many more schools could we have built from that profit and the interest on that money? Is that a wise use of public money? How many more teachers could we have got and how much smaller could class sizes have become using those grossly inflated profits? Is that responsible use of public money?

Mike Russell's comments lead me on to say that a procurement process for public buildings should be open, consultative and participative. As Mr Fitzpatrick and I know, those processes should not be shrouded in commercial confidentiality—or secrecy—as was the outline business case to which Mr Fitzpatrick referred. I wonder how the member can support an outline business case for a joint venture from East Dunbartonshire Council, when the council refuses to discuss it in public with members of the public or with parents.

The other day, I was at another meeting with Brian Fitzpatrick, but because of the commercial confidentiality and secrecy surrounding the issue, a local school where the building is crumbling around the pupils has been offered "tarting up" and maybe—if members will excuse my cod Latin—fructus hodie, or jam tomorrow. Not-for-profit trusts would ensure that the public, parents and pupils were involved producing schools, rather than having foisted on them schools that are not fit for purpose—schools whose only purpose is to provide profits for private companies.

I return to amendment 19. Until the minister answered John Scott, I thought that we were getting somewhere. We know that the bill is about integration and achieving through consultation, but to ensure that we can agree to amendment 19, will the minister assure us that the acts to which he referred will be re-examined, in a consultative manner, in the light of the bill as an integratory measure?

Again, the SNP and the committee must acknowledge the consideration that the Executive has shown in listening to what we have said. I shall briefly address amendments 13 and 25. Proposed section 11(10)(a)(ii) states that SEPA should publish a notice in a local newspaper circulating in the river basin district. Perhaps it would have been more appropriate to refer to the sub-basin area, as the river basin district covers the whole of Scotland. However, I appreciate that the minister has taken our thoughts on board. In relation to amendment 25, I give my personal thanks for the letter, and for the consultation in which we have been involved. However, I have another slight suggestion. Paragraph (b) of the proposed new section states that the information is to be provided in such other formats as the organisation thinks fit. I suggest that that needs more to back it up, perhaps some guidelines. I welcomed the minister's comments this afternoon that SEPA would have to provide someone to talk through and explain information, but I should like to see guidelines to support that. The reason why I ask for that is that I hope that we will get some imaginative solutions, rather than the standards ones, to providing information in a variety of formats. I have been thinking about information being provided to a specific group of users who may want to consider a particular aspect of the plans. It also strikes me—the minister will not be surprised to hear this—that the guidelines could suggest that when organisations consult and hold informative evenings about the plans, they should think about how they provide audio assistance to members of the audience. As members know, I often have to wear headphones to pick up information. If there were guidelines, that point would be drawn to the attention of all those involved. I thank the minister for moving the amendment.

I welcome the fact that the Executive has recognised and accepted the importance that the committee placed on wetlands. I also welcome the fact that the Executive has recognised that we were looking for integration of activities across sectors. I want to question the minister on amendments 17, 19, 20 and 21. I seek not so much direct answers as assurances about those amendments, which would change the bill as amended at stage 2. On amendments 17, 20 and 21, will the minister assure us that his proposed changes would still protect wetlands? In particular, would amendment 17 protect wetlands from being drained or affected by the activities of others vis-à-vis abstraction and impounding upstream? In mentioning the impact of impoundments on wetlands, the minister said that his amendments would guarantee that wetlands would be protected. I ask the minister to explain that a little bit further, as I was not quite reassured from his opening remarks that impounding and abstraction activities would not affect wetlands. Therefore, I am not sure that we should remove the wording that protects wetlands. I am much more concerned about amendment 19. I hope that I am not the only person who did not understand the minister's explanation of why we need the amendment. If we were to agree to amendment 19, we would lose the objective of integration, from river all the way through to coastal waters. The definition of "water environment" includes transitional waters, inland waters and coastal waters. Given that definition, why does amendment 19 appear to seek to chop the river away from its coastal connection to the sea? We need a bit more detail on that.

As Bristow Muldoon said, the minister referred to other pieces of legislation that will cover those waters, but will they be reviewed in light of the bill—which we will pass today—if it is necessary to do so to achieve its objective of integration?

Will the member give way?

rose—

That could take 100 years.

I join Robin Harper in thanking George Lyon for bringing the topic before us. Scotland has such huge potential in renewable energy, and we have to start at the beginning if we are to ensure that we get it right so that, when we exploit that potential, we will gain benefits for everybody. George Lyon spoke about the ambitious targets that have been set and about the fact that the Scottish Executive has put out to consultation the idea of exceeding its target of 18 per cent for renewable energy by 2010; it is hoped that it will achieve a level of 40 per cent by 2020. The minister will not be surprised to hear me say that I would like the Executive to be a lot more ambitious. Based on the current figures and on the capacity that we are already planning for, it would be possible to achieve a lot more. That is why the SNP has set targets of drawing 25 per cent of electricity from renewable sources by 2010 and 50 per cent by 2020. Robin Harper spoke about Scotland being inventive in this area. We have a history of being inventive, but of not reaping the economic benefits of that inventiveness, which the SNP would be very keen to see. We must ask the Executive where the green job strategy is. We must ensure that we are not just dealing with inward investment by foreign companies to build wave or other turbines here. We should use the expertise that exists here and we should employ our people here in Scotland. Much of George Lyon's speech concentrated on  the worries that communities might have. Although they might be unfounded, those worries exist. When we plan for renewable energy, the SNP would very much like it if we considered community involvement. On local plans for individual local authority areas we could, in consultation with communities, consider zoning areas for renewable energy, which would give rise to much more co-operation from those communities. Similarly, communities could reap some of the direct economic benefits. That is already happening—I am aware that Evanton community council receives a substantial sum of money each year from the wind farm in that area. We could also consider setting up trusts, through which a community would receive, say, a penny per megawatt. To deal with things in those terms might ensure that the benefits were reaped locally. The minister will not be surprised to hear that I hope that the Scottish Executive will use its devolved powers in the matter to ensure that we go all out to ensure that renewable energy schemes go ahead. We might have to re-examine the renewables obligation Scotland scheme—ROS—to give more of a leg-up to wave and tidal power, which have huge potential for Scotland. We know that some of the issues that are related to renewables are reserved, but let us not worry about those. Let us go for independence, so that we can have a renewable Scotland in an independent Scotland.

Bristow Muldoon opened with a good explanation of the starting point for the Transport and the Environment Committee's inquiry. He talked about the frustration of travellers and of other rail network users. He also said that the moment is opportune, because it has been and is a time of great change for the railways in Scotland and the UK. His opening remarks and the opportune timing give the lie to some of our opponents' comments about the SNP's view of the need for change to the railway structure.  I will take a few minutes to consider some of the rail network problems that the committee's report threw up and that have not been dealt with by the changes that have been mentioned or in the replies that we have received from ministers. It took a while for STAG to be mentioned in the debate, but I am glad that Robin Harper and John Scott, among others, referred to it. The Transport and the Environment Committee is committed to that guidance. We are concerned that some parts of STAG conflict with the SRA's guidelines and that must be resolved, but the committee recognises the strength of STAG and we must ensure that the SRA recognises it. Perhaps a more Scotland-focused SRA would be more amenable to guidance on that from the Executive. Another matter that concerned the committee greatly was financial transparency. Great debate was held about whether the evidence showed a Scottish gain in railways investment over the Scottish collection of Railtrack access charges. Railtrack did not help that debate. Janette Anderson told the committee that "we do not produce sets of accounts for Scotland, as we are not a separate subsidiary."—[ Official Report , Transport and the Environment Committee, 15 May 2002; c 3072.] We have learned that we have not moved forward from that position. We might not have Railtrack any more but, as we heard from my colleague Kenny MacAskill, the SRA does not produce separate accounts for Scotland. The minister agreed with the committee about financial transparency. In paragraph 44 of the report, the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning is quoted as saying: "Transparency on track access charges can only be helpful."—[ Official Report , Transport and the Environment Committee , 12 June 2002; c 3280.] The phrase "can only be helpful" has to be one of the biggest understatements that has been made about Railtrack financing. Those points led the SNP to dissent from the committee's view that there was no need to create a separate Scottish network rail company; however, if we went down that route at this time of change, we would be sure that money that was raised in Scotland was invested in Scotland. We could do something about the frustrations of rail users, which was the starting point of the committee's report. Problems have arisen in respect of transparency and accountability of relationships; those problems are not as yet resolved. In Annexe B to the report, ScotRail is quoted as saying that "key policy decisions affecting present and future investment in Scotland's railways" are "being taken in London." That led the committee to make extensive recommendations in paragraph 47 about the priorities for investment and progress in Scotland's railways. We also warned in paragraph 46 that, if we do not see those priorities coming to fruition in decent time, we might have to revisit structural reform of the railways in Scotland. The committee hopes that its detailed recommendations, its list of prioritised projects and the problems that it highlighted are addressed. The minister listened courteously throughout the committee's inquiry—he must now show determination to deliver for Scotland's railways.

I begin by congratulating the committee on the work that it has done. The Parliament should also thank the committee for the work that it has done on the bill. It is quite an achievement.  I remember what I think was the first meeting of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee in 1999, when we sat about and said, "What are we going to do for the next four years?" The children's commissioner was one of the items raised at that time, and it is an achievement that, before the end of the parliamentary session, we will have the ability to appoint a children's commissioner in Scotland. I followed the germination of the bill. Donald Gorrie and I are perhaps the only members to take part in today's debate who have followed the bill's progress from afar. That interest might allow me to bring to the stage 2 discussions some issues that could be considered so that the bill is exactly right. I mean no criticism of the work that has been done, but that would lend a fresh eye to some of the work. The investigations that the commissioner will be able to undertake will be a huge part of the commissioner's work. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee took a great amount of evidence on that matter. I know that the committee rejected the idea that the commissioner should be able to investigate individual complaints. That is clearly stated in section 7(3)(b). I remind the stage 2 committee that we are talking about human rights, and children have human rights as well. The Paris principles, which relate to the monitoring of human rights, do not proscribe commissioners and regulators from investigating the cases of individuals who feel that the system has let them down. I offer a word of caution, because there may well be times when individual young people and children feel that they have exhausted the processes that are available to them.

I am not looking for the commissioner to be the last court of appeal, but having talked about exhausting the process, I hope that there will always be someone to whom children and young people can turn if they feel that the system has let them down. I put that point to the stage 2 committee. The chamber will not be surprised to hear that I have concerns about section 7(3)(a), on reserved matters. Children's lives in Scotland do not fit into the schedules to the Scotland Act 1998, so I hope that, although the commissioner will not be  allowed to investigate reserved matters, he or she will always feel confident and free to comment on reserved matters that impact adversely on the lives of children in Scotland. Ian Jenkins mentioned refugees and asylum seekers. Recently, we have discussed such issues regularly in Parliament, in relation to asylum-seeking children attending local authority schools. That is a reserved matter, but I hope that the commissioner will not feel constrained. I would like to comment on a few other areas, but I see that the Presiding Officer is asking me to wind up, so I will simply state that a few technical issues will have to be examined at stage 2. I am pleased that the bill and the explanatory notes recognise that when we establish the role of commissioner, it will not be set in stone but will be continually reviewed. I am also pleased that the commissioner will be able continually to review his or her role, and that the Parliament will be able to continue to expand that role as necessary.

Nora Radcliffe began by saying that the bill is technical and by implying that it is boring. The bill is not exciting, but it is important, and it will be instructive to watch how a former committee member who knows the Transport and the Environment Committee's concerns translates them into amendments to the bill. A stage 1 debate is about a committee's being able to highlight its areas of concern and, on reading the Transport and the Environment Committee's report, we see five areas of concern. One of those concerns stems from the Social Justice Committee's report, which I commend to the ministers, on fuel poverty and sustainable development. Members of that committee were also concerned about costs to local authorities, the role of private verifiers and, more important, the introduction of monitoring and auditing of those private verifiers. We also had concerns about the definition of an owner. In my few minutes, I want to concentrate on the potential problem of the mandatory status of our new standards. The problem relates to the functional standards that we are about to introduce versus the technical standards that we have at the moment. Why is there a problem? For example, new functional standards for fire safety might say that building materials "shall not spread fire", which is a wonderful intention. However, the old technical standard would have set, for example, minimum times for fire doors to hold back fire and a minimum width for corridors, fire exits and stairways. That is the difference. The functional standard says, "shall not spread fire" but the technical standard ensures that fire cannot be spread. Similarly, the new functional standard will say that access to buildings should be convenient, but the previous technical standard would have set, for example, a maximum gradient for ramps. It is clear that there are issues that we must consider. I am particularly concerned by the transfer from technical to functional standards. That transfer has happened in England and Wales and the Transport and the Environment Committee heard from people who experienced the transfer that they have reservations about it and how it is working in practice. In particular, the committee heard from the Disability Rights Commission and the Fire Protection Association about their concerns on the transfer and the mandatory level of the standards. Before I go on to that, I return to the word "convenient", which the minister used and to which  Linda Fabiani referred in her speech. The DRC said that using the term "convenient" to describe access to a building is outmoded. In evidence to the committee, the then minister Hugh Henry said that it was okay to continue to use that term in the new standards because it was used in the Building (Scotland) Act 1959 and was understood as a technical term. I refer ministers to the DRC's evidence that said that if we are updating the standards, we should update the language as well in order to ensure that the terms that we use show fully what they are meant to achieve. I want confirmation that the technical standards that we have at the moment will not be reduced when they become functional standards and that the mandatory nature of the standards will be enforceable in law. One of the minister's civil servants said in committee: "The expanded functional standards will still set a minimum that must be met and that the courts will be able to enforce. That minimum will be no lower than that which we set at present through regulation."—[ Official Report , Transport and the Environment Committee , 13 November 2002; c 3690.] I want, as do many others, to hear on record from the ministers that that will be the case, because it is important. As both the Disability Rights Commission and Fire Protection Association pointed out, it is much more difficult to remedy accessibility or fire-proofing defects once a building is built than it is to ensure that it is built appropriately by meeting standards as it is built. Mention has been made of standards that buildings have to meet in other legislation. That includes part III of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, which will come into force in October 2004 and, in relation to fire safety, the European directive on construction products. If the functional standards in the bill do not meet those minimum standards, the buildings will not meet other legislation. I also want assurance that the Building Standards Advisory Committee will include representation from fire authorities and disability groups to ensure that such organisations' concerns are considered. In conclusion, I am concerned that much of the legislation's substance will come through regulation and guidance rather than be included in the bill. That presents Parliament with a difficulty in scrutinising and influencing legislation. Again, will the minister assure us that Parliament will be involved in the production of the regulations and guidance? Hugh Henry said that there would be many issues for ministers to deal with, including the appointment of verifiers. Will the minister assure us that Parliament will be part of that process to ensure that when the bill is passed, it works for everybody?

With such a short time to speak, I will not explain my objection but will, instead, appeal to the chamber to reject the approval of this statutory instrument on genetically modified crops because it is not about protecting the environment but about protecting a minister. It is about absolving that minister of responsibility for making political decisions on a matter that everyone in Scotland, including his party, agrees on. It is about a Liberal Democrat minister executing Labour party policies and so we should reject it.

I am glad that the minister raised that subject. It became apparent during the debate in September that Audit Scotland, not PricewaterhouseCoopers, would undertake the greater Glasgow review, but the minister has confirmed that PricewaterhouseCoopers will undertake the review. Will the minister confirm that PricewaterhouseCoopers already audits greater Glasgow's NHS services, which means that it is not the most appropriate body to use?

Bill Aitken's motion mentions the continuing concerns over the decisions on the acute services review that Greater Glasgow NHS Board has taken. I point out that those concerns were demonstrated by many hundreds of members of the public who marched through the streets of Kirkintilloch only two weeks ago to express their continuing concern about Stobhill hospital's future under the acute services review. As part of my continuing concern with the acute services review, on 5 November I attended the Greater Glasgow NHS Board annual general meeting. I appeared to be the only politician who attended that evening, but it was instructive to be there. Perhaps a few quotations—

I am sorry if Paul Martin is feeling sensitive. Perhaps, as part of that exchange of information, I can give some quotations from the AGM. Professor Dickson, the interim chair of Greater Glasgow NHS Board, lauded Professor Hamblen, who was chair at the time of the acute services review and who made  the decisions, for his "courageous decisions" on the acute services review. When we look at the courageous decisions that led us to having only two accident and emergency departments for the whole of greater Glasgow, we must wonder whether they should have been termed foolhardy decisions. As we have heard, those two accident and emergency departments have been criticised by the very consultants who will have to provide the services. Those two accident and emergency departments were decided upon on the basis of a flawed—I think that we all agree with that—transport study, which says that it is quicker for my constituents in Bearsden and Milngavie to travel through the Clyde tunnel than to go the accident and emergency department at the Western infirmary. I remind members that the Clyde tunnel is shut to trucks because of the firefighters' strike, as it is such a hazardous route to travel. To ask accident and emergency patients to travel that route seems nonsensical. To decide that two standalone ACAD units should take the place of two general hospitals in greater Glasgow also seems a foolhardy decision. Pauline McNeill mentioned that those ACAD units will be very big. They will be very big, but they are untried. Without the support of a general hospital, they will be, in the words of the consultant who runs the ACAD unit at Central Middlesex hospital, glorified outpatient departments, no matter how big they are. It was also worrying to be at that AGM and hear the interim chair of Greater Glasgow NHS Board say that the acute services review decisions had been "vindicated" by a vote in the Parliament in September. The fact that the acute services review is a continuing concern that MSPs continually have to raise in the chamber to debate its shortcomings with the Executive tells us that the decision was not vindicated by the Parliament. The vote that will vindicate the acute services review of Greater Glasgow NHS Board is the vote that will be held on 1 May next year, when I presume the people will return an SNP Government, which will be able to implement policies. Unlike the current one, which seems to do less for patients, we will actually provide services for patients.

Bristow Muldoon talked about the fact that the First Minister made commitments. Ross Finnie made a commitment that we would have a mandatory target for recycling, but we have lost that commitment. The bill that we are considering and through which we are about to pass responsibility to Westminster says that, if agreement between the Administrations cannot be met, there will be a fallback rule. Would that fallback rule mean that Scotland has to dae whit it's telt by Westminster?

I understand what Des McNulty is saying and the concerns voiced by some of the smaller voluntary sector organisations that he has mentioned, but those who have an intent to harm children will move from the regulated sector into the non-regulated sector if they know that they can exploit that loophole. Does Des McNulty agree that there is a need for an advisory panel to support voluntary organisations and to ensure that they will be part of the process and get the necessary help?

I join other members in welcoming the bill as another measure to add to our toolkit of child protection. The minister said that the bill is not a panacea and, at the Education, Culture and Sport Committee meeting on the bill that I attended, she said that she could not give 100 per cent guarantees on child protection. However, the bill advances our ability to protect children. I take issue with Ian Jenkins on one point. The bill is not about a loss of innocence, but about recognising today's cruel realities. The minister said that she is keen to hear the tenor of the debate. I will reiterate some of the committee's concerns, but the points bear repetition to ensure that the minister recognises that many members are concerned about the issues. Voluntary organisations do not have a statutory duty to refer people to the list. My comments are informed by the evidence that the committee took on the issue, but they are also tinged by my experience as a volunteer. I will not go into my experience in a voluntary organisation in great detail, but I will say that we could have done with a lot more help and support at one time. There is a lot of talk about the worry that the burden that the bill will put on voluntary organisations will prove to be onerous. Karen Gillon mentioned the SRU and Scottish Swimming. They do not regard the burden as onerous and do not want concern about that to outweigh the bill's intention to protect. The two organisations are doing much of the work anyway, never mind anticipating whether they will have to do it. That brings me to the evidence that we have heard about the need for an advisory panel on advice, training and support for organisations. The point is worth reiterating. The minister said that she expects that if organisations do not have a statutory duty, they will see themselves as having a moral duty. That exhortation from the minister lends even more weight to the need for an advisory panel for voluntary organisations. Another area that concerns me is the way in which "child care position" and "an institution" are defined in schedule 2. I do not want to address the large number of such points, but one example from the list in schedule 2 is a hospital that deals mainly with children. In Scotland, there are possibly only three such hospitals, yet clinics,  health centres, accident and emergency departments and the ambulance service all deal with children when they are most vulnerable. Therefore, we must reconsider the definitions of "an institution" and "child care position", as they apply to other institutions and positions. We have already heard that teachers are covered by the bill, but self-employed tutors are not. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland has raised concern about that, and the matter would bear a little more scrutiny and more definition at stage 2. Folk have said that we do not want to get into too much definition because that allows for loopholes, but the definitions in schedule 2 already leave too many loopholes and loopholes that are too big. It would be worth reviewing the definitions in schedule 2. Supported by evidence from ACPOS, I want also to address section 10(5), which is where employers have the defence of whether they reasonably knew that a person was disqualified before they employed them. ACPOS says that a way round that would be to place a duty on employers to check through Disclosure Scotland. If employers did that, that would ensure that they had taken all reasonable steps and followed—as the minister said—good practice in employment techniques. In her opening remarks, the minister implied that she expected employers to follow the full Disclosure Scotland route. I would like that to be more definite, so that it is not an expectation but a duty. The route works for employers and employees, as it allows employers to cover themselves with the argument that they made all reasonable checks, and ensures that employees, before they are employed, have been fully checked through Disclosure Scotland. I am not going to take up my seven minutes, Presiding Officer.

I thank the minister for that clarification, but I do not think that she has yet  taken us far enough along the route of understanding the position of the self-employed tutor who is not working through an agency, for example. Increasingly, parents are turning to tutors, with the drive to improve standards in schools and so on. I would like a wee bit more clarification. I recently received a letter from a constituent who had spent 20-odd years working in child protection services. She wrote to me with concerns about the new Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001, which came into force on 1 April, which she felt did not allow her to ensure full protection of children. My answer to her was that I felt that, taken in conjunction, the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 and the Protection of Children (Scotland) Bill will take us further along the route of ensuring child protection. I hope that the minister will accept many of the committee's recommendations. I know that we will not achieve 100 per cent child protection, but I certainly hope that we will raise the percentage and ensure that children in Scotland are afforded greater protection than at present.

Given that we are debating flexibility in schools, I will begin by talking about using flexibly the bricks and mortar of the buildings that we call schools. In 1999, before the Scottish Parliament election, the SNP proposed using our schools as children's  centres and opening them for more than eight hours a day to provide facilities for young people. It is increasingly clear that that is an idea whose time has come. Recent research by MORI and the British Market Research Bureau on behalf of the Kids Clubs Network found that one in three 11 to 18-year-olds goes home from school to an empty house and one in four young people admits to hanging around after school with nothing to do. How can we turn our schools into centres where young people want to be not only for their formal education, but for much more of their social education, outside the hours of 9 to 4? I would like the Executive to give such flexibility much more attention. That issue came through strongly in Children in Scotland's work with young people for the national debate on education. Young people said that they wanted their schools to be more than educational settings. Until we have a national network of youth clubs, which the minister knows I am always going on about, schools will be the places in which we can offer such provision. The minister must think about not only how we use such buildings, but how we fund them. As members know, the public-private partnership method to fund the schools that the Executive proposes to build will cost us an extra £400 million, according to Audit Scotland. That £400 million could have built us another 90-odd schools, which we could have used as children's centres. When we go down the PPP route, as in Glasgow, we end up with restricted access to the buildings, via charges or the contract, which can limit greater use.

Brian Fitzpatrick mentioned the new sports hall that will open at Bishopbriggs High School tonight and which we are delighted to see. The community will be able to access the hall, because it was not built under a PPP.

We also know that an additional cost of PPPs is the way in which maintenance contracts are presented to local authorities. The situation is not as simple as Maureen Macmillan makes out.  I will move on to the flexible use of staff. Members will not be surprised that I mention my registered interest as a member of the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals. We are talking about flexibility. The national literacy strategy says that research on progress showed widespread concern from staff that there was "too little ... opportunity for self-directed learning in the early stages of primary school" and for fun in reading in the early stages of primary school. The development officer's remit under the national literacy strategy is classroom and teacher focused.

I am terribly sorry, but I am short of time.

The minister and I attended the W H Smith reception today. I ask her to consider the 31 extra school librarians that we need in secondary schools and the school librarians that we need in primary schools, because they will move us away from the nuts and bolts—the mechanics—of reading to the exciting world of literature, as we learned at the W H Smith event. The national literacy strategy asks people to send in their ideas. Will the minister take it that my speech is my contribution, so that I do not have to write in? The issues that I have mentioned, especially flexibility, are important. I will finish by talking about the information that we discovered from children in Scotland. When we asked our young people what education is for, they said that it is not just about getting a job, but about education for life. Will the minister consider the 11 key points that the young people mentioned in their evidence? I have tried to cover five of them in my speech. We are talking about flexibility, funding, staffing and listening to our young people.

I am glad that, at the end of this debate, all parties are in agreement that the water framework directive is something that Scotland must sign up to, not only because we are part of the EU, but because it deals with the future of our water environment. A stage 1 debate gives us a chance to raise issues about the principles of the bill and to ask questions that we want to be answered at stage 2. It is not only the SNP that has raised issues about the bill. Before the Transport and the Environment Committee could say that it was happy with the  principles of the bill, it sought reassurances from the Scottish Executive on some main points, one of which was the financial memorandum, which I will return to later. Another point related to the cost-benefit analysis method. The minister has convinced me that the bill could bring great financial and social benefits but the tenor of the debate, especially with regard to the financial memorandum, tells us that he has not yet convinced all the members here or, more important, the stakeholders outwith Parliament on the method by which the cost-benefit analysis will be carried out. The committee wanted a clearer understanding that, as this is primarily an enabling bill, the affirmative procedure will be used in relation to the statutory instruments that we are relying on to implement the bill. The minister has come a long way towards that and we look forward to him moving even further at stage 2. However, the committee's report asks not only for the affirmative procedure to be used in relation to the statutory instruments, but for financial memorandums to accompany them. That does not happen as a matter of course at the moment, but given the financial implications of the instruments associated with the bill, we want them to have financial memorandums. On participation, I do not think that the minister has come as far as we would have liked him to. Colin Campbell talked about the fact that the notion of participation is mentioned slightly in the bill, but many of us want much more progress in that regard. Making sub-basin advisory groups statutory would go a long way towards reassuring us in that regard. The Transport and the Environment Committee, the SNP and others are concerned about the use of derogations. As yet, we have heard no great detail on that issue. We asked for greater detail on the connection costs policy in part 2 of the bill and we have heard from more than one member today about the impact that that could have on small rural developments. The minister has said that he will consult, but telling us that he will consult more does not answer Maureen Macmillan's questions. We need to know the Government's policy on small and rural development connections. Des McNulty—I hate to call him "Soapy Des"—raised SUDS earlier. The minister has not come far enough on that point. We need to know who is responsible for ensuring that we achieve sustainable urban drainage systems. A couple of members picked up on my next point. We want to ensure that, when we pass the bill and implement the water framework directive, we have joined-up government. That is a horrible term and we all hate it, but we must consider it. We have heard about the effect that the bill and  the directive will have on agriculture. That effect means that when the minister talks about strategies for agriculture and about agri-environment subsidies, he must consider everything in the round. We heard from Colin Campbell about forestry and how it can help us. We heard about biodiversity. We look for better assurance from the minister that, when we implement the water framework directive, we consider not only its narrow implications—how it affects water—but its effect on all his Government's policies to ensure that we have sustainable, joined-up government. We know that the Executive talks about that, but we want it to happen. I turn to the biggy that we have all addressed. Actually, there are two biggies: finances and flooding. I will consider finances. The Finance Committee and the Transport and the Environment Committee have criticised the financial memorandum. In fact, paragraph 107 of the Transport and the Environment Committee's stage 1 report makes it clear that "the Committee is content to recommend to the Parliament that the general principles of the Bill are agreed to" only "On the basis that these issues", including the financial memorandum, "are addressed by the Executive". I will quote from the letter that the minister sent to the committee on 25 October, which I presume to be in the public domain. On giving the committee a robust financial assessment, the minister said: "We have done that to the fullest extent we can." He went on to say that the report that WRc prepared, the financial memorandum and his letter of 27 September "convey all the information that is available." That is not enough for the Parliament to fulfil its duty of parliamentary scrutiny of the Executive and for members, not only of the Transport and the Environment Committee and the Finance Committee, to ensure that they have complied with their duty to scrutinise the financial memorandum. We are not satisfied with the minister's answers so far. We are not—and no member should be—able to vote for the financial memorandum. I am sorry that, with only 30 seconds left, I cannot turn to the other biggy—flooding. The Transport and the Environment Committee and the Parliament will be left with a huge task at stage 2 and in future consideration of the statutory instruments that will enact the bill's provisions. To achieve a sound and sustainable water  environment for Scotland, we are dependent on the Executive answering the financial questions that continue to be asked.

Notwithstanding what the minister said about considering legislation, will he explain why—given that mitigation of flooding will be one of the indicators of the success of the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Bill—he is not using that bill as the legislative vehicle with which to deal with flooding?

I feel that I should start with an apology to the chamber, and especially to the opening speakers, for my late arrival. Thank you, Presiding Officer, for your understanding of the vagaries of ScotRail timetabling. I want to confine my remarks to Low Moss prison, which we all know is unfit as a prison for the 21 st century. It is unfit for the prisoners, for the staff and for the community living around it. I am not the only person saying that; the same statement has been made by the minister, by the committee in its report and by the current governor of Low Moss. For the benefit of those members who have not been to Low Moss prison, I should inform the chamber of just how dire the situation is there. Low Moss is a category C prison for 300 prisoners. Those 300 prisoners are housed in ex-RAF wooden huts, in dormitories of up to 30 inmates at a time, and we know the problems that result from that kind of accommodation. Since the beginning of the year, we have had at least half a dozen incidents of disorder at Low Moss prison, the most recent of which was only a few weeks ago. It is not just disorder that the dormitory accommodation gives rise to. There are also  problems with drug taking. If there is a prisoner who wants to come off drugs living with 29 other inmates who may not want to, it is much more difficult for that prisoner to make that decision and stay with it. We heard that in the evidence that the governor gave to the Justice 1 Committee. There are also problems with the bullying and intimidation of prisoners in a dormitory situation. One of the things that struck me on a recent visit to Low Moss was that, although the education unit is excellent and its dedicated staff work hard with inmates, inmates can take part in the education programme only when they are in the education unit itself. It is much more difficult to find the peace and quiet to get on with work in a dormitory where there are 29 other inmates. That is something else that the Justice 1 Committee heard in evidence from the governor. The Justice 1 Committee said in its report "that the current prison is untenable", and the current governor, Ian Bannatyne, said in evidence: "My belief is that morale is not low in the sense that it is affecting staff performance, but there is a degree of uncertainty that will not be removed until decisions on the proposals in the estates review are made."—[ Official Report, Justice 1 Committee , 30 April 2002; c 3512.] Given those statements, I would like to ask the minister to tell us when Low Moss, as it exists today, will be closing. We keep hearing that it is past its sell-by date and we need to know what that sell-by date is, so that we know that the minister is making provision for the future. When he is reviewing the future, the minister must recognise that a private prison on that site is not an option. I say that because the record from Kilmarnock private prison is quite clear. We have seen the records on staffing, on drug taking and on lack of rehabilitation. Stewart Stevenson has quoted from parliamentary answers to tell us about the lack of innovation for staff there.

I am sorry that I cannot take Brian Fitzpatrick's intervention. Given Kilmarnock's record, we must be clear that a private prison on the Low Moss site is not the answer. We do not want to replace an inadequate building with an inadequate service. In closing, I stress that the community wants to know when the closing date for Low Moss will be and what the future is for that site.

The minister referred in her statement to the more than £1 billion that is to be invested in school buildings throughout Scotland. I am sure that no one in the chamber, no pupil and no parent would deny that that was necessary. Is the minister aware of last week's Audit Scotland report, which said that going down the intended PPP route will cost an extra 2 to 3 per cent in additional interest payments? That is £461 million, which translates into 92 extra schools. It also easily covers the £742,140 that it would cost to employ the 31 secondary school librarians that we need in this country to ensure that we have a smart successful Scotland. Why did the minister choose the PFI route over those extras that would make a real difference to education in Scotland today?

It gives me great delight to congratulate Brian Fitzpatrick on securing the debate. It also gives me great delight to know finally that CancerBACUP has secured its extended premises in Glasgow. That is because I used CancerBACUP in a previous life as the librarian at Huntershill Marie Curie Cancer Care centre. Brian Fitzpatrick talked about the fear and the panic that envelop people when they get cancer. Mary Scanlon told us that people often say that, as soon as they hear the word "cancer", they hear no more. In such a situation, information and knowledge about the illness is power, not only for the patient, but for their extended family and friends. That helps the patient to cope with and combat their illness as much as they can. Information gives people understanding of their illness and does not make them part of the myth of what their illness might be. It also gives people the power to understand the treatment that they are being given and therefore to become fully a part of that treatment and to overcome the myths. As Mary Scanlon said, many folk turn down treatment for fear that the treatment will be worse than the illness. It is increasingly important that patients know that they have greater chances of living with and beyond cancer and of more years of living with cancer. They must understand what is happening to them throughout those years. Patients and their families need to overcome fear. When I used CancerBACUP in a professional capacity all those years ago, I obtained information not only for patients, but for their families, who often had more fear than the patients. I thank CancerBACUP for the help that it gave me in supporting my patients all those years ago. I give CancerBACUP great congratulations and wish it well in Glasgow.

I declare my registered interest as a member of the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals. I will ask the minister about the promotion of Scotland's literary heritage. Has she considered discussing with local authorities the need to consider making it a condition of the tendering process for library book contracts that Scottish titles are purchased from Scottish publishers, given the demise of Cawdor Book Services Ltd, the last independent Scottish bookseller?

It gives me great pleasure to close on behalf of the Scottish National Party. I intended to make a joke about being there in the very early days of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, when we first began to speak about the issue. That led me to conception and birth, but I did not think that a joke about that was a good idea. I hope that giving birth is not catching. Conservative members have raised several questions. We will answer those questions. I know that Cathy Peattie will answer them on behalf of the committee, but I feel that I must review some of the things that Conservative members have said. Why do we need a commissioner for children and young people? We need a commissioner because there is no direct or focused way for young people in Scotland to have their voices heard. The views that have been expressed by Conservative members make me realise how important it is to ensure that children are able to make their voices heard in a direct way. The commissioner must have sufficient standing to make the Parliament and all its members listen to what they say on behalf of the young people of Scotland. I am proud that in the Parliament's three short years, the Education, Culture and Sport Committee has produced recommendations on how other committees should consult young people. I am pleased that the Scottish Executive has a ministerial task force on children and a national child care strategy. However, none of that takes away from the need to have a focused person with a clearly defined role who will ensure that young people's voices are heard with  authority. Brian Monteith said that MSPs could be commissioners. He had a set-to with Scott Barrie. How many MSPs are approached directly by young people? The majority of young people do not see us as people who will listen and work for them. Many of us try to make a connection with young people but, on the whole, young people have not made such a connection with us. A children and young people's commissioner would fulfil that role, almost on our behalf. I hope that a children and young people's commissioner would also be able to scrutinise the issues that young people have. The Conservatives have referred to children as individuals. Children are individuals, but they make up 20 per cent of our society and they bring to our attention a group of issues and problems that it is right to bring to our attention. In 1996, the first report on the United Kingdom's implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child made some specific criticisms of implementation in the UK. The second report is due shortly. Ten years after the implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child in this country, we know that the rapporteur will probably make some of the same criticisms again. We will be criticised for still not having proceeded with certain issues. I hope that the children's commissioner will bring focus to whether the work of the Parliament and the Executive complies with the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. One issue that has not been mentioned but which I feel quite strongly about is that the existence of the children's commissioner should help to ensure that the Executive and the Parliament produce in an easily accessible format the facts, figures and statistics on what is happening to young people. I know that we are making progress on that issue, but I am sure that if we had a commissioner demanding that, the facts and figures would have to be produced. That issue came to mind when I remembered how, for the Parliament's debate on mental health that took place a good two years ago, I had found it difficult to get statistics on mental health problems for young people and teenagers. Having a children's commissioner for Scotland could help us to achieve that. Murdo Fraser said that the commissioner should not get involved in legislation, as that is for the Parliament and for MSPs. I am sorry but, although the Scottish Parliament has a better record on ensuring that our legislation is in some way child proofed, we do not have everything right yet. I hope that a children's commissioner would help us in that respect. The minister referred to child impact statements. When we talk about the  Parliament equality proofing legislation, the thing that comes to mind is the fact that the Equal Opportunities Committee considers every piece of legislation to see how it impacts on equal opportunities. At the moment, there is nobody anywhere to consider how legislation impacts on young people. That is another valuable role that the children's commissioner could perhaps introduce.

Yes. As I mentioned, the Executive has a national child care strategy and a ministerial group on children. The commissioner should be a focus to ensure that the Executive is brought to heel if it falls down. The commissioner will push to ensure that the Executive does what it says it will do. Consultation on legislation is extremely important. Given the arguments backwards and forwards during last week's debate on the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill, I am proud that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, during its consideration of the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill, recognised that the bill impacted on young people. We commissioned consultation with the young people. We not only went out to consult the young people but brought them into Parliament in a way that they made them feel comfortable so that they could inform us. The report on the stage 1 consideration of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill shows that, of the 59 submissions that were received, only four were from groups that represented young people. Last week's debate did not really take into account young people's views on the bill. Unfortunately, the situation was similar in the Parliament's consideration of the Housing (Scotland) Bill. I am glad that Karen Gillon said that the question of which powers were reserved and which were devolved has been dealt with. The commissioner needs to be able to comment on reserved issues because, as we have heard, asylum and social security issues know no boundaries. Finally, let me quickly deal with the investigation of individual cases. A few weeks ago, we met Judith Karp, who is the UK rapporteur on the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. She told us that it was important that we should not restrict the commissioner's role in such a way that the commissioner was blocked from ever taking up individual cases. We always need to leave a safety net so that, if the appropriate body—be that  private or public—has failed an individual, there is still someone to whom that individual can turn. I am glad that the bill to establish a children's commissioner will be introduced. I am especially glad that the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child will underpin the role of the commissioner for children and young people in Scotland. Introducing such a bill is a public affirmation that the Parliament recognises that young people have a proud place in society in Scotland. We should recognise and applaud that.

I must use up a few of my seconds by declaring my registered interest, no longer as an associate of the Library Association, but as a member of the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals. From that, members will not be surprised to learn that I will talk about the role of literature in the cultural education of our young people. I will talk about the joy of reading, the pleasure that it gives each individual, the literacy skills that it teaches each child and the creativity skills with which it endows every child who reads. Scotland has a long and rich literary tradition of which we should all be proud. I am sure that all members join me in expressing concern at the demise of Cawdor Book Services Ltd, which was the last independent Scottish bookseller providing books to Scottish libraries. I will talk about the unique role of the literary co-ordinators who are already in our schools. Ninety per cent of our secondary schools have those literary co-ordinators—they are called school librarians. School librarians do not just provide books; they promote literature and reading to all our pupils. They promote it through formal lessons, in their lunch times and through reading circles and literary clubs. I bring members' attention to the Scottish writers project of 2000, which took Scottish titles into every school library in the country. Those titles were selected by pupils and were accompanied by a British Academy of Film and Television Arts award-winning CD-ROM that encouraged pupils to explore books and reading. I make a plea that that should not stop at the Scottish writers project 2000, but that we look forward to introducing the Scottish writers project into primary schools which, I understand, would cost £750,000. I suggest that  that money could come from the £1.75 million that has been set aside for cultural co-ordinators. The SNP does not like to make promises about money without saying where we would obtain it. Using the £1.75 million, I suggest that we extend the Scottish writers project to primaries, and for the princely sum of £742,140, we could make up the shortfall of 31 school librarians that we need to bring coverage up to 100 per cent of our secondary schools.

Do I have time?

I am asking the minister nicely, because he is the man with the money now, and I want the school librarians now. The literary culture of our country needs those school librarians now, so please, go on—make the commitment. We should also consider the early years. I recently received a letter from the deputy minister's colleague Cathy Jamieson, who asked me to be a reading champion and to participate in the home reading initiative. Do not worry—I will. I am a champion of reading. However, for the princely sum of £766,080, we could provide three professionals for each local authority, who could provide for pre-five, primary school and special needs. Those professionals would be librarians who could work in those sectors. I make a plea to the minister, but I also bring it to members' attention that school librarians have a vital role in the promotion of literary culture. The debate has shown that we feel strongly that we want our young people to be part of that rich literary scene.

Given that Torness will close in 2022 and that Hunterston B in my constituency will close in 2011, what plans does the minister have with local  enterprise companies, local further education colleges and other bodies to ensure that we have a skilled decommissioning work force in those days?

Will the minister take an intervention on that point?

In the minister's opening remarks, he referred to the Executive's obligations  under the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. Where does the Executive's acceptance of the Justice 2 Committee's view leave its obligations, with reference to article 19 of the convention, which says that states should take "all appropriate ... legislative ... measures to protect the child from all forms of physical ... violence"?

The debate has been interesting. Every MSP who spoke welcomed, as does the motion, the £700 million investment in Glasgow's health services. Every MSP who spoke asked pertinent questions about whether the Greater Glasgow NHS Board review meets the needs and aspirations of the people of Glasgow. Did we get any answers? Well, Frank McAveety summed it up when he almost refused to take interventions from his back benchers. The Executive has not listened to MSPs and does not appear to listen to its ministers. The Executive has also refused to listen to the 43,000 people who signed the "save Stobhill" petition. It is about time that that ended. The Executive must listen. I would like to pick up on one of Mr McAveety's opening comments. If the Executive is serious about listening, perhaps it will give time to the debate during its time in Parliament. I am sorry that so many of the members with local and constituency interests in the issue were unable to get into the debate. I am especially sorry that Paul Martin, a doughty fighter for Stobhill, was unable  to take part.

As every member is aware, the SNP has three hours for debate each month while Labour controls every other hour. Paul Martin is a member of the Labour party, which has accepted the review. The matter should have been debated in Executive time. The Executive's amendment gives "a commitment to keep named services at Stobhill and Victoria over the next five years". I was going to ask the minister to name those services but he told us that the services have already been named by Greater Glasgow NHS Board in its health improvement plans. If there is no change there, what is the point of mentioning it in the amendment? For the minister's benefit, I will name the services that Stobhill has already lost and which it will not be able to hang onto for five years: in-patient orthopaedics, in-patient renal medicine, vascular surgery, respiratory function services and laboratory services for bacteriology and pathology. Three weeks ago, we learned that Stobhill is to lose medical illustration. What is going to be left at the end of the five-year period? This is a piece of masterly spin but it will not be believed by anybody in the greater Glasgow area. I hope that Glasgow's Labour MSPs will not accept that spin and, when they come to vote later today, will listen to their constituents rather than accept the whip. While all this spinning is going on, staff morale at Stobhill is plummeting. Stobhill is finding it difficult to attract junior consultants. The minister has offered a five-year moratorium, but what is a five-year career path for a junior consultant? Nurses are leaving Stobhill and others are not applying for vacant posts in the hospital. Robert Brown mentioned managed clinical networks, which are important in relation to Stobhill. Managed clinical networks can work, as has been clinically proven, and Stobhill makes them work. The hospital should get the chance to keep showing that they work. On the issue of the end of the accident and emergency review in two years' time, in reply to Bill Butler the minister said that he has an open mind on whether there should be three accident and emergency sites rather than two. If the minister has an open mind now and will have an open mind in two years' time, why has he accepted Greater Glasgow NHS Board's proposal to have only two accident and emergency sites?

I have already said that I believe that, today, we should be voting for our constituents and I hope that every MSP will do so. The minister has already heard that my constituents from Milngavie and Bearsden are going to get stuck in the Clyde tunnel. When a constituent of mine who can go into anaphylactic shock if she cannot get to a hospital gets stuck in the Clyde tunnel, will the minister tell her that that is all right because it does not happen often? How will the minister tell my constituents from Kirkintilloch and Bishopbriggs that, on the way to Glasgow royal infirmary, they will be stuck in a traffic jam and that, upon arrival, they will be unable to park, thereby adding another hour to their journey to accident and emergency? Will the minister make freely accessible the transport study that we have been told has been done for the Southern general hospital? This is all fantasy, like the standalone ACAD, which is a fantasy and a fig leaf. The minister talks about building an ACAD at Stobhill and at the Victoria infirmary. There are no standalone ACADs in the United Kingdom, so where is the long-term future for hospitals in having standalone ACADs? Brian Fitzpatrick said that he wants the ACAD at Stobhill to be built soon. I alert all members to the fact that, to build the ACAD at Stobhill as currently configured, we would have to start demolishing wards 2a, 2b, 3a, 3b, 4a and 4b. That would be the beginning of the end of Stobhill hospital. That is not acceptable. The minister should stop kidding around. He should start listening. He should listen to MSPs and to the people of Glasgow. I also say to all Glasgow and West of Scotland MSPs that we should stop kidding around and ensure that we vote for what our constituents have clearly told us they want—the SNP motion.

The minister began the debate by saying that he wants to restore public confidence in Scotland's water. After hearing 15 minutes of his speech, I do not think that the public's confidence will be greatly restored. I lived through that nightmare a few weeks ago, as someone who was affected by it, whose neighbours were affected by it, whose family was affected by it and whose constituents were affected by it. I was surrounded by people who did not know whether they could drink the water. Once they knew that they could not drink the water, they were worried about how long they had been drinking the water. That was a huge problem for a huge number of people. Let me illustrate how badly the communication side of the outbreak was handled, through my experience as a member of the Parliament. When I phoned Scottish Water's helpline to ask what areas were affected, it took the operators quite a long time to work through postcodes and find out which parts of my constituency were affected. When I asked them whether bottled water would be delivered, they could not tell me. When I asked them where the bowsers would be sited, they could not tell me. When, eventually, I told them that I was an MSP and asked them to take my phone number and phone me back so that I could inform my constituents, they said that they could not do that. Is that the way in which we want to inform the public? It was an abject example of how not to do that. We have to move on, and there are three things that we should ensure happen. I am a member of the Transport and the Environment Committee. First, that committee should immediately hold an inquiry into what happened and why it happened. That inquiry should examine the events of the outbreak and the quality of Scotland's water. It should consider whether the legislation that the Parliament has just passed and the bill that the committee has just started to scrutinise are up to delivering a high standard of water. It must reconsider the evidence that we were given that, if we accepted the medium level of investment, we would ensure the production of good quality water  in Scotland. Perhaps the enhanced option would have meant that we would have got quicker results or that we would achieve levels of water quality above those that are achieved in England rather than below them. The inquiry must also consider how quickly things are happening. The minister has talked about the ad hoc reports and we have talked about the OCT report from last November. I live where I have always lived. Five years ago, West of Scotland Water did not know where the pipes from Burncrooks went. Now, in 2002, Scottish Water is saying that it does not know where the pipes from Mugdock go. How many five-year intervals do we have to go through before we can answer such questions? Secondly, we need a strong, authoritative and powerful regulator, not a variety of them that would include a drinking water quality regulator and a water industry commissioner. We must have a strong voice and a champion for Scotland's customers, whose priority will be to balance charges against health—unlike that of the water commissioner who admits that his passion is efficiency rather than public health. Thirdly, we must consider legislation. The Transport and the Environment Committee started work this morning on the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Bill. Will the minister take the opportunity that that bill affords to ensure that legislation on notification of, and possible prosecution over, contaminated water in Scotland is brought up to the same level as the legislation in England? If he is not going to take that opportunity, is he going to leave it to the SNP to take it? As an MSP and as someone who lives in the area that was affected, I say to the minister that we need answers, not more bland Exec-speak.

Des McNulty raised the question of local jobs, but as the minister has answered further questions it is clear that those jobs are receding into the future. When can we expect the expansion in Clydebank? When that expansion takes place, will the minister ensure that recruitment is targeted in Clydebank?

Several organisations with which I have volunteered in the past week have brought to my attention an issue that it would be useful to review. The organisations talked about the fact that they have to spend money by the end of the financial year or lose it, despite the three-year funding arrangements. Will the minister assure me that he will review that to allow voluntary organisations to carry forward money from one financial year to another?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

We are talking about the 21 st century, not the 18 th century.

At the outset, I want to make it clear that we are debating the future quality of Scotland's agriculture, produce and environment. Scotland has a reputation for quality and can never compete on the basis of quantity and mass production. Our country must continue to maintain that reputation now and in the future. Indeed, that is what our customers want. Supermarkets know that Scottish produce can attract premium product labels and so premium prices. Producers know that Scottish produce is backed up by quality assurance schemes and so they can sell it on for quality-assured prices. In a survey, 79 per cent of 15,000 Europeans said that they did not want to buy genetically modified products. I ask the minister to stop jeopardising Scotland's reputation for quality by carrying out open-air experiments in this country. I draw members' attention to a report by Sherwin Shih of Middlesex University entitled "Regulating the Impacts of Genetically Modified Organisms on the Environment: A UK Perspective". The report says: "These trials follow the bizarre logic of finding out whether it is safe to release something into the environment by releasing it into the environment." That is hardly a precautionary approach. We need an evidence-based approach. I ask about the evidence behind the Executive's amendment. Despite what it says, there has been no "step by step" process in Scotland. We already have field-scale trials and flowering GM crops in Scotland, and are currently releasing genetically modified organisms into the Scottish environment.  Moreover, as the Minister for Environment and Rural Development made clear in a letter to the Transport and the Environment Committee, the crops are not being monitored for their effects on public health. I repeat my question: where is the evidence to back up the Executive's amendment? Although the whole argument has been raging in the Parliament for many years, feelings have been running particularly high in the past three to four weeks in the Transport and the Environment Committee. Mr Finnie has insisted throughout that he has used scientific evidence in deciding to allow field-scale trials to go ahead, but he has ignored scientific evidence of gene flow between GM crops and others; of viable pollen transfer up to 5km; and of loss of biodiversity and organic status. I wonder how many members know that any organic product that they buy nowadays can be certified as only 99 per cent GM-free. Because of cross-contamination, we can no longer certify that our organic produce is 100 per cent GM-free. There is much more scientific evidence that I would like to bring before the chamber. Members of the Transport and the Environment Committee know that I have already produced a large number of scientific articles, which the minister seems content to continue to ignore. Today, I would like to bring a few of them to the attention of members who might not be aware of the weight of scientific evidence that supports my motion. One of the articles is Jorgensen and Andersen's 1994 paper in the American Journal of Botany , "Spontaneous hybridization between oilseed rape (Brassica napus) and weedy B. campestris: A risk of growing genetically modified oilseed rape." Another is Jim Orson's 2002 study, "Gene stacking and herbicide tolerant oilseed rape: lessons from the North American experience". I also draw the minister's attention to the European Environment Agency's report, which he says means nothing. It has 233 references at the end, drawing our attention to the scientific problems associated with growing GM crops in the environment. That report was dismissed by the minister and his advisers at the Advisory Committee on Releases to the Environment, who claimed that it said nothing new, despite its referring to 233 items of scientific research. That brings me to ACRE, upon whose experts the minister relies heavily. Perhaps members should be aware that eight of the 13 original members of ACRE had links to the biotechnology industry. The minister will probably be delighted to tell me, "But those eight people have now been replaced." However, those eight were in place when the Munlochy application was passed to the minister for consent. ACRE's remit does not cover strategic, ethical or public acceptability issues. ACRE itself accepts  that its advice is not the only advice that ministers need consider. I have already quoted in Parliament from a letter of 31 July 2001 from Adrian Butt of the ACRE secretariat, and I shall quote it again: "Ministers are not obliged to take ACRE's advice nor is the Committee's advice the only consideration for ministers when issuing a consent." So what powers does the minister have to protect Scotland's environmental future? I would like to take members through the three powers that the minister could have used and could still use today. Article 4 of the 90/220/EEC directive states that member states must "ensure that all appropriate measures are taken to avoid adverse effects on human health and the environment". That brings me back to the Shih report. How can the minister be sure that all appropriate measures have been taken when he is releasing crops into the environment to find out what happens? The minister himself has told us that the Munlochy experiment is not assessing the effects on human health. Munlochy is simply a trial to see how farmers manage the crops. It is not a trial of their effect on the environment or on human health. The trials must stop now before they damage the environment and public health.

Nora Radcliffe should read the consent, which is to study the farm practice management techniques of using a herbicide-resistant oil-seed rape. I turn again to the minister's powers. The Environmental Protection Act 1990 has been quoted before. Section 111(10) provides that the secretary of state—or, in this case, the Scottish ministers—may "at any time, by notice given to the holder of a consent, revoke the consent". If this Parliament says today that we believe that the scientific evidence shows that the minister's actions are putting the Scottish environment in jeopardy, the minister has the power to revoke that consent and revoke it now.

I am terribly sorry, but I do not have great hearing and the acoustics in this room are not good. I think that you are asking what a Scottish SNP minister would have done. A  Scottish SNP minister would have done exactly what the Belgian minister did on 29 and 30 April this year.

My first answer still applies. The precautionary principle, which the Belgian minister used on 30 April, should be used. That principle is enshrined in article 174 of the Treaty establishing the European Community. The Belgian minister quoted it and said that, of the five applications for GM crop trials in Belgium, she would turn down two of them. One of them would be turned down because oil-seed rape, which is being tested in Scotland, was involved. Article 174 of the treaty says: "Community policy on the environment shall contribute to pursuit of the following objectives: —preserving, protecting and improving the quality of the environment". The treaty says that Community policy "shall be based on the precautionary principle". The minister could use that principle now. A Belgian minister has done so and an SNP minister would certainly do so. Belgium is a small and independent European nation. It is not an anti-science nation but a pro-evidence nation. It should be contrasted with Scotland, which is a small, dependent UK subsidiary whose Minister for Environment and Rural Development proclaims himself a GM fan and refuses to examine and accept the evidence. He refuses to use his powers, which I have outlined to the chamber. Indeed, some weeks ago, he gave back many of those powers to Westminster. He has taken a hot potato and chucked it back elsewhere. Every MSP must examine the scientific evidence and the evidence relating to legal powers that I have produced. They must examine the minister's motivation for stubbornly refusing to use his powers and they must vote for Scotland's environment rather than for Labour's biotechnology donors. I move, That the Parliament believes that the future of Scottish agriculture is in quality produce, meeting consumer demand and reflecting its outstanding environmental reputation and that, in light of scientific research which raises concerns about the environmental and public health effects of GM crops, Scottish Ministers should immediately apply the precautionary principle and use their powers to halt the Scottish field scale trials and restrict future testing to enclosed laboratories.

Will the minister give way?

I agree with Robin Harper and a couple of other speakers that the debate is far too short. The topic is far too important for us to try to cram it into one hour. On the other hand, I ask the minister why, exactly, we are having the short debate today. When I saw it in the business bulletin, I thought that the Government might give us its targets at last. We have been waiting for those targets since the Executive published its waste strategy in 1999. Three years on, the minister says to us, "Maybe by Christmas, maybe by the end of the year I will give you some targets." We are having a very short debate on a very important topic, but we are not moving the issue on one iota. The topic is very important. It is estimated that each household in Scotland produces 1 tonne of rubbish per annum—an enormous amount. As the minister pointed out, something like 94 per cent of that household rubbish goes straight into holes in the ground. That is not a sustainable way to manage our country's waste. It raises health concerns, of which I am sure the minister is aware. At least two reports have been produced recently on the effect that living near a landfill site has on health, especially the health of children. That is one of the drivers for saying that we must move on from landfill. There are also many worries about environmental degradation and damage, with leachates from landfill sites going into our water courses. It is not only an important topic, but an urgent one. The landfill directive has to be met by 2010, which is less than eight years away. The minister and his colleagues have been the Government for three years, but we have not moved forward at all, so how can we expect him to make such a huge leap in the next eight years? The Lothian and Borders draft area waste plan states:  "By 2020, municipal solid waste in the Lothians and Borders could increase by 60%". For that reason, we cannot keep putting things off, talking about next year or next month. We are already living with the consequences of failing to understand the EC directive on fridges: we have a fridge mountain. I ask the minister a simple question: with the commitment to waste minimisation and to moving away from landfill, why is Scottish Enterprise not actively seeking to support facilities here in Scotland in order to deal with those fridges? We have a nonsensical, absurd situation in which fridges are sent from, I think, either Aberdeen City Council or Aberdeenshire Council down to Manchester, but not to be disposed of—simply to be stored. We must do something about that. The minister's record is not great, nor is his leadership.

That information is based on international evidence of what countries such as Switzerland and Denmark can do. As the minister said, we are fortunate in Scotland in that we have 11 area waste plans and a lot of effort has been put in to examining the problem. A 30 per cent to 35 per cent mandatory target is entirely achievable, but if that is not made a target, nobody will work their plans to achieve it. That is why I say that targets are so essential. At the moment, 4.5 per cent of waste is recycled, which is a completely and utterly unsustainable amount. The minister used his lovely wee slogan, "do a little, change a lot." I would say that the slogan for the present Government should be "do a little, change not a jot." We need action, not never-ending consultation. We do not need empty slogans. Also, we need to keep revenue from landfill tax here. Spending £50 million per annum on looking into recycling would ensure that we achieve something here in Scotland.

Will the member give way?

It is significant that, irrespective of party, almost every member who has spoken in the debate has lamented the document's lack of specific targets. That lack of targets has also been lamented elsewhere. There are 24 indicators and 12 targets, which amounts to a rate of 50 per cent—or half a vision. I suppose that half a vision is better than no vision at all. It is not simply making a party-political point to say that we could certainly do better than that. Without targets, one cannot measure what one is achieving and one has nothing to aim for. I will quote from a few of our local organisations. RSPB Scotland stated: "For any policy initiative to be monitored and implemented successfully, it needs to set targets to be achieved, and define indicators of how it will progress towards these targets." I repeat that we have targets for only 50 per cent of the indicators. WWF made a similar comment: "There are few targets associated with each indicator—and some are unclear." On climate change, Friends of the Earth Scotland said: "Scotland will be unable to make an equitable contribution to the UK target unless there is Scottish data." We will not obtain Scottish data unless we have a Scottish target to meet. Scotland could do a lot  more on renewables if we exploited our huge renewables potential.

Every organisation has points to make. I was not trying to score party-political points. The minister introduced the document by saying that it represented a beginning and that we had a way to go. I am suggesting ways in which the minister should be going. The SNP accepts that there should be targets—

If the targets are not set, no one will collect the data—it is as simple as that. It is clear why we need targets. Targets are a mark to aim for, they offer an indicator for allocating resources and they are a mark by which to be measured. Government must set targets and must aim for them. Without setting targets, the Executive has no obligation to allocate appropriate resources and its performance cannot be measured. It is essential that we set targets for Scotland. This morning, Ross Finnie made it clear to the Transport and the Environment Committee that Scotland has specific problems in certain areas, for which Scottish solutions should be produced. The SNP would say that we should set Scottish targets to achieve those solutions. The statement on climate change—that we will make an "equitable contribution"—is inadequate. Scotland should take its place on the world stage and get out there and do something. An "equitable contribution" to a UK target is not a visionary statement for a Scottish minister to make; it is a miserly statement. I will suggest a specific target that the minister could set, which Sylvia Jackson has alluded to. In the Parliament, we have mentioned a wildlife bill several times. The last time that I spoke to Mr Wilson, the description of the timetable had changed from "soon" to "very soon". The minister should make an extra target by giving us a date—before 2003—for the introduction of a wildlife bill. Robin Harper suggested that we need an overall strategy for Scotland, rather than the "Meeting the Needs" document. I will ask what might appear to be a naive question. I noticed that there is no  indication that the document is printed on recycled paper.

Thank you, minister; I am relieved to hear that. We need an overall strategy, not merely a statement. The SNP would be happy to sign up to such a commitment. In Government, we would aim to conduct an environmental audit, which would inform the task of producing a national environment plan. That would allow us to advance a lot further towards strategic environmental assessment and sustainable development, in accordance with EU directives. I want to highlight the sustainability of Government and ministerial powers. At today's meeting of the Transport and the Environment Committee, we considered a statutory instrument in which the Minister for Environment and Rural Development was happy to pass back to Westminster powers over genetically modified organisms, air quality and ozone-depleting substances. If we really want sustainable development, let us keep Scotland's powers rather than give them away. The SNP would go one step further by ensuring that Scotland had all its powers.

Gracious is my middle name—actually, it is Grace—but the SNP would certainly not give away administrative powers.

Sorry, but I am short of time. If the minister is seriously saying that the ultimate decision rests with him, I will be delighted when he sustains that definition by saying no to GMOs and no to new nuclear build in Scotland. As the minister claims that he has those powers, he should sustain that claim by using them. The only needs that the Executive's statement meets are those of new Labour. To paraphrase the Brundtland definition, the statement meets Labour's needs of the present, which are to get a good report card. However, sustainable development should be about a sustainable future for Scotland. We will not achieve that until we have an independent future for Scotland.

The figure was 4.5 per cent.

The minister referred to ACRE in his earlier answer. Is he aware that Adrian Butt of the ACRE secretariat has written to say that it is "ACRE's role to advise ministers", and that "Ministers are not obliged to take ACRE's advice nor is the Committee's advice the only consideration for ministers when issuing a consent." When will the minister use the powers under section 112 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 to stop the crop trials?

Will the member give way?

I want to pick up a theme that has run through a number of speeches today. We all know about article 12 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, which is about hearing children, but it is also about listening to them. I say to the minister that it is also about doing something about what we hear. I wish to raise an issue that the minister knows  is dear to my heart. We need to produce a national strategy on youth space for the young people of Scotland. It is not good enough for us to say continually that youth cafes and leisure facilities are provided by local authorities; that answer is not good enough. We have national strategies to deal with youth crime and youth alcohol abuse, which are delivered by local organisations. It is time that we listened to what young people have been saying to us since day one of this Parliament, and provided a national strategy on youth space in Scotland. There is evidence that that is what young people are asking us for. They are telling us that it is what they want. Reference has been made to the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on children and young people's "Having your say" events, of which we have had three, in Ayr, Arbroath and Newton Mearns. On each occasion, a recurring theme was, "Give us our space. Come and ask us what we want, then give us our space to do our own thing." That would be an answer not only to giving young people their own space, but to the great bogey of youth crime and youth disorder.

I agree that crime is a serious social problem, but the way in which parts of the press react to youth crime issues is over the top. We should take cognisance of that. I quote from the notes on the cross-party group's Newton Mearns event that Lyndsay McIntosh attended. Young people "feel drugs and alcohol would not be such a problem for young people if they had places to go. A place to go would also prevent young people from hanging around the streets, which could help to make the streets safer and reduce crime." That is what young people are telling us—give us our space and help us to be responsible citizens. I have evidence from my experience as a volunteer youth worker. In 1996, we set up a drop-in cafe in the village where I live. On the Friday nights when the cafe was open, there was a 300 per cent drop in the reporting of crime involving young people. In the past few months in Milngavie, in my constituency, we opened Cafe 1, which is a cafe for young people. Most important, young people are involved on the management committee. The local police inspector told me that on the four nights a week that Cafe 1 is open, there are no reports of youth disturbances. That evidence shows that we should work towards achieving what young people are asking for, but also allow young people to contribute to ensuring that we have safer communities. I make a final plea to the minister for us to listen  to young people. We should hear what they say, but also react to it. A suitable finish to today's debate would be to say that we will talk to young people about a national strategy on youth space for young people.

In opening, I say that we should remember that the debate was originally scheduled for 19 September last year, to coincide with the original date of the UN special session on children. Unfortunately, it had to be cancelled after the tragic events of 11 September last year. Those tragic events led to a new political climate and to new political tensions throughout the world. In that new political climate, it is even more important that young people's voices are heard. Conflict affects young people in many ways. Conflict affects young people directly—it kills them. Conflict bereaves young people when their parents and relatives are killed. In too many instances around the world, it directly affects young people and children who are enlisted as soldiers. If listening to young people is accepted and becomes the norm, we will not forget in times of stress and chaos that we should listen to young people and that they should be heard. The UN special session in two weeks' time, from 8 to 10 May, should be considered the norm. At that special session, young people will sit alongside heads of state, heads of Government and Nelson Mandela. We hope that, at the end of the special session, the heads of state will ratify the statement, "A world fit for children." The statement has been prepared with input from young people all round the world. It is appropriate for the Parliament to thank Save the Children for its preparatory work in Scotland  through its video and information pack, which allowed organisations to help young people to express their opinions. Save the Children will pass those opinions on to the UN special session. Save the Children will also further reinforce that when it holds its special link-up in Edinburgh on 9 May, when young people from throughout Scotland will talk to our young representative at the special session, Ellen. That will ensure that the discussion is informed from Scotland and that the discussion informs our thoughts in Scotland. In 1990, a world summit was held on children's issues. Scotland can do better. We should not have to wait 12 years while the world thinks about holding another summit or special session. I hope that the minister will agree with me and many of the members who will speak that the Parliament should have an annual report—a state of the nation statement—of what the Parliament has done for young people and what it proposes to do. In addition to an annual report and an annual debate on that report, I hope that we will hold an annual meeting with the young people of Scotland, at which they can say, "You've got the statistics and the facts, now hear what we've got to say and our report card on what the Scottish Parliament is doing each year for the people of Scotland." It is sad that Scotland still has to do better. In 1995, a report was published on the UK's—I admit that it was not entirely Scotland's—contribution to and compliance with the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. I will highlight from that report three issues on which the UK and Scotland fall down in their compliance with the convention—physical punishment, immigration and asylum policies and the age of criminal responsibility. We must do more. The best thing that we can do to ensure that those three issues and others are dealt with is fully to sign up to and implement article 12 of the convention. Article 12 says that we must listen to young people, but we must go further than that. We must act on what young people tell us are their concerns. Young people have made their views on some matters clear. The 1995 report to which I referred pointed out our lack of provision for ending the physical punishment of children. The Parliament is engaging in a debate on the Executive's proposals to end smacking, with some provisos. In Save the Children's consultation on the Executive's proposals, more than three quarters of young people said that smacking is unacceptable. The cross-party group on children and young people has held consultation events with young people. A theme that has run through those events is that young people say, "We need somewhere to go. We need somewhere that is our space." I would like the minister to say that he has not only  listened to those young people, but acted on what they have said and will produce a strategy on the provision of what we might call youth cafes for the young people of Scotland. I commend to the minister the 76 Church of Scotland children's forums, which were established recently. Those forums are for eight to 14-year-old members of the Church of Scotland. The forums allow their members to get together to discuss what they want their church to do. More than that, the adult representative at the children's forums must report their findings to the relevant board of the Church of Scotland. I will turn briefly to the international situation, because we have to consider that.

Thank you. The United States of America is one of the few countries that has not signed up fully to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. That is because it does not agree with the article that sets out that the death penalty must not apply to young people under the age of 18. We must put pressure on the United States to ensure that it signs up to that article. I would also like to draw the Parliament's attention to President Bush's withdrawal of funds for contraceptive projects in the third world. The withdrawal of those funds has led to an increase in the number of women who die from pregnancy and childbirth-related conditions. It is pertinent and the chamber should know that, when a mother dies in pregnancy or in childbirth, there is a 50 per cent increase in the risk that her surviving children under the age of five will die before they reach the age of five. There is a crying need to provide proper contraceptive information across the world. Let us listen to the young people when they meet in New York in a fortnight. Let us commit ourselves to an annual strategy, an annual report, an annual debate and an annual consultation with the young people of Scotland. Let us, in the words of Ravi Gurumurthy, the chair of the Carnegie young people initiative, "work towards the day when it is not your age that counts, but the contribution that you are making."

rose—

When?

We should all congratulate Jamie McGrigor on securing the debate, given that we are working in the legislative vacuum to which Sarah Boyack has just referred. The SNP and I are supportive of environmentally designated areas, but that does not mean that we do not believe that there is room for improvement. There is a need for improvement. "The Nature of Scotland: A Policy Statement", which the Executive published over a year ago in March 2001, contained some very good proposals. On the topic about which we are talking, it said that we would need to enhance local consultation and involvement in the designation of environmental areas. I ask the minister, as Sarah Boyack has just done, to tell us when we will get the natural heritage bill. I refer the deputy minister to his boss's words in November 2001, when we last debated the issue, when Ross Finnie replied to my colleague Bruce Crawford: "Bruce Crawford asked me what I have done: I have accelerated the timetable for the production of the bill. Let there be no question about that. However, I cannot give a categorical timetable for its drafting at this point."— [ Official Report , 15 November 2001; c 3905.]  I hope that the deputy minister will give us a date tonight, rather than a soon or a very soon. Once the bill is introduced, we can legislate to ensure that we have full and proper consultation. SNH is not above criticism in this regard. I happened to be at the Public Petitions Committee in February when the three petitions that are mentioned in the motion were discussed. Jamie McGrigor has highlighted the problems about which the people from Barra came and told us. The same story was told by the islanders of Arran and of Yell. SNH is not alone in being a public body that is  not good at consultation with the public. I have personal experience of the former Greater Glasgow Health Board and West of Scotland Water using techniques similar to those that the petitioners discussed in relation to SNH. They are examples of public bodies that seem to think that going to the public and telling them what they are doing counts as consultation. If we had the legislation, we would, through the parliamentary process, be able to ensure a proper process for SNH not just to present its proposals to the public, but to listen to what the public has to say about them and to adapt or moderate them in light of that. I join RSPB Scotland in saying that we need a bill and we need it soon. I would say to SNH that it should take note of the petitions and of the debate and realise that it must adopt best practice now so that we do not have to wait any longer and so that no other communities feel obliged to petition the Parliament on the same subject.

I thank the Deputy First Minister for taking extra questions. I return to the issue of Low Moss prison. On a few occasions, the minister said that Low Moss  prison was nearing the end of its useful life. He then said it would close as soon as possible. Will the minister define "as soon as possible", given that the time scales for a new build he had been talking about range from five to 11 years? If Low Moss prison is going to be closed before a new build is produced, can the minister tell us where prisoners and staff will go in the interim? Is the minister aware that there are already plans for a new build on the site at Low Moss and that the project is one step ahead of most others? Finally, I ask the minister to extend to me, as a West of Scotland MSP who also has a constituency interest in the future of Low Moss prison, the courtesy of the invitation that he gave to Brian Fitzpatrick.

Is the First Minister aware that directive 90/220/EEC, which is in force in Scotland, gives Scottish ministers the power to stop trials of GM crops where there is known damage to the environment or public health? Is he aware of the evidence from around the world, including the UK, of the damage that those crops are doing to the environment? Is he prepared to use that power and tell the people of Munlochy that the field in question will be ploughed up now rather than fertilised, as it was on Tuesday?

I want to talk about the reason why we are having this debate today. Energy policy is crucial to everyone in Scotland, as are the Government's powers in that area. At the end of today, the Scottish people have to be clear about who has the power to decide the future of nuclear build in Scotland and who is going to exercise that power. Even more important, we have to be sure about how they intend to exercise that power. That is the purpose of today's debate. A non-nuclear future is demanded by the overwhelming majority of the people of Scotland. Why? Because nuclear energy is inefficient. If not for the nuclear energy arrangement, Torness and Hunterston would be providing uneconomic power to Scotland. Nuclear energy is deadly. It produces waste that we will have to live with for tens of thousands of generations. That is not a sustainable situation for us to pass on to a future  Scotland.

I was talking about the nuclear energy agreement whereby Scottish Power and Scottish and Southern Energy have to take non-economic energy from Torness and Hunterston. That is not the same as a subsidy. Producing nuclear energy costs Scottish consumers money. Nuclear energy, as even Mr Gallie must know, is unnecessary. Scotland exports 26 per cent of the energy that we produce and we produce 26 per cent of our energy by nuclear power. Therefore, we do not need nuclear power. If we want to maintain an export market, which we do, we should keep in mind the Garrad Hassan report that showed that Scotland has the potential, through renewable energy, to provide for not only our own needs but 75 per cent of the UK's needs. If we do away with nuclear power and invest in renewable energy, we will make even more of a profit.

My understanding, from a meeting at Scottish Power's grid control centre two weeks ago in Kirkintilloch, is that that problem is not impossible to work out. We already have back-up in Cruachan, for example, that will ensure the stability of the grid. In 1990, the Government in Denmark secured grid stability by giving leadership and support to the upgrading of the grid. If Denmark can do that, so can we. Does not the minister wish that he had the power that the Danish Government has to ensure that we have a secure, renewable and sustainable future?

I am sorry, but I am short of time. Nora Radcliffe talked about upgrading the grid. That issue will be resolved when the Government gives leadership and gets the power to do that. In 1990, Denmark—a small country like Scotland—upgraded its grid and is reaping the benefits of that now. John Home Robertson gave us Labour's old scare stories, saying that, if people vote for the SNP and independence, 600 jobs will be lost in Torness. However, in Denmark, 14,000 jobs have been created in the renewable energy market,  which completely dwarfs the 600 jobs that John Home Robertson talked about. Phil Gallie said that, when the 1,200 megawatts from Hunterston disappear in 10 years' time, the lights will go out. I am sorry, but that is not the case. Scottish Power is already looking at producing 450 megawatts from a wind farm in Eaglesham and others are looking at producing 600 megawatts from wind farms in the Western Isles. That amount of energy almost meets the amount that Hunterston produces. We have to get away from the continual scare stories. We are talking about a Scotland that can invest in and promote renewable energy. We are also talking about the powers of the Government. At the moment, the Scottish Government does not have the power to do more than promote renewable energy. I am delighted that the minister has confirmed that he has the power to say no to nuclear new build in Scotland. Will he confirm now that he will use that power and say no to nuclear new build in Scotland? The minister said that Westminster could overrule the Scottish Executive but that the Scottish Executive and the Scottish Parliament would have to approve any overrule of that derogation. Will the minister make it clear that, if Westminster makes such a move, the Scottish Government will refuse to allow that power to be taken away from the Scottish people?

The minister should just say no. He should stand up for Scotland and say that those powers are ours and that we are keeping them, no matter what. The other MSPs in the chamber have until 5 o'clock tonight to consider the motion and the amendment and to reach the conclusion that, if the minister cannot say that he will stand up for the Scottish people's rights on energy and non-nuclear build, they will stand up for them instead by voting for the SNP motion.

rose—

Will the member give way?

Has the independent bathing waters panel been involved in compiling the strategy to which the minister referred? When will the panel next meet? I understand that it has not met since 1998. Why did the Government, at that time, turn down the panel's recommendation that two beaches in my constituency of the West of Scotland—Helensburgh and Largs—should be designated for bathing water quality standards?

Bullet point one is that the SNP cannot vote for the bill, as the Executive has left too much to chance. On privatisation, the Executive cannot put in the wee word "public" to ensure that this remains a public water authority. On charities, I begin by saying again that we welcome the sixth, seventh or eighth concession—I do not know how many the minister has made during the SNP campaign—to have charities recognised. We welcome such concessions, but special pleading is not the answer, even when it is the SNP's special pleading that wins them. I have a question for the minister on hospices. This morning, he talked about the ring-fenced money to pay their water charges. Will that ring-fenced money increase when, by 2003, meters are put in and their bills rise dramatically? Perhaps the minister could address that point in his closing remarks. I could give examples from every constituency, but the minister knows what charities need, as the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations has told him. It stated: "SCVO remains committed to the principle that all Scottish charities should receive relief by virtue of their public benefit purpose" and goes on to state: "Fundamental concerns remain on the terms of the exemption scheme and the transitional fund". The minister will not rule out privatisation, has given himself powers to install domestic meters and will not write charities' rights into the bill. Does  he wonder why the SNP is not supporting the bill?

I will speak to amendment 93 and to the generalities of all the amendments. I apologise for any confusion earlier, Presiding Officer. Those amendments are intended to ensure that the appointments of the water industry commissioner, the convener of the water customer consultation panels and members of the board of Scottish Water, which are powerful positions in the Scottish water industry, have parliamentary approval. I thought that every member would want that. I will talk about the role of the convener of the customer consultation panels—or conveners, if amendments 106 and 107 from the Scott twins are agreed to, of which I would approve. The convener of those panels will be the voice and face of millions of customers. They cannot be a ministerial placeman or placewoman and they cannot be a ministerial mouthpiece. We know from last week's revelations that we still have no independent scrutiny of ministerial appointments. Only parliamentary approval of such pivotal appointments will lift them above political interference. I ask all members to vote for amendments 92, 93 and 95.

Bristow Muldoon's remarks have made it clear that the debate will go on and on. It is about parliamentary approval of pivotal appointments in public life in Scotland. The evidence that we received last week during the debate on the Public Appointments (Parliamentary Approval) (Scotland) Bill was that the Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive has still not worked out a mechanism that will ensure that such pivotal appointments are above political interference. Only parliamentary approval, such as the Liberal Democrats tell us in their manifesto that they want, but which they give up in the Executive, will ensure that the appointments are above the political process.

I would like Adam Ingram to move amendment 92 for me.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I want to get to the fundamentals. Every member must see this as an example of our commitment to Scotland's charities. While we wait for the Executive to introduce charity legislation, we need the Water Industry (Scotland) Bill to show that we support Scotland's charities by giving them 80 per cent relief from water charges. If we vote against including such a provision in the bill, how can we say that we have a compact with the voluntary sector to deliver vital services to some of the most vulnerable members of our society? There are problems with the latest deal. The minister asked whether we welcome the deal. I have pushed and pushed on the issue and the Executive has moved and moved, so of course we welcome it. However, the problem is that it takes us back to special pleading. Two members have talked about hospices. Because of the special pleading on hospices, the Executive said at stage 2 that Malcolm Chisholm would ensure that the money that hospices receive from the Government covered water charges. Do we have to keep making special pleas for different charities? The new hardship fund is a case of more special pleading, making more special cases and having charities tied up in bureaucracy to plead with the Executive to pay their water bills. It is not appropriate and it is not right that we ask charities to do that. Amendment 1 is not ideal, although we will support it because it is better than nothing. However, the issue is not conservation and the amendment will affect disproportionately charities that need to use water to deliver their services, such as hospices. We cannot support amendment 102 because fee-paying schools are not just private schools. The seven grant-maintained schools—Donaldson's College, the Craighalbert Centre, the Royal Blind School and so on—are charities that provide a national service. We cannot put them under threat.

I urge members to vote for amendment 90. That provision must be included in the bill to prove to voluntary and charitable organisations that the Parliament is serious in supporting their work and will not tax them in it.

I should inform members that my stage 2 amendments on the code of practice and customer involvement were similar to my amendments in this group. Those amendments were accepted by the minister and agreed to by the committee. It would be logical for members to accept my argument that the customer's voice should be heard before charges can be increased.  Given the recent unnecessary increases in charges from both East of Scotland Water and West of Scotland Water, we must support amendment 99.

In speaking to amendments 87, 88 and 89, I bring to the— [Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Amendments 87, 88 and 89 are relevant to the charges schemes that customers will have to pay. My intention is to ensure that customers have a voice and that their views are considered in developing charges schemes. Charges will be of fundamental concern to each customer of Scottish Water. On amendment 87, it is important that the water industry commissioner consults the water customer consultation panels when he draws up charges schemes. If the commissioner is to be the customers' champion, as we hope he will be, he must surely take on board customers' views on charges, as charging is one of the most fundamental activities that Scottish Water will undertake for each of its customers. Even if the water industry commissioner is simply to be an economic regulator—I say that because, when the committee took evidence at stage 1, and again during stage 2, the ministers referred to the water industry commissioner as an "economic regulator"—he should take on board customers' concerns, as the deputy minister conceded during stage 2. The water industry commissioner is to be the customers' champion and is to be concerned with customers' interests, so it is important that the commissioner takes cognisance, through the water customer consultation panels, of customers' views, because it is a fundamental fact that charges will affect them economically. If the water industry commissioner had to seek approval for charges through the customer consultation panels, that would strengthen his advice. Amendment 88 is about publication of the charges schemes. It should be an absolute given that every customer has access to the full contents of a charges scheme, not just to an amended or an abbreviated version. If the full scheme is not published, customers will ask why they cannot be informed about a scheme for which they must pay. They will wonder what the minister, the water industry commissioner or Scottish Water is trying to hide from them. Amendment 89 relates to section 32, on the commissioner's advice on charges. When advising on charges, the commissioner must take into account everything except the views of the customers. That seems wrong-headed and top-down rather than bottom-up.  Amendments 99 and 100 are about informing Parliament and involving it in the process of achieving a charges scheme. I hope that no parliamentarian would not want to be involved in that process. I move amendment 87.

I will confine my remarks to amendments 3, 4 and 5. However, I will pick up on what the minister said about amendment 8, which we all agree is a good amendment. He said that amendment 8 will ensure that the customer, through the customer panels and the water industry commissioner, has his or her voice and views heard. I believe that amendments 3, 4 and 5 will restrict provisions that would ensure that those views are heard. If the water customer consultation panels are to represent the views and interests of the customers, we cannot limit those views and interests to Scottish Water's core functions. The customer's interests in Scottish Water are bound up with the whole operation of the company; its overall performance could affect the delivery of its core functions. Therefore, the customer and the water customer consultation panels must be able to have their views heard on all matters that concern Scottish Water. Bruce Crawford gave examples and I will give another, concrete example—MSPs in the west of Scotland might have received notice of the matter directly or through their constituents. West of Scotland Water has been sending letters out to customers in which it offers an insurance service, for £49 per annum, that will look after the pipes from a householder's gate to their doorway. As members will know, that service is the responsibility not of West of Scotland Water, but of the householder. The service is not a core function of West of Scotland Water, but its customers will have a view on, and an interest in, it. Through the water customer consultation panels, Scottish Water's customers should be able to have their  views and interests represented on such matters. Amendment 4 is about the issuing of reports from the water customer consultation panels. Again, customers will take to the panels issues that are outwith the core functions of Scottish Water. They will expect to see those issues appearing in reports. Amendment 5 is about recommendations to the water industry commissioner, as a sort of promotion of customer interests. Again, customers will take non-core function interests to the panels. The panels must be able to present those interests to the water industry commissioner so that the customer's voice is truly heard.

I refer the minister to section 2(4), which states that a customer panel must "make such recommendations as it considers appropriate to the Commissioner". The minister wants to limit that responsibility to apply only to core function items. How will the customer panels and the water industry commissioner take account of non-core functions if amendment 2 does not allow them to?

I want to talk about evidence. The SNP has quoted extensively this morning the evidence that supports our proposal for class sizes of 18 pupils. I want to point out to Brian Monteith that we were quoting from qualitative research, not meta-analysis. There is a difference.

I am 25 seconds into my speech. I am sorry if the member did not get on the Labour speakers list, but she cannot keep intervening on SNP members to find the time. The evidence is that the minister has missed the target. In her opening remarks she attempted to slide the dates for the Executive's targets and say that they would still be met and that they remained the same. I will quote the Executive press release of August 1999, when the regulations on small class sizes were introduced: "Regulations which came into force this month will ensure the Scottish Executive's commitment to reduce class sizes in the first three years of primary school will be met by the target date of 2001." The minister attempted to imply that that meant 2001-02. The press release from 1999 goes on to say that the target for primary 3 will be met in August 2001. The Executive has failed to meet those targets and the evidence is there to show it.

I am sorry, but I have already told the member—I am beginning to sound like the  member of the education profession that I used to be. I want to turn to a report from the Scottish Council Foundation and Children in Scotland, entitled "Children, families and learning: A new agenda for education". The report says: "we need to develop and pursue a policy agenda that is rigorous and evidence-based." Everything that we do should be evidence based. I would like to give the minister the evidence that the Executive's policies are not producing. The problems of large class sizes can be seen in the increase by 20 per cent in 2000-01 of unauthorised absences from Scottish primary schools. That is evidence of unsettled pupils not receiving enough pastoral care from the overburdened teachers of classes of more than 30 pupils.

How can I accept that when I have just provided the evidence that the Executive has failed to meet its own targets? They are not my targets, but those of the Executive. The Scottish Council Foundation report "Children, families and learning: A new agenda for education" pointed out that we need the evidence. I have more evidence from the HMIE report "Standards and Quality in Primary Schools: Mathematics 1998-2001". That report finds that, in 50 per cent of primary schools, there is weakness in problem solving and inquiry work in maths; in 45 per cent of primary schools, there is a significant weakness in scientific investigative skills. That is evidence that we are failing to teach our pupils how to learn and how to think. If we do not have thinking schools, we will not be able to meet the commitments of the new job market, which is always looking for retraining and reskilling. That is based on being taught to think and learn at the earliest stages of school and to take that throughout one's life. Lifelong learning begins at school—it is not a corrective for when school lets people down. The key to delivery of such information handling skills is small classes, where pupils have the space to think and support their development. I must draw the minister's attention to the HMIE report that shows that in secondary 1 and secondary 2 we are coasting. We are not helping pupils in those years to match their information  skills to the wider world of information. I would like to comment on the importance of school libraries to that key skill, but I do not have time. The evidence shows that small classes lead to information handling skills and abilities in pupils that make them lifelong learners. Scotland's pupils deserve nothing less than to become lifelong learners from the day that they enter education. Scotland can afford nothing less.

I declare an interest as an associate member of the Library Association. That will no doubt alert the minister to the fact that I want to ask when the Executive will make recommendations about pay and conditions for school librarians. After all, school librarians are education professionals at the heart of learning and teaching in our schools and are intrinsic to the delivery of the information and communication technology skills that are so necessary—

Will the minister comment on the £50.4 million strategic waste fund, which works out at about £1.5 million for each area waste plan each year over three years? Is that enough to encourage those areas to move away from the initially cheap quick-fix solution provided by incineration?

Iain Smith is lauding the Liberal Democrats as a UK party, but does he consider that the Scottish Liberal Democrats have failed in regard to their 1999 partnership agreement with Labour? The agreement states: "We will set targets for recycling in public and private sectors". The Government has not yet set mandatory targets. Will the Scottish Liberal Democrats, within the coalition, be pushing for those targets to be set?

Given that the estimate of the number of fridges that need disposed of annually in Scotland is 250,000 and that Rhona Brankin, when Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development, answered a parliamentary question of mine saying that it was up to businesses to dispose of fridges themselves, we can congratulate Remploy, but should the Government perhaps do more to support businesses to dispose of those 250,000 fridges?

As the minister said, we must congratulate Robin Harper on securing the debate. It is important that the Scottish Parliament takes this opportunity to show that recycling, sustainable employment and so on are not woolly concepts, but realities. If we invest in those areas now, Scotland will reap the economic and environmental benefits. Members will not be surprised that I start my speech by giving some statistics from abroad. As everyone knows, the SNP likes to benchmark Scotland as an independent country against other independent countries. Before that, however, I will deal with some information from the UK. Waste Watch, an organisation that is sponsored by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, has said that if we can increase the amount of recycled waste to 30 per cent, we could produce 45,000  jobs. There are only 17,700 jobs in waste management at the moment. That shows that sustainable employment based on environmental practice can reap rewards. In Denmark, 35 companies recycle 60 per cent of the country's domestic waste. Scotland could do with having 35 long-term, sustainable companies. In New York, a recent study on waste management found that a move to composting and recycling would create 890 permanent jobs as opposed to 350 in conventional incineration and landfill practices. The Bureau of International Recycling tells us that, in 50 countries across the world, 1.5 million people are employed in recycling activities. That business has a $1.6 billion annual turnover. Those statistics show that it is possible to invest in environmentally safe practices and produce sound and sustainable employment. International comparisons are all very well, but I want to highlight a well-respected local organisation that, in two weeks' time, will tackle the problem that Andrew Welsh raised: the de-gassing of fridges. As we know, from 1 January this year, the process became much more complicated because of European Community regulations. I did extensive research before 1 January and found out that there is no facility in the UK that is capable of de-gassing fridges to conform with the EC regulations. On Monday, I visited Remploy in Clydebank and was told that, in two weeks' time, the new Remploy site that the First Minister opened in Wishaw will start to de-gas fridges from local authorities, beginning with South Lanarkshire Council. Remploy has seen an environmental opportunity and is using it to create sustainable jobs. That is not the only good news that I heard on my visit to Remploy. I was also told that the company hopes to open new sites in the north and the north-west of Scotland. That particularly excites me because Aberdeenshire Council recently told me that, from 1 January, the only thing that it could do with its old fridges was send them to Manchester for storage. It is absolutely fantastic that a local organisation will provide sustainable employment in environmental management practices in Scotland. Remploy has based the scheme on a previous scheme that it ran in Leeds that was worth £500,000 and employed 35 people. That scheme involved working in partnership with Comet to recycle white goods by passing them on to needy communities. That is the sort of sustainable employment that we must have in this country. Sustainable employment is good for the environment. Recycling paper produces 35 per cent less water pollution and 74 per cent less air pollution than making paper by conventional methods.  With regard to the Government's record, I am sure that Labour and Liberal Democrat members are aware of last year's report card from WWF, which said that, in nearly three years of Labour government in Scotland, there has been no progress toward placing sustainable development at the heart of the Executive's plans. How often has the ministerial group on sustainable development met in the past three years? What has it done? We have, in Scotland, an unsustainable industry that provides unsustainable jobs: nuclear power generation. It has a limited lifespan—our three power stations will be gone by 2015—but the lifespan of the deadly radioactive waste that it leaves behind is unlimited. Does the Government support new build in that unsustainable industry? Germany has shown that it is possible to help create sustainable employment in environmental industries with the help of interest rates and investment subsidies to companies. Is the Executive prepared to do that? Is the minister prepared to put his money where his mouth is? I move amendment S1M-2635.2, to insert at end: ", and agrees that these objectives, amongst others, should be considered for inclusion in a national environment plan for Scotland."

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

There is no space at George IV Bridge to fit in another reading room. The specialist staff will be reduced in number from 13 to three.

We are told that the Causewayside building will remain—that it will not be sold off—and that the map reading room will be open to the public. However, if someone turns up for the science reading room, they will be sent to George IV Bridge. Does Mr Monteith agree that that is ludicrous?

I open my remarks by declaring a registered interest, because I will talk about libraries. I am an associate member of the Library Association. I thank the many members who signed my motion and who are in the chamber. I also thank the many people in the gallery who have lobbied long and hard about the crisis that faces science and business information in Scotland today. The Scottish science library opened in 1989 to international acclaim but, without Executive intervention, it will close in 48 hours. Tonight is the last late opening of the library. Staff and users are, I know, watching us on the webcast. Why is the Scottish science library being closed? It is all for the paltry sum of £400,000. I call that a paltry sum because it pales into insignificance when we consider the £3 million that Scottish Opera was given as a bail-out with hardly the bat of an eyelid. The underfunding of the National Library of Scotland is a national disgrace. For 2001-02, its budget is £9.2 million. That is in an era in which library inflation is running at 10 per cent to 15 per cent per annum. I move on from talking about money—I will return to it—to talking about the importance not only of the Scottish science library and the Scottish business information service but of libraries in general. As a librarian, I feel that I must inform the chamber of that because of preconceptions about what libraries are. Libraries are not only book deposits and the National Library is not just the biggest and bestest book collection in Scotland—libraries are gateways for information. If we want to live in a Scotland that is part of the knowledge economy and in which information is open and accessible, we can say only that it is a national disgrace that we underfund our national  library service to the extent that we are about to lose the Scottish science library and the Scottish business information service. The Scottish science library and the Scottish business information service are key to the promotion of Scotland as a knowledge economy. It is not only librarians and I who believe that; the Government believes that science and business are key to the promotion of Scotland. Over the past two years, we have seen strategy after strategy from the Executive. We have science strategies. We have knowledge management strategies. We have digital Scotland strategies. We have enterprise strategies. I will quote from "A Science Strategy for Scotland ", which was published this summer. It states: " the Executive will:    promote Scotland as a  centre of scientific excellence  in which to buy or do science".    Those are fine words, but words mean nothing when we cannot support scientists in their work and we cannot support businessmen in their exploitation of that scientific research. The Scottish science library and the Scottish business information service have 26 per cent of the National Library of Scotland's readers. That gives the lie to the information that has been put out that those services are peripheral parts of the core service, which is the National Library of Scotland. One in four users of the National Library of Scotland has a scientific or business background. One in four users of the National Library of Scotland uses it for scientific and business information. In addition, the social science collection of the National Library of Scotland is held in the Causewayside building and 21 per cent of the National Library of Scotland's readers are social scientists. All that means that almost half the users of the National Library of Scotland use the Scottish science library in Causewayside. It is inconceivable that almost half the library's users are not core users of that library. Those users should have their service preserved for them. Last year alone, the Scottish science library dealt with 17,000 inquiries. Those were 17,000 inquiries from scientists and businessmen who want to develop in Scotland and export from Scotland. Without the Scottish science library and the Scottish business information service, those 17,000 inquiries would not have been answered as fully as they were. It is only with full information and the back-up of subject specialists that we will provide the service that those businesses and scientists deserve. Business in Scotland is something that we all promote—not just the Executive, but every member of the Parliament. Scottish Enterprise, through its small business gateways, acknowledges the fact that businesses need  information. Those small business gateways often refer users to the Scottish business information service because of the specialist knowledge that is kept there. The incubation period of a small business is most vital in ensuring that small business's longevity. If we close the services, we will cut off a vital source of information, which nourishes those businesses at their most important time—their start-up period. I refer briefly to the manner in which the information about the Scottish science library and business information service has come out. The National Library of Scotland's board of trustees ignored its own consultant's report. The consultant's report did not say that the Scottish science library should be closed, but the board of trustees chose to ignore that fact. They have not just ignored the Scottish science library's advisory committee, they have disbanded it. In a letter of 2 October, Professor Anderson announced to members of the advisory committee that they should not turn up for a meeting on 25 October, because the advisory committee no longer had a role to play as there was not going to be a Scottish science library. That is appalling. The Executive's answer to the crisis has also been appalling. Allan Wilson said in the cultural strategy debate of 25 October that the alternatives that were being proposed were sufficient; they are not. From a specialist staff of 13, only two business specialists and one scientific specialist will be transferred to the reading room on George IV Bridge. Is that what we as a nation consider to be adequate support for business and science in Scotland today? I have a few questions for the minister. I say to his deputy that she, as a scientist, knows that the Scottish science library service is vital. To the minister I say that he has the power to do something. His deputy signed Robin Harper's motion, which decried the science library's closure. I hope that the minister will use his power to ensure that the library will not close. He need not sign his name to a motion—he has the power to do something about the matter. The sum we are talking about is £400,000, which is less than 1 per cent of the minister's annual budget for all the national institutions. I ask the minister how much end-year flexibility he got this year. Could not he have used that to buy time to conduct a full-scale review of the National Library of Scotland's funding to ensure that the Scottish science library was kept open in the interim? It is laudable that he found £5.7 million to abolish entrance fees to museums. For the sake of £400,000, he is about to prevent access to the core collection of scientific literature in Scotland. I ask the minister to talk to the Minister for  Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning. This is not just a cultural issue; it is also an enterprise and science issue. Surely the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport and his deputy, between the two departments that are covered by their portfolios, can find the paltry sum that is needed to save a vital institution.

Presiding Officer, I seek your guidance under rule 9.7 of the standing orders about the conduct of stage 2 of a bill. As John Scott said, stage 2 consideration of the bill began this morning, yet the minister issued a press release today detailing the number and the names of the members of the board of Scottish Water. I seek your guidance as to whether rule 9.7 comes into play.

We are debating the general principles of the Water Industry (Scotland) Bill. The SNP accepts the general principles of the bill, but at stage 2 we will lodge amendments to ensure that the bill creates in Scottish Water a public body that will remain a public body. Several issues have come out of the stage 1 report and today's debate that are concerns not just for the Parliament, but for the wider public, who have made representations to us. One of the major issues has been section 25 and the ability of Scottish Water to set up private companies. No matter what assurances we have been given, section 25 opens to the door to turning Scottish Water into a private company. Section 25 relates to the Companies Act 1985, section 3(1)(f) of which provides for Scottish Water to be able to turn itself into "an unlimited company having share capital". That is a privatised industry. Ministerial direction is not a sufficient "safeguard" or "guarantee". I use those words advisedly, because they were used by Labour members Des McNulty and Johann Lamont. I must ask the minister why, if there is an act that states that "There shall be a Scottish Parliament", the Water Industry (Scotland) Bill should not say "There shall not be a Scottish Water plc"?

I will reply with a quote from section 3(1)(f) of the Companies Act 1985, which provides for Scottish Water to turn itself into "an unlimited company having share capital". Why cannot we include in the bill a statement that Scottish Water will be a public authority? That is what Unison is asking for. I take the minister back to the Strathclyde referendum, when 97 per cent of the people of Strathclyde said clearly that the water authority must remain a public body. Another area of the bill that we must consider more carefully at stage 2 is debt and charges. We have heard about the £1.9 billion debt that Scottish Water will carry over. Why cannot we  have the green dowry for our £1.9 billion of debt that the English authority had for its £9 billion debt? A £700 million commutation a few years ago is not the same as getting rid of £1.9 billion of debt. The point of carrying the debt is that the Treasury wins and customers end up paying higher charges. Getting rid of the debt is about ensuring that everyone pays as little as possible. I turn to relief for voluntary organisations. Ross Finnie did not just prevaricate in his replies to some interventions, but tended towards obfuscation. At the end of one of the minister's replies I was unsure whether he was saying that under section 37 of the bill the Executive would ensure reduced charges or relief for voluntary organisations. We have heard from the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, the churches and Women's Aid, and members have given examples of how crippling to charities in Scotland will be the loss of relief. If the minister believes in the compact with the voluntary sector and in social justice, he must tell us that there will be relief for charities in Scotland. Jobs is another area of concern. We could lose one sixth to one third of the work force. Adam Ingram gave clear evidence of the catastrophic effect that such huge losses would have on the industry. We want Scottish Water to be an industry that is fit for the 21 st century. We do not want it to be stripped of skills and jobs, as Railtrack and Transco were. The same thing happened to Welsh Water, which went in a matter of years from having 1,000 employees to having 100 employees. Democracy is one of the other elements about which the SNP and the general public are greatly concerned. Scottish Water will be the biggest quango in Scotland and we must ensure that all appointments to the non-executive board and the appointments of convener of the customer panels and the water industry commissioner are approved by the Parliament. The appointments must not be made as the gifts of a minister to the largest quango in Scotland. I wish to speak briefly about sustainable development.

I hope that we will lose section 47(5) of the bill. We need sustainable development to be at the heart of Scottish Water and we cannot have a get-out clause, so let us get rid of that section. The SNP demands that there be no get-outs in the Water Industry (Scotland) Bill. There must be no get-outs on privatisation, on job security, on loss of rates relief to charities, on ensuring democracy of the new board or on debt write-off. The SNP demands that Scottish Water  be a public trust for the Scottish people for the 21 st century.

Will Bristow Muldoon give way?

rose—

Will the minister give way?

Minister—

There is a famous phrase in America: "Where's the beef?" The recurrent phrase for today's debate is "Where's the bill?" It is not good enough for the deputy minister to say three times that the Executive will introduce a bill as soon as possible. Can she define "as soon as possible"? It could mean "as long as we can get away with doing nothing". That is what it sounds like today. It does not sound like that to members alone, it sounds like that to the enormous part of the population of Scotland that cares passionately about the nature of Scotland. The land reform bill is brought to my mind. In 1999, we were promised that bill as soon as possible. I understand from my colleagues in the SNP justice team that no bill has yet been introduced in 2001. Is the "as soon as possible" for the bill on the protection and promotion of Scotland's natural heritage as good as the land reform bill "as soon as possible"? It is not good enough to leave legislation to a member's bill. In response to my intervention, Nora Radcliffe said that if the Executive does not provide a legislative timetable she will go ahead with her member's bill to ensure that wildlife legislation is updated during in this session of Parliament. I must tell the minister that that is not good enough. It is not for a member to introduce much-needed legislation. Ministers are supposed to be a Government. Do it. Govern. The Parliament is here to pass laws. I have to say that the minister's opening remarks were more like story time in Parliament: she simply read out "The Nature of Scotland"—a lovely document with pictures. As a librarian, I enjoy story time; as an MSP, I expect to see a legislative timetable in front of me. In "The Nature of Scotland", the Executive makes 41 commitments. One says that all "Scottish Ministers should have a specific duty to have regard to the conservation of biological diversity". There is a specific duty to have regard. If we do not have a minister who introduces legislation to ensure that we have wildlife protection and updated SSSIs, the Executive's regard is like a blind man. If the Executive's regard for biodiversity  is the same as its regard for sustainable development, we have no chance of protecting the nature of Scotland. I have been involved with three bills in the Parliament—the Standards in Scotland's Schools Bill, the Transport (Scotland) Bill and the current Water Industry (Scotland) Bill. On each of them, members of the Opposition have had to make statements and lodge amendments on sustainable development—and each time Labour back benchers have defeated those amendments. That is not good enough. We have to ensure that legislation to protect the wildlife of Scotland is in place.

The Executive also produced section 47(5), which is the get-out clause. It says quite clearly that sustainable development is at the bottom of the list of priorities for Scottish Water.

If Mr Finnie is so outraged, perhaps he could produce a timetable for legislation in his closing speech. His outrage would then be justified. I turn finally to page 45 of "The Nature of Scotland". The Government of which the minister is a member says: "The management and protection of Scotland's natural heritage is, however, first and foremost dependent on the commitment of Scotland's people rather than on laws and policies." What a get-out. We all accept that every individual and citizen has a commitment to the nature of Scotland, but it is not good enough for the Government to say that it is our responsibility, not theirs. They are the Government—govern.

Will the member take an intervention?

Given that the minister said three times that she would introduce a bill as soon as possible, will Nora Radcliffe proceed with her proposed member's bill, to ensure that such proposals are on the timetable for this session?

rose—

I must declare a registered interest again this afternoon, as I am an associate member of the Library Association and I will concentrate on the library content of the national cultural strategy. I will begin by quoting to the minister from one of his glossy documents on the national cultural strategy:  "The roles of the public sector include giving direct support to a framework of agencies, institutions and services". The National Library of Scotland's budget this year is £9.23 million. That is a 78 per cent cut since the 1998-99 budget. There has been a cut of more than £2 million. How is that declining sum compatible with some of the key priorities in the first annual report? I warn the minister that, unlike everyone else who has spoken, I have read the first annual report since 12 o'clock. I refer him to key priority 3.2, on developing "wider opportunities for cultural access". The report says that the Executive will: "Progressively improve access to museum, gallery and library collections for all groups". Cutting the National Library of Scotland's budget by £2 million does not provide extra access to that library. I also refer the minister to key priority 2.2, under which the Executive says that it will: "Support the National Library of Scotland ... in its aim to become a 'hybrid library' ... to meet the demands on a modern library of national and international importance". I will give an example of how the minister has failed miserably. At the beginning of October, it was announced that the Scottish science library and the Scottish business information service would close as soon as practicably possible, as a direct result of the cuts in funding to the National Library of Scotland. The Scottish science library's Causewayside building was opened in 1989 to international acclaim and the library has continued to receive international acclaim for its work. Last year, the library received 8,500 personal visits. Last year, the Scottish science library and the Scottish business information service received nearly 17,000 inquiries. Those services meet the key priorities of the minister's national cultural strategy. They also meet priorities in other Executive strategies—the science strategy, the enterprise strategy, the digital Scotland strategy and the knowledge management strategy. You name it, the Scottish science library meets the Executive's requirements. Those services cannot be provided by anyone else. One principle in the national cultural strategy is that "Decisions about public funding of culture should be informed by valid and reliable evidence and based upon clearly understood criteria." The minister must agree that 8,500 personal visits last year and more than 17,000 inquiries are reliable evidence that the Scottish science library is necessary and delivers its work efficiently. Will the minister give us a commitment today that, in  line with the key priorities and principles that are set out in the document, the Scottish science library and the Scottish business information service will not close through lack of funds?

I would like to use Scott Barrie's question to consider the moneys for books and equipment for school libraries. I have to declare a registered interest, as I am an associate member of the Library Association. Is the First Minister considering a similar special fund to ensure that the moneys meant for school library books get to the school libraries and are spent on school library books and equipment? This week, I was in a school library whose  capitation should have produced £3,400 per annum; for the past two years, however, it has received only £200 per annum.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its definition is of a completed telecommunications mast. (S1O-3837)

Rather than providing the definition that I am seeking for the fourth time, is the minister seriously suggesting that he is abrogating responsibility for his legislation and leaving local councils to face the financial might of the telecommunications companies through the courts?

Will the member give way?

First, I should declare several interests. I have a receipt for the 60p toll that was taken from me at 5.30 pm on 30 August. When I submit the receipt to the Scottish Parliament, will the Scottish Parliament be able to reclaim that illegally collected 60p from the Scottish Executive? Furthermore, I point out that, contrary to comments that have been made, I was the author of at least six amendments on bridges and tolling that the SNP lodged to the Transport (Scotland) Bill. I am sorry that I do not remember the exact figure, but I am sure that there were at least six. I am sure that the minister is well aware of the phrase "Act in haste, repent at leisure". She must ask herself whether she has got the bill and its procedure right. Although the bill seeks to reinstate section 1(1) of the Erskine Bridge Tolls Act 1968, the minister has made it clear that she  wants to continue to make a profit from the collection of tolls. Section 4 and schedule 2 of the 1968 act say that the tolls "may be sufficient to defray the costs of the construction, improvement, maintenance and repair of the bridge". We have heard that in 1999-2000, there was a surplus of more than £3 million. The Scottish Parliament information centre report on the Erskine Bridge Tolls Bill—which the minister has tried to counter—points out that a £30 million profit has been made over 30 years. The source of that information is the minister's own department in the Scottish Executive.

No. The ministers have tried to counter the report, but its source is the Scottish Executive. We must pause and consider the figures. My West of Scotland constituents have done so and are asking, "Is this highway robbery, or is it a stealth tax?" The SNP amendment gives us time to examine the legality and the principles of the bill in the correct forum, not backwards and forwards in the bluff and bluster of the chamber. Interestingly, I follow two members of the Transport and the Environment Committee who have begun the extensive debate that must take place. I hope that they will support the amendment, so that we can conclude the debate. If we took the matter to the Transport and the Environment Committee, we could take evidence from West Dunbartonshire Council, whose letter of 9 May to the minister has already been quoted. That letter "calls on the Scottish Executive ... to consider the option of making the Erskine bridge toll free. The Council believes this would be a major step forward in job opportunity as it would widen the travel to work horizon for jobseekers throughout West Dunbartonshire Council". It is appropriate for the council to give evidence and explain that statement. If the Transport and the Environment Committee were able to examine the issue, we would also be able to test the minister's assertion in the policy memorandum that maintaining low tolls would result in "undesirable economic, environmental and social consequences through potentially increased traffic levels on a heavily used facility." However, as the bill's explanatory notes point out, the current projection is that, with tolls, traffic levels will rise by 5 per cent a year. We need to be able to have a debate about such matters. Members have already mentioned congestion; we must examine whether a toll-free Erskine bridge would help to relieve the  congestion at the Kingston bridge and the Clyde tunnel. As someone who lives two miles from the entrance to the Clyde tunnel, I can tell the minister that the congestion can last for an hour and a half every morning. We are not just losing parliamentary scrutiny. Contrary to the minister's point of information, sections 3(1)(a) and 3(1)(b) of the 1968 act ensure that any extension of the toll order must have a six-week publication date and that any objection will result in a local enquiry. I am beginning to wonder whether there has been a mistake or administrative error, or whether a deliberate act brought the bill to the chamber today and prevented the local authority from having a local inquiry.

Does Mr Tosh accept that the SNP members voted in good faith? During the debate in the Transport and the Environment Committee, the minister said that the enabling powers—which is what Mr Tosh is talking about—would "apply to both the Forth and Tay road bridge joint boards". She went on to say: "We cannot identify any other significant crossing to which section 69 powers could apply".—[ Official Report , Transport and the Environment Committee , 22 November 2000; c 1271 and 1275.] That is why the SNP members voted for the measure.

On a point of information.

Will the minister give way?

The minister said that he would give urgent consideration to directive 2001/18/EC. Is he able to say when he hopes to introduce guidelines on public consultation? As my colleague Brian Adam made clear, there was great consternation locally when folk heard—in the press the following day—about the 17 March decision on New Craig farm.

Can the minister assure members by setting a target, rather than giving a date, to introduce the guidelines before next year's planting?

Does Mr Tosh accept that, on two of the report's recommendations that the SNP was not happy to sign up to, the committee report makes it clear that there is no consensus view on scientific safety and that there are differing interpretations of the EC directive?

I want to take the five minutes that I have in this debate to explain why the SNP dissented from only three of the 79 recommendations in the report. As Andy Kerr outlined, the committee was as one on a vast majority of the issues. Given the brevity of the time that is available, I will deal with recommendations 25 and 35, which the SNP dissented from. They are about this Parliament's power to deal with GM crop field trials under the EC directive 90/220/EEC, which Andy Kerr mentioned. My colleague Bruce Crawford will deal with recommendation 63, which is about a separate Scottish advisory body. As Andy Kerr said, GM crop trials are of huge interest to the public. That is primarily because genetic modification is a new science, which has not only the potential to produce enormous benefits for agriculture in this country, but the potential to endanger human and environmental health. That is why the public is interested in GM crops and has concerns about them. The committee's report is timely and its recommendations should be accepted by the Government. The Parliament should be aware of people's concerns and should accept the recommendations of the committee to show the Scottish people that we understand their concerns. Recommendations 25 and 35 rest upon the interpretation of the EC directive. The Scottish Executive has said that it cannot restrict GM crop field trials, because the directive requires that Governments should "not unnecessarily restrict the release of GM crops if the release was safe for human health and the environment."  The key point is whether at this time GM crop releases are "safe for human health and the environment." Andy Kerr alluded to the fact that there is not a consensus view on the safety of GM crops within the committee, society in general or the scientific community. A quick scan of the enormous amount of literature on the safety of GM crops will back up that view. For example, the Royal Society of Canada's expert panel examined this issue—Canada is the third largest GM crop-planting nation on the planet—and concluded that there was no full evidence that GM crops did not cause harm. Dr Ulrich Loening told the committee that there has been insufficient research on the long-term effects of GM crops. Furthermore, a British Medical Association report entitled "The Impact of Genetic Modification on Agriculture, Food and Health", which was published in 1999, contained 19 recommendations, including a moratorium on GM commercial planting and the statement that there should be no releases of GM material into the environment. It is therefore important to point out that, instead of ensuring the safety of GM releases, the Scottish Executive is looking for a supposed lack of evidence of harm. Any approach should be the other way around; safety should come first. I will turn from the consideration of the scientific arguments to a further investigation of the EC directive. Article 4 of the directive states that Governments must "ensure that all appropriate measures are taken to avoid adverse effects on human health and the environment which might arise from the deliberate release ... of GMOs" which can be interpreted to mean that safety must come first. The SNP believes that article 4 enables the Parliament to prevent GM crop field trials. Indeed, we are not alone in holding that view: Friends of the Earth Scotland gave such evidence to the committee.

Mr Kerr knows as well as I do that the committee was aware of the lack of consensus on the issue, and that there is still no such consensus within the scientific community. That is the issue that we must examine. I want to return to article 4 of the EC directive, which the SNP and Friends of the Earth Scotland  believe would allow the Parliament to prevent GM crop field trials. Just last month, the Friends of the Earth Cymru received legal opinion on the matter to the effect that the article permits individual Governments to prevent such trials. In June 2000, the Welsh Assembly voted for a moratorium on those trials—and Wales is still a GM-free country. There are other European Union—

I am terribly short of time.

Okay.

As I understand it, the legal advice that the Friends of the Earth Cymru has received says the exact opposite. As a result, the matter is still up for debate in Wales. Other EU countries bound by the same EC directive have actually done something under article 4. Austria, Luxembourg, Greece and France have implemented controls over GM crop trials. The committee itself accepted that the directive is open to interpretation. That question is not yet closed, and perhaps it is up to the European Committee to pursue further this specific issue in the report. That would be an example of a devolved Parliament and its committees working for Scotland. Apart from three recommendations, the SNP signs up to this report. I hope that members will not think that I am finishing on a sour note if I say that, given the three recommendations on which the committee failed to agree, we need an independent Scottish voice in Europe to argue for Scotland's return to a GM-free, quality-food nation.

The Executive has given a loan of £1.9 million to the Scottish Borders Council; but it is a railway that the Borders need, not a loan to the council.

This has been an interesting debate, although it has  also been relatively quiet, which surprises me, after this morning's debate on fuel tax. I would like to examine the facts behind some of the words that we have heard today. We have been criticised for referring to the Executive's motion as complacent, but that is the only word that can sum up the motion. In "Rural Scotland: A New Approach", the Government said: "We are committed to delivering transport policies that reflect the diverse transport needs of people living in rural areas". Those are wonderful words, but what is behind them? During my intervention in Des McNulty's speech, I mentioned that we hear the wonderful words that the rural transport fund has risen by 33 per cent to £18 million. The reality is that the rural transport fund is still less than 1 per cent of the Scottish Executive's transport budget. That is not a commitment to Scotland's rural transport needs.

No, thank you. I will not take an intervention from Des McNulty because he started his speech by saying that he did not want to intrude as a non-rural member—he should not have because he does not know the facts. I want to talk about the road network that serves Scotland's remote and rural communities. The minister talked about roads this morning and this afternoon. The minister is proud of the trunk road construction programme, but only a quarter of the £120 million is to be spent outwith the central belt. That is not a commitment to serve Scotland's remote and rural communities. Of the 33 projects with a completion date, to be funded from the public transport fund, only around eight are in rural areas. I want to highlight one of those. The south-east Scotland travel ticket is a great idea. I am in favour of integrated transport, but there will be no train ticket as part of that travel ticket. When will the Borders rail link be built and paid for by the Government? The minister mentioned that rural petrol stations will be assisted. Page 167 of "The Scottish Budget" says that, between now and 2004, 15 rural petrol stations will be assisted. Those are the facts behind the words. Those are the reasons why the SNP says that the motion is a complacent motion from a complacent Government. Look at some of the other facts from the Scottish Executive's budget. Of the hugely expanded budget that the minister talked about, £1,593  million is for capital charges. That £1,593 will not provide a single new road, rail line or bus route. That is not a commitment to Scotland's rural communities. What is the debate about? What is the Government about? The minister raised it herself this morning: it is about whether we are dealing with Westminster or standing up for Scotland. When the minister deals with Westminster, how does she say to the Chancellor of the Exchequer that she wants £180.3 million? That £180.3 million would pay to buy the Skye bridge back for the public of Scotland. It would pay to extend the concessionary fares scheme in Scotland to all 16 and 17-year-olds and to all carers of disabled people. I say to the minister that that is what the debate is about. It is about reality, not rhetoric. It is about standing up for Scotland. It is not about spinning for Westminster, nor is it about—I say this after what we heard this afternoon about Russell Brown—spinning for Westminster MPs with Scottish constituencies on devolved, not reserved, matters.

Mr McNulty talks about achieving balance, but does he realise that the much-vaunted £18 million investment, which represents a rise of 33 per cent for the rural transport fund, brings that fund to less than 1 per cent of the total transport budget?

rose—

Will the minister give way?

I, too, congratulate George Lyon on securing the debate. Perhaps it is fitting that I am the last member to speak, because I want to ask on behalf of my constituents in the west of Scotland why it is that so many of them are worried about the threat to CalMac. In the west of Scotland, CalMac is a large employer. Duncan McNeil mentioned the fact that CalMac's headquarters are in Gourock. What happens if CalMac loses the contract and it goes to a company whose headquarters are outside Scotland? There are terminals at Ardrossan, Wemyss Bay, Gourock and Largs, and many of my constituents are worried. The services can be a daily lifeline for some people, and that is what is important to them—their daily lives. For the island of Cumbrae, the ferry provides the daily trip for pupils who attend Largs Academy. Without the ferry crossing being guaranteed at a price that folk can afford, how can secondary school pupils get to school? The daily ferry from Largs to Cumbrae brings the home helps who help so many of our elderly citizens to stay on Cumbrae to the ends of their lives—something that they want to do. We must ensure that such lifeline services are available for all. Maureen Macmillan said that I criticised the minister for going to the European Community on this issue. The SNP would never criticise a Scottish minister for going to the European Community to make the Scottish case. My criticism was that, to date, she has not achieved the result that the SNP could achieve for Scotland.

rose—

Certainly. Sustainable development applies to debates too. I will follow up Murray Tosh's concluding remarks by saying why the debate is important. We can relate the debate to real lives by considering current events, such as yesterday's weather chaos. Many weather patterns that we suffer nowadays can be attributed to climate change. Furthermore, the introduction of industrial practices into a natural process could be part of the explanation—although it is not entirely to blame—for the spread of foot-and-mouth disease. Just last night, I learned that 70 per cent of food in the United Kingdom is produced on only 20 per cent of farms. Society is turning its back on nature,  and nature is giving us our due. We must go beyond words and ensure that action is taken. Several members have discussed many of the Government's commitments, so I will not go into great detail on them. The advisory group on sustainable development's 10-point action plan was also mentioned. It was encouraging to hear that—two years after that plan was produced—the Government will finally take up most of those 10 points. "Making it work together" and "Working together for Scotland" referred to sustainable development. We have heard that the Executive has a commitment to sustainable development and that that is central to its policies, particularly on transport and the environment. That was in "Making it work together", which was published in September 1999. That document preceded the Transport (Scotland) Bill, which the SNP and the Green party tried to amend to embed in it sustainable development in transport. The Executive refused to accept that change. If the Executive says that it is committed to sustainable development then fails to put those words into practice when it has the opportunity, that tells us that the Executive believes in words rather than action. Today, the minister said that sustainable development would be embedded as a central policy of the Government. I am pleased to hear that, but I hope that that was not another of the minister's technical terms, like those that he used this morning when he gave evidence to the Transport and the Environment Committee. I hope that we get action, rather than embedding Government commitments. Many members referred to the ministerial working group and asked questions about it. They asked about when it has met, what it has done and when the Parliament will hear about it. It is essential that members become part of that process and hear what is happening. Talking about a ministerial working group on sustainable Scotland but not reporting to Parliament on it shows that the Executive is all talk and no action. What happened at that ministerial working group in regard to the indicators that we are all waiting for? We have heard how long we have had to wait for those indicators. Today, the minister came close to telling us that we might get 40 indicators and that we might get them some time. We would like to know when we are going to get them and what they will be. We want to know whether the ministerial working group has provided guidance on how business in Scotland should take sustainable development into account in its everyday working practices. I was surprised that no other member raised the Friends of the Earth Scotland report card, which I  am sure we all received today and which would not make happy reading for the minister. I pick a few issues that have been given unhappy, unsmiley faces. Mixed waste incineration for energy has been discussed, and it is accepted that that is not a sustainable way of producing energy, yet it is still under consideration in the renewables obligation (Scotland) consultation. The SNP will say no to mixed waste incineration as a form of renewable energy. The FOES report card talks about indicators—almost everyone has raised that issue today. The SNP amendment is there to ensure that we have a timetable, and that we no longer talk about or fantasise about indicators but produce them. That will mean that we get some work done. In government, the SNP would take that further. We would say that we should start with an audit of the environmental practices in this country, at the end of which we would produce a national environment plan, which would include indicators, targets and the dates by which we would achieve those targets. We could easily put "Must do better" at the end of the FOES report card. We must set dates and targets. We have to act now for the future, not in the future when it is too late. The Tory amendment talks about further consultation. The SNP would say, "We are sorry—we want action, not further consultation." Murray Tosh talked about the minister repackaging. We do not need more repackaging—we need action and we need it now. I was surprised that the targets in Robin Harper's amendment were not more ambitious, although he upped the ante on them in his speech. Scotland could be far more ambitious in the targets it sets. On the motion, I am sorry, but no commendation can be given for lots of words and no action. There is no amendment from the Liberals. I presume that, in their sustainable fashion, they will vote for the Government's motion. However, George Lyon spoke to our amendment, so we could look forward to the support of the Liberals for it in the vote.

What does Mr Macintosh feel was the clear message that he sent out during the stage 2 debate on the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill, when he voted for neither the SNP's nor the Green party's amendment to embed sustainable development in the bill?

I gave an example of a good cross-sectoral project in East Dunbartonshire. Will there be Scottish Executive funding for external evaluation of that project?

This afternoon, I will raise the issue of teenagers, who form an often forgotten group within the designation of children and young people. They have their own special problems separate from children and certainly do not like to be seen as children. I am also pleased that the Minister for Health and Community Care will sum up, because I want to focus particularly on the issues of drugs misuse and mental health among teenagers. I am afraid that, with members' permission, I will quote many facts and figures, as it is important to realise how many young people are affected by those problems.  In 1998-99, 1,228 young people were referred to the children's reporter for alcohol, drugs or solvent abuse. Of the 1,193 who were referred for alcohol and drugs misuse, 17 per cent were then referred on to a hearing; 9 per cent were given voluntary support; and 74 per cent received no intervention. That 74 per cent represents 882 young people who, although identified as at risk, received no help at all. How did such a situation happen? That might have happened because one of the grounds for referral to a children's hearing is that the hearing must include positively beneficial outcomes for the child. Sadly, it has been accepted that the children's hearings system cannot always have such positively beneficial outcomes. The principal reporter of the Scottish Children's Reporter Association, Alan Miller, has identified one of the problems as "the low availability at present of drug treatment services dedicated to the under-16 age group". I have raised the issue before in parliamentary debates and, a year on, I see no great evidence that the Government has supported enough specific projects for young people under the age of 16 suffering from drug, alcohol and solvent misuse. Many mental health problems among young people exhibit themselves in such misuse. In 1998, there were 114 suicides in the nought-to-24 age group, which is a dreadful figure for Scotland. In 1997-98, there were 15,025 NHS attendances for child and adolescent psychiatric hospital appointments but, in that period, only 100 day-patient beds were available in Scotland for child and adolescent psychiatric patients. That figure has risen since 1997-98 to 108 day-care beds, but that is still only 108 beds for 15,025 NHS attendances. We must recognise and examine the problem, and we must ensure that the means are made available to tackle it. I highlight an innovative cross-sectoral project that is exactly what we are talking about today—the mental health development fund initiative for looked-after children and young people in East Dunbartonshire. In 1997, a one-year pilot project was set up with £140,000 to cater for 200 young people who were looked after or accommodated. It was supported by East Dunbartonshire Council, Greater Glasgow Health Board and the NHS mental health trust in the area, in an excellent example of cross-sectoral working. Sadly, that pilot scheme ended at the beginning of this year. The internal evaluation of that project states that residential staff and foster carers benefited immensely and were able to deliver higher-quality care by having consultation with mental health professionals who were able to inform and, crucially, to legitimise their practice. The evaluation also stated that it was hoped that, if the  project could be sustained and further developed, it might provide a Scottish demonstration site for a mental health vision for looked-after and accommodated young people. That is most important in East Dunbartonshire, with Kenmuir St Mary's School, which is the national secure care unit for young people. I end my speech with a plea to the minister. The project has approached the Scottish Executive for funding for an external evaluation, to ensure that it can become a national demonstration project. I ask the minister to ensure that the project receives that funding.

I am delighted to hear the minister announcing the abolition of league tables. I come from part of East Dunbartonshire where our schools always used to top the league tables. I draw the minister's attention to the part of the HMI report on the education functions of local authorities that deals with East Dunbartonshire Council and ask him to comment on the performance targets that the council has failed to meet. The report said that no aspects were found to be very good, that no aspects were found to be good and that three aspects were found to be unsatisfactory. That tells the minister why he has had to abolish league tables. We used to appear at the top of them; we are now at the bottom.

Will the First Minister give way?

Will the member give way?

Will Iain Smith give way?

I have to follow Andy Kerr. He said—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Let us return to the issue at hand, which is the minister and her competence in the handling of the trunk roads maintenance contracts. She prejudged the issue and signed the contracts against the will of Parliament, which was expressed in the chamber three weeks ago when member after member rose to tell her to take her time, to wait for the committee's report and not to go ahead with the flawed process. Andy Kerr said that there was only one issue over which he took issue with the minister. However, we must consider the minister's record not only on trunk roads, but on her general overseeing of the brief. There was the issue of the problems with Caledonian MacBrayne. We are sadly considering a seatrack rather than a Railtrack. She has considered bundling routes and she is reported to have visited Brussels on more than one occasion. Was any of that necessary? Could not the minister have sat down and worked things out properly in the first place? There was the issue of the northern ferries contract. At the last minute, the minister had to come to Parliament—

Other members accept the fact that I am addressing the competence of the minister. At the last minute, the minister had to make an emergency statement to Parliament on the northern ferries contract. Even after that, we still lost the contract to a Finnish yard.

I do not intend to repeat continually that I am addressing the competence of the minister. The minister is already costing an extra £400,000 a year in public funds that are being used to support a Finnish yard rather than a Scottish yard. We are talking about lifeline services, not the life of a minister. We are talking about the winter maintenance of our roads and the chaos that will result from the minister's actions—chaos that is already apparent. We have received reports that the contractors are asking local coal merchants and hauliers whether they will be able to help them to fulfil their part of the contract. We will have blocked roads this winter and a jigsaw of access because, although some roads will be cleared by the councils, trunk roads will not be cleared by the private contractors.

No, I will not. I am closing. The minister came to the Parliament with ideas about and commitment to an integrated transport policy. In this instance, she has failed in her brief and has failed the Parliament. It is time for her to go.

Mr Kerr has just stated that he has no confidence in Bruce Crawford's judgment. I take him back to the roads debate three weeks ago when he said: "I have absolutely no confidence in Sarah Boyack's judgment on the matter."— [ Official Report, 25 January 2001; Vol 10, c 579.]  Will Mr Kerr address that point now?

rose—

indicated disagreement.

Given the member's commitment to a Scottish wave energy test site, how can she support the Government's amendment, which will delete that part of Robin Harper's motion?

It was clear from Robin Harper's opening speech that the debate is not only about renewable energy, but about Scotland's future and environment. Robin Harper mentioned that Scotland has a rich potential in renewable energy. Numerous academic studies support that. There are also international comparisons with countries such as Denmark, which Robin Harper made. Denmark employs 15,000 people in renewables. Scotland also has a track record in renewable energy engineering, such as the wind turbines that are made by James Howden & Co Ltd in Glasgow and the ducks for wave power that were invented by Professor Stephen Salter—professor of engineering at the University of Edinburgh. We should remember that track record and progress it, rather than do what we have done in the past. There are lots of different renewable energy sources that we must examine. There is hydroelectric, in which we also have a track record. Sadly, in recent years, it has been starved  of finances and almost of a future. I hope that the minister will, when he winds up, make a commitment that hydroelectric schemes will be eligible for grants under the ROS scheme, especially for refurbishment schemes. Let us consider the energy that could be produced from different renewable energy sources. Hydroelectricity in Scotland could produce capacity equivalent to 250MW. It currently accounts for 11 per cent of capacity, but it could be a great deal more. Onshore wind could produce 420MW, offshore wind could produce 200MW, wave power could produce 200MW and I could list other energies. By 2010, we could produce 50 per cent of our energy in Scotland from renewable energy. If we put that against a background of a plan to increase coal generation of electricity by 1,200MW within 10 years, it is clear that renewable energy can produce what we need and that it can produce it more cleanly. We should put our energies into that. As Scotland has greater potential for renewable energy, the SNP believes that we should set greater targets. We owe that to ourselves and to the environment. The UK's target of 10 per cent is miserly compared with targets throughout the European Community. The Scottish Executive's target of 18 per cent—starting from a base of 13 per cent—is not very exciting. The EC has set a target of 22.1 per cent but, given the figures that I have quoted, the SNP would set a target of providing 25 per cent of electricity from renewable energy by 2010; we could easily achieve that target. We can achieve the target only if we accept that there are Scottish solutions to Scottish problems. A lot of the effort that is going into renewable energy is about large-scale production. That has its place, but Scotland is a small country so we should concentrate on small-scale solutions. The problems with the grid have been mentioned. My colleague, Kenny MacAskill, will address those. One of the ways round the problem is local production of renewable energies for local consumption. That would not only contribute to meeting renewable energy targets, it would take us into the ecological and environmental argument that small is beautiful. Farmers could harvest energy and fabrication yards could build plant for renewable energy production, as Robin Harper said.

Scotland could do so much; we have to do it. I commend Robin Harper's motion and must condemn the Government's amendment. Allan Wilson mentioned that the ROS  consultation will finish tomorrow. As it finishes tomorrow, why has the Government set its stall out today by lodging its amendment and refusing all the Scottish Parliament renewable energy group's consultation responses, which are listed in Robin Harper's motion? The Government has refused those today. It has made its decision and will not wait until tomorrow. It is not listening.

We must go further; that is what the SNP amendment says. The SNP would go further; we would set a 25 per cent target and we would set up an audit. It was mentioned in the House of Commons recently that we must ensure that we audit our environmental practices properly. In auditing those practices, Scotland could produce a national environment plan that would ensure that we were safeguarding our environment and our future. I move amendment S1M-1634.2, to leave out from "urgently" to end and insert: "commission an environmental audit as a forerunner to producing a national environment plan which will encompass a renewable energy capacity audit."

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that when the south-east of England has decided that it is vital for its economy to get connected to the interconnector, and has gone ahead, it is of the same vital concern that Scotland gets connected, as Ireland too has done?

The minister talks about bringing youth unemployment down. Does she still stick to the answer that she gave me in a recent debate, when she said that a 13-week job is a sustainable job for a young person? Does she stand by the statement that a 13-week job is sustainable?

To ask the Scottish Executive what income from rent for the positioning of mobile telephone masts it receives from telecommunications companies. (S1O-2815)

I take it that as those masts are on public buildings that is why, in the draft consultation on national planning guidelines, only new installations of telecommunications apparatus on buildings will be subject to full planning control. That goes against recommendation 1 of the Transport and Environment Committee report: "The Committee recommends the introduction of full planning control for telecommunications development." Is the intention to allow the Government to continue to make money on a potential health hazard?

Will the member give way?

This is not so much a set-piece debate as an emergency debate. I hope that the minister will listen to the pleas that are being made in the chamber. The minister said that the process was not flawed, but she has heard more than once today that the court made it clear that its judgment was time-barred, but that it accepted the prima facie evidence. Therefore the process was legally flawed. Members have talked about loss of jobs. Does the minister dispute the local authorities' figures? Does she dispute the figures that her colleagues have quoted today—that there will be 22 job losses in South Ayrshire, 22 in Dumfries and Galloway and 30 jobs lost in the Highlands? All will be directly related to the loss of the contracts. Is TUPE fully costed in bids from private companies to which the minister is about to award contracts? If it is not—we have heard from several councils that it is not and that not all jobs are covered by TUPE—will extra money be put into local authority budgets to offset the costs of redundancies? The minister said that the process has been long and that people have had plenty of opportunity to question her. I say to the minister that I have received correspondence from more than one council. That correspondence states that the councils have, throughout, tried to question the process, but they have not been allowed to do so and the door has been slammed in their faces. That is not what a listening Government would do. I want to finish by saying—in fact I do not want to finish as I have plenty of time and there are plenty of other points that I could make.

I apologise. I will quote from Alison Magee, the COSLA transport spokesman. She wrote to all members, including the Minister for Transport and the First Minister. The letter states: "on behalf of COSLA I would, again, request most urgently that before any contracts are awarded you undertake an independent and widely defined appraisal of whether the whole process followed will provide best value in delivering road maintenance". In essence, that is what all members are asking of the minister today. In her summing-up, I want to hear a categorical assurance about the phrase in her amendment that says that the Executive will "continue further exploration of all outstanding issues." I want the minister to explain that phrase and to  tell us that it means that she will halt the process now and that she will not award the contracts within the next four days, but instead await the Transport and the Environment Committee's inquiry, which will be full, wide-ranging, transparent, open and public. I want an assurance that, when that inquiry is reported to Parliament, the minister will listen and make her decision based on it. If we hear the absolute guarantee today that she will halt the tender process and that she will await the report from that committee's inquiry, as discussed by Parliament, the SNP will support her amendment.

rose—

I have constituents in the west of Scotland who use every hospital in the Greater Glasgow Health Board area. Ken Macintosh has already made many of the comments that I was going to make about the constituents whom we share in East Renfrewshire, so I will confine my remarks to my experience of an option appraisal by Greater Glasgow Health Board for the siting of the secure care centre at Stobhill hospital. I want to bring that experience to the minister's attention in particular. Mary Scanlon and Richard Simpson have mentioned their concern about what they have been hearing. Their concerns are well founded. I was at the Health and Community Care Committee when it inquired into the effectiveness of Greater Glasgow Health Board's consultation on the secure care centre. Robert Brown is right. The lesson that the health board learned from that grilling by the Health and Community Care Committee was to do more by way of smoke and mirrors. I will supply some examples, which I hope the minister will take to heart. Twenty-eight meetings were planned to discuss the acute services review. That sounds wonderful, but only 17 of them actually took place. That was because 10 of them were cancelled through lack of attendees, which in turn was because the health board did not properly publicise the meetings. It did not let folk know and it did not hold the meetings in the right places. That is what I mean by smoke and mirrors.

Pauline McNeill has a point, although the health board has in fact had plenty of responses. According to its own documentation, it has received more than 500 written responses, which is an exceptional number from the public. Consultation is about presenting the information in a way that people can understand. It was not exactly helpful to the public for 22 different leaflets to be circulated. Furthermore, the content of the 22 leaflets needs to be considered. We have already heard about the innumeracy of Greater Glasgow Health Board's case, which someone described as an option for doctors and administrators. None of the medical associations in greater Glasgow's hospitals likes the process that has been conducted and none of them likes the options that have been presented. Most important, the associations do not like the fact that the evidence is not being presented to them in a way that allows rational decisions to be made.

I am glad that we are labouring the point. I hope that the minister is picking it up, because it is what this is all about. There has not been a consultation process—there has been a public relations process for the minister's consumption and nobody else's. Greater Glasgow Health Board did not learn the lessons of the secure care centre at Stobhill; we in the Parliament have to ensure that we represent the opinions of the patients and of the health professionals throughout greater Glasgow. I hope that the minister will ensure that there is an inquiry into the whole process that Greater Glasgow Health Board has gone through.

I shall not move amendment 51. I am pleased that the minister has listened to the lobby, which has said that we need this statutory body. Its advice will have to be brought before the Parliament, listened to and discussed. I am pleased that that is what is planned. I hope that, in her remarks, the minister will acknowledge that the advice that the group gives to the Executive will be taken seriously. I expect that, when this body comes into being, one of the first pieces of advice that it will give the Executive will be that there should be concessionary fares for carers. Unfortunately, Sir David Steel did not choose for discussion today the amendment that calls for that, which was lodged in my name. I am therefore pleased to welcome the minister's actions.

I shall leave amendment 69 in the traffic jam that the Tories would consign us to for evermore. I want to ask a few questions about the minister's amendments to the parts of section 44 that were added by my stage 2 amendments. I am not sure why, with amendment 40, the minister wants to remove the words "those persons". If that paragraph said only  "specify the classes of motor vehicles", that would take care of ambulances and other such vehicles, but how would it take care of blue or orange badge holders in cars? I would like the minister to address that point, so that I can be sure that I understand what she is saying. I hope that, in amendment 41, "provision" will be enough to ensure that, whenever changes are made, they are made transparently and are published, so that everybody is notified of them. We must not allow a Skye bridge situation to happen in every tolling regime in the country.

I want to echo Murray Tosh's comments. Will the minister assure us that there will be enough flexibility? How do we allow for emergency timetables to meet emergency situations when the amendment refers to "specifying dates as the only dates . . . as may be specified in the regulations"? We need to know that there will be sufficient flexibility. I am thinking of the current rail disruption and the emergency rail timetables. We need to be able to implement emergency bus timetables to ensure an integrated transport service. If my train is arriving 15 minutes later, there is no point in my bus arriving to meet the train 15 minutes earlier. I seek an assurance on the necessary flexibility.

Amendments 6 and 7 are intended to ensure that the principle of consultation is enshrined at the beginning of the bill and applies throughout it. Amendment 7 moves us on from consultation of those whom bodies think appropriate, to consultation of those "who have an interest". It is important to accept that we do not always know who has an interest and who is the appropriate body to consult, so the requirement should be to consult all those who have an interest. I was pleased that at stage 2 the minister accepted many of the arguments on consultation. If we want the public to use public transport, we have to listen to their views. That means that we have to listen to all the views—of users and of potential users of public transport. We have to listen to potential users to understand why they are not using public transport. The Subordinate Legislation Committee's report raised the concern about the fact that there are times when consultation under the bill will be statutory and times when it will be inferred and accepted. The committee had a long debate with civil servants about the concept in law of statutory consultation versus reasonableness. It is important to ensure that people are consulted at the heart of the bill's provisions on transport strategies. After all, the Parliament's watchwords are openness, accessibility and accountability and if consultation is included at the beginning of the bill, it will flow through the rest of it.

Today's debate has fallen into three main areas: safety, ministerial powers and money—money is always mentioned. I thought that members would talk mainly about safety. I am surprised that everyone picked up on the issue of ministerial powers. We have heard that the SNP wants to fragment the railways even further—

I would prefer to get started. I take issue with the implication that the SNP wants to fragment the railways even further. The minister said throughout the debate that she has powers and that the Transport Act 2000 will give her more. I draw her attention to the fact that the House of Commons made it clear that, under sections 208 and 209 of the act, the strategic rail authority will not have to comply with directions or guidance from Scottish ministers that are not consistent with guidance from the secretary of state. The SNP's point is that power over the strategic review of railways in Scotland must lie in Scotland and must not be at the mercy of the secretary of state in England and Wales. The minister also talked about the £50 million compensation package that will be available to passengers. If the minister travelled on the Edinburgh to Glasgow rail line every day of the week, as Gil Paterson and I do, she would hear that passengers do not want compensation—they want the money to be invested to ensure that they have a safe and reliable railway. We must also consider why the minister and the Tories' Murray Tosh are happy that someone else will decide what happens in Scotland. The power to direct the railways in Scotland on behalf of passengers must lie in Scotland. That power must not be exercised at the behest of a secretary of state in England. We must achieve Scottish powers that are good for Scotland's railways. We would not be in the position that we are in today if we had been able to instruct ScotRail and Railtrack.

Come independence, there will be a separate and independent health and safety executive in Scotland. On that point—

No. Bristow Muldoon should sit down. He has been up and down like a jack-in-the-box all morning. Let us consider the money that is involved. Last year, Railtrack's profits were £421 million. The Health and Safety Executive's funding for its work throughout the UK was £182 million. The debate is about putting profit before safety. Perhaps we would be able to invest in safety first in an independent Scotland. The minister also asked whether we would have  the same guidelines in Scotland as are in place in the rest of the UK. I draw to her attention the fact that, after the Hatfield incident, Bruce Crawford and I met Railtrack a week before she did. We were told that, in Scotland, Railtrack applied guidelines plus—the staff whom we met were proud of the fact that the guidelines for Railtrack in Scotland are better than the guidelines for the rest of the UK. However, while we were pleased to hear that we already have better guidelines, we were not pleased that guidelines plus has resulted in 250 miles of track needing to be replaced. Independence and power in Scotland will ensure that Scotland's railways do not again get into the mess that they are in today.

The detail is there—the problem is that the minister cannot come up with the money and does not have the power to do anything with it anyway.

I am sorry, but I am conscious that we are short of time—I have only four minutes. I want to conclude by repeating the point that the SNP has made throughout the debate. The SNP wants power in Scotland so that there is parliamentary oversight of the railways in Scotland. That would ensure that the massive public subsidies that already go to Railtrack, to which Tommy Sheridan referred, deliver a public service in Scotland and reflect the desires and the demands of the people of this country.

Will the minister give way?

rose—

Any framework for economic development at the beginning of the 21 st century must give due cognisance to the fact that future development will be based on e-business and e-commerce, both of which will grow from the knowledge society. I am heartened by the emphasis placed on that by both the framework and the minister's opening comments, and I will re-emphasise the importance of that in my speech. Recently, Robert Crawford, who is the chief executive of Scottish Enterprise, said: "E-commerce is the most profound economic development since the industrial revolution and it must be embraced before the challenges become threats." I fear that we may be approaching the level of threat if we do not do something soon. I was at Scottish Enterprise's annual meeting in August this year, at which Professor Jim Norton, from the Institute of Directors, produced some fascinating statistics on growth in e-business around the world. I will introduce another country into the debate, as Jim Norton told us that Norway was the world leader in e-business—not the United States but Norway, which is the same size as Scotland and which is on the geographical periphery, just like Scotland. I ask ministers whether Scotland can emulate Norway and whether the framework will put Scotland in front, instead of playing catch-up. We must consider what the Government has done in two crucial areas over the past 18 months.  I bring members back to digital Scotland, which is an area that I constantly mention in debates in the Parliament. I make no apology for that. If we do not achieve digital Scotland, we will not do e-business this year, next year or in 10 years' time. I remind the chamber that we debated digital Scotland more than a year ago. Six months later, in May 2000, a task force report on digital Scotland was published. Four months later, on 14 September, we had the Executive's response to the digital Scotland task force report: the Executive agreed to all 68 recommendations. But where are we, what have we done and what has the Government achieved a year after the debate? Even the framework document mentions broadband provision, when it says: "There is already a consensus that investment in high quality broadband telecommunications throughout Scotland would be an important contributor to the building of a knowledge-based economy." But where is that broadband provision? Where is Scotland's direct access to the north Atlantic cable, which would allow broadband communications throughout Scotland? The south-east of England has such direct access, but Scotland does not. Where is the feasibility study into broadband communications for Scottish schools? That study was due to be published at the end of September, but we have heard nothing. It goes on and on. We must ensure that we achieve and do not just talk. We have a wonderful glossy document, but we need the action and we cannot keep waiting for it. One of the key points that the digital Scotland task force and the knowledge economy action group talked about was leadership for digital Scotland and for the e-economy. They talked about energetic leadership and about appointing a Scottish e-envoy and a Scottish Cabinet minister for the information age strategy. I refer the minister to recommendation 17 of the digital Scotland task force report. Where is that person? Where is the leadership? Without wanting to get too personal, Peter Peacock has been the minister responsible for digital Scotland. If we were conducting a performance review and were measuring Peter's application to digital Scotland in the past year, we would have to question his results. Where is the action plan that the EU said that we should have produced by June 1999? We need action and we need it now. In closing, I was going to say to Wendy Alexander, "Wendy, we need action and I hope you'll lead it." However, given her responses to some of the questions that were put to her earlier, I am very disappointed that our minister is someone who thinks that three months' work is sustainable employment for young people and that  words, not funding, are the way of achieving an e-Scotland.

The member says that the Irish accepted the need for investment in their electronic infrastructure. I take it that the Liberal Democrats will support our amendment, which calls for exactly that.

Will Wendy Alexander tell the chamber how many of those young people went into sustainable—rather than short-term—employment?

Along with my SNP colleagues, I welcome the minister's announcements, but I want to draw members' attention to the mess that we have got into with local government finance over the past 20 years and why, as the SNP amendment says, we need a thorough review of the financing of local government. All 32 local authorities, in submissions to the Local Government Committee, called for such a review. I will give an example from my constituency—indeed, from the council area in which I live—of the mess that we have got into and why that thorough review is essential. East Dunbartonshire Council could be described as a potpourri council: until 14 months ago, it was Labour controlled; since then, it has been Liberal Democrat controlled; and its budget this year was passed only with the support of the Conservative councillors. East Dunbartonshire can lay the blame solidly around the parties—except for the SNP, which is not represented there. With proportional representation, of course, we would have a quarter of the seats and could bring some sense to local government in the area. East Dunbartonshire has one of the richest tax bases in Scotland. It encompasses areas such as Bearsden and Bishopbriggs, but it also includes areas of need such as Kirkintilloch. Despite that rich tax base, East Dunbartonshire Council is crumbling, like its roads and its buildings. The council estimates that it needs to spend £20 million to bring the schools up to a tolerable standard. East Dunbartonshire is also failing. It is failing its pupils, as there is a 29-week wait for special educational needs assessments. It is failing its old people, because in this year's budget, in order to save £380,000, it decided to make fewer nursing home placements. That means leaving old folk in hospital when they should be in a nursing home, or leaving old folk in their own homes without the care that they need in order to have a decent and comfortable existence.  East Dunbartonshire is failing its communities. It took the decision to close Twechar recreation centre, leaving that community to go for lottery money and take on the responsibility—

I said that if our 25 per cent vote had been reflected in the number of seats, we would have had some of the solutions. The community of Twechar has been left to take on the responsibility of looking for lottery money in order to have a recreation centre, but the council has said that, even if the community takes on that responsibility, the centre will still be liable for a rates bill of £3,000 per month. That is not a commitment to communities. Volunteers in East Dunbartonshire have been told that hall lets will rise, which means that the council is taking money away from the voluntary sector. I am seeking assurances from the minister for East Dunbartonshire and its residents. I want an assurance that the removal of guidelines will relieve East Dunbartonshire of the nonsense of having to make cuts of £12.3 million over the next three years. I want an assurance that the loan repayments, amounting to £400,000 per annum over the next 20 years, for the long-awaited flood prevention scheme that was announced last week will be taken into consideration in future grant allocations to East Dunbartonshire. I mostly want to know what the minister thinks—he has not addressed this yet—is a reasonable rise in council tax and how that equates with an electorate's reasonable demand for services. For example, in East Dunbartonshire, this year's 0 per cent rise meant a 2 per cent cut in its budget. If there had been a 3 per cent rise, the cut would have been 1 per cent; a 7 per cent rise would have meant a standstill budget. I would like the minister to tell us what a reasonable rise would be.

Has Ian Jenkins had any contact with his Liberal Democrat colleagues in East Dunbartonshire Council, which knocked down the swimming pool in Kirkintilloch? In such cases, it is not about finding revenue funding or capital, but about replacing a facility.

Will  the minister comment on the fact that East Dunbartonshire Council has just closed Twechar recreation centre, thereby disbarring a community from access to a local recreation facility?

Will the member agree that to move equality from the margins takes more than just strategies? Does she agree with this quote from Hansard ? "There is nothing that will focus the Government's attention more continuously and more fully on the need to help the disabled than an obligation written into the Statute Book".—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 5 December 1969; Vol 792, c 1919.]  Does she agree that that would move equality from the margins?

I am pleased that Jackie Baillie is talking about ensuring that mainstreaming is part of our daily business. Today, at the Transport and the Environment Committee, I moved amendments at stage 2 of the Transport (Scotland) Bill to ensure that disabled badge holders will gain exemptions in the bill. The Executive argued against those amendments and voted against them. Can the minister explain that inconsistency?

I welcome the Labour Government's move towards the SNP's long-held policy of a national concessionary fares scheme. However, I want to clarify a few points in the minister's statement. I want to be assured that councils such as Clackmannanshire Council, which already runs a free concessionary fares scheme for pensioners, will not be financially penalised between now and October 2002 when the Executive intends to introduce the scheme across the country. Will October 2002 also be when the concessionary schemes for the disabled and teenagers are introduced? I remind the minister  that 16 and 17-year-olds have to pay full fares at the moment, yet they are not eligible for benefit.

Does the First Minister concede that a major barrier to access to education and training this year has been the 1 September start date for individual learning accounts? Can the First Minister say how many Scottish students have been disadvantaged by that start date, given that most Scottish courses started in mid-August?

I apologise for the thin presence of SNP members tonight. As members will know, my colleagues are on their way to Inverness—perhaps we will all need palliative care come Sunday morning. I congratulate Michael McMahon on securing the debate and on the formation of the cross-party group on palliative care. I speak as a former volunteer and member of staff at Marie Curie Cancer Care, which cared for my aunt in her dying days. Scotland must accept that, in many senses, palliative care is the future of medicine. We have an aging population. Medical advances keep many of us alive much longer than was previously the case. However, those medical advances bring their own problems in the need for palliative care at the end of life. We must be careful not to medicalise the end of life. We must not turn death into a medical event rather than an end-of-life event. That is why palliative care is very different from medical care. The health priorities and strategies of the Executive must reflect the need and desire of many people at the end of their lives to die in their own home rather than in a hospital. At the cross-party group today, we heard that a bed in a teaching hospital costs £1,000 a day, a bed in a national health service palliative care unit costs £350 a day and the services of a Macmillan home care nurse cost £312 a day. On the bases of cost and what patients want, palliative care should be prioritised in the Executive's health strategy. Another point that was raised at the meeting of the cross-party group was that there is no Scottish Executive guidance note to social workers that specifies palliative care as one of their roles and gives them guidance on how they should provide that service. It is important that palliative care should be regarded as part of a joined-up service that involves the health service, care in the community, social workers and the voluntary sector. That is how the system works—we must ensure that that continues to be the case in the priorities and strategies of the Executive.

On that point, it is very difficult to find statistics on mental health problems for under-16s in the health service statistics currently gathered. Will the minister instruct the internal statistics division to ensure that such statistics are collected and collated?

The previous time that I spoke in a health debate I was the last speaker, but I am sad to say that I was the first to mention child health. I am therefore delighted that today the minister emphasised the needs of our children and young people. I am pleased that members welcomed the points that Irene Oldfather made and I am sure that the minister will take them on board.  I would like to concentrate on three areas in which the health of young people is a problem. Yesterday and today we heard the dreadful statistics on teenage pregnancy in Scotland. We have the highest level of teenage pregnancy in Europe. We heard that there are 9,000 teenage pregnancies every year, more than 4,000 of which end in abortions. That means that more than 4,000 young women each year go through a medical procedure that they should never have needed. We must take cognisance of that. Recent reports tell us that a third of 15-year-old girls have already had sexual intercourse. As a Parliament, we must raise the profile of such problems and support the minister in tackling them. I whole-heartedly support the minister's initiatives and I congratulate her on the high profile that she has given to that aspect of health. I hope that every member in the chamber will join me in rejecting the e-mail that we got last week from Precious Life Scotland, which said that it had taken great pride in handing out leaflets showing pictures of aborted foetuses, after the minister launched the Sandyford initiative. I rejected that e-mail and wrote back in very strong terms. Four thousand young women in this country should not have to have abortions. If they cannot get access to proper, sustained contraceptive advice, that figure will not come down. We must lead in that battle. The matter is urgent, which is where I take issue with the minister. It took more than a year to set up Healthy Respect in Edinburgh. We cannot wait another year and another 9,000 pregnancies. The minister mentioned demonstration projects. We want the sexual health initiative and strategy to be in place as soon as possible. We have talked today about joined-up government. Last week I was in Greenock to hear about SHIFT—the sexual health information for teenagers project—which is doing great work in bringing down the number of teenage pregnancies in Greenock. However, while I was there I heard that Inverclyde Council's community education budget had been halved since 1996. If we are to have joined-up and sustained approaches to working with young people, we must address such problems. In the drugs debate that we had earlier this year, I highlighted the fact that there were no specific under-16-years projects to support young people with drugs problems. Mary Scanlon emphasised that again today. Again, that is a matter of urgency. I asked some parliamentary questions about volatile substance abuse, and I was disappointed to hear that 15 of the 22 drug action teams do not refer specifically in their action plans to how they will deal with VSA, even though that is a required point in their remit. Angus MacKay said  that the Executive would consider what further action was required. We know what further action is required; we need to see it being taken. In the few seconds that are left to me, I would like to address the issue of smoking, which many members have raised today. I ask the Executive, when it is drawing up the Scottish tobacco enforcement protocol—which I know is coming—to examine the Crown Office guidance that does not allow test purchasing of tobacco products by under-16-year-olds in Scotland. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland that is permitted, and it has been found that when retailers are prosecuted, they stop selling tobacco to under-16s. That initiative has a 100 per cent success rate. In Scotland, there have been no prosecutions in the past year for selling tobacco or volatile substances to the under-aged. I welcome the minister's commitment to helping young people, but I would like to see some hard initiatives being taken.

Although the minister is describing the support that will be made available to young people at the places where they need that support, can she confirm that the number of school nurses in  Scotland is falling? School nurses provide an important point of contact with the nursing profession for young people.

Will the member give way?

This is not the first statement that the minister has had to make to the chamber; I recall that there was one on Scottish Opera's £3 million deficit and three on the Hampden fiasco. How can he now reassure pupils and parents that they can have any confidence when he says that he will stay and sort out the problem? Does he think that perhaps he is the problem—or is he just a jinx?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is receiving an appropriate equivalent amount from Her Majesty's Treasury to that allocated to the children's fund in England and Wales and, if so, how much it is receiving and how it intends to spend any such funds. (S1O-2136)

At a Treasury briefing a few months ago, voluntary organisations were told that a sum of between £100 million and £120 million would be allocated to a children's fund. Is the minister saying that that is not the case?

I want to ask the minister a brief question. Following this debate, could we commission research, or have research produced by the Scottish Parliament information centre, on this subject? We have heard statistics such as that 50 per cent of 999 calls are non-emergency calls, and I want to know if that is the case. We also heard that children make most of those calls and, again, I want to know if that is the case. There is not much point putting into place detailed education programmes for children if they are not causing the problem. We should commission research to ensure that the facts and figures that have been quoted are correct, and then we can have a full and frank discussion. I believe that Lothian and Borders police proposed a 555 number a few years ago. The possibility of having such a system would be backed up by research on the use, or misuse, of the 999 number.

I was pleased to hear the minister mention the importance of healthy lifestyles for children in the battle against future heart disease. Will she tell the Parliament, as well as local authorities around the country, how much of the £9 million that she just mentioned will be available to reverse the cuts that hard-pressed local authorities continually have to make to leisure and sports facilities?

We have heard many assurances and guarantees from Nicol Stephen—the SNP will ensure that those are honoured. We have also heard much about marketing and monitoring. I am concerned that we are leaving some principles behind and that there will be marginalised groups in society until the monitoring and marketing are done and there has been an annual review. I would like the Executive to acknowledge that concern. A year ago—almost to the day—we heard Donald Dewar talk about "Scottish solutions to Scottish problems."—[ Official Report , 16 June 1999; Vol 1, c 404.] The debate on amendments 4 and 5 made it clear that the Scottish Parliament is running behind Westminster's coat tails. That is not providing Scottish solutions to Scottish problems. It is an unhappy situation, which must not set a precedent. If lifelong learning and social inclusion are important enough for Parliament to legislate on, they are important enough for the Government to produce a timetable that allows Parliament to scrutinise legislation effectively. The SNP looks forward to seeing the minister's regulations—I hope that they will be more readily available than the draft regulations, which were delivered to me only this morning. We also look forward to the minister's regular reports to Parliament on the take-up of ILAs. We look forward to as many people as possible in Scotland engaging in lifelong learning, education and training.

I thought that, with the guillotine, I would not be able to speak to the amendment. Amendment 5 is in the same vein as amendment 4, and ensures that the Parliament and its committees have a positive role to play in the content of the regulations. It was worrying to hear the deputy minister say in committee: "The advantage of the negative procedure is that it allows the regulations to be introduced during the recess. Only if a member of the committee objected to their acceptance would the issue have to be discussed further"—[ Official Report, Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee , 12 June 2000; c 887.] Those arguments were made about amendment 4, and we all understood them. I cannot believe that a minister would say that it is an advantage to bypass Parliament and its committees. Members surely cannot accept such a claim, and will insist on something so important to Scotland. As every member in this chamber is committed to lifelong learning and social inclusion, we will insist that the matter must be open to the fullest scrutiny and the participation of all elected members. I move amendment 5.

Yes.

In formally moving amendment 3, I would like to refute some of the comments that were made. Nicol Stephen said that this was about funding of individual learning accounts. However, it must be about funding the associated costs as well. I raised those issues at stage 1, so they should not have come as a surprise. I would have thought  that the Government would have thought of those people in its social inclusion policy. We are leaving vulnerable people for another year before we deal with the associated costs that their caring and caring needs bring to them. Please vote for this amendment. I move amendment 3.

Amendment 3 is about targeting. It would ensure that the grants provide for the associated costs of learning that are incurred by two particular groups—those who care for others and those who need care for themselves. The statistics bear out the fact that those two groups are under-represented in education and training courses. The new section 1(2A) that would be created by amendment 3 relates to child care and other caring responsibilities. In a recent survey of women returners, to which my colleague Nicola Sturgeon has referred on previous occasions, it was found that the high costs of child care were still a disincentive to women's returning to work, training or education. In the stage 1 debate on 25  May, I asked the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning about the £8 million that Henry McLeish had announced for child care at further education colleges. At that stage, the minister was unable to indicate clearly that that £8 million would be accessible by people with individual learning accounts. I would appreciate it if the minister could take the time to clarify that. I turn to carers other than those with child care responsibilities. The Carers National Association in Scotland reckons that there are 500,000 carers in Scotland, who save the Government a total of £3.4 billion per annum. It is unreasonable to ask those carers to bear the burden of providing alternative care arrangements so that they can go into some kind of education and training. If carers are saving the Government £3.4 billion per annum, it is only fair that the Government does not allow them to bear the costs of returning to training and education. The NCA is asking the Government to make two pledges: to abolish the 21-hour study rule, which affects an individual's ability to claim individual care allowance; and to develop individual learning accounts for carers who receive long-term ICA. It is only reasonable that we write that onto the face of the bill; it is about principle, and ensuring that those who care for others have the financial ability to train themselves for the future. We all know—the facts are there—that it is more costly for disabled students to enter education and training. They need their associated costs to be covered. Enable reckons that there are 50,000 people in Scotland with a learning disability. If we want to encourage those people into education and training, we must ensure that they do not pay a financial penalty for it.

I have listened with great interest and I am glad to hear that members of  other parties are not hostile to the intent behind my amendment. Unfortunately, what I hear from the minister is talk about marketing rather than principle. My amendment is about ensuring principles rather than a marketing campaign. The figure of 25 per cent was arrived at after careful consideration of the facts of the matter. Members may remember that just last month there was a report, on which Henry McLeish has commented, which stated that a million people in Scotland suffer from illiteracy. A million people is approximately 20 per cent of the population of Scotland. A target of 25 per cent would therefore ensure that those who are most in need of support would get the support that they need. There was also talk about inflexibility, but the target in the amendment is not inflexible. The final part of the amendment indicates that, if less than 25 per cent of the money that has been allocated to an individual is paid in any one year, that money is not lost and may be redistributed as appropriate. The change that was made in the Grampian Enterprise pilot was in better targeting. It ensured that people in Grampian who needed to be brought into the system were brought into the system. I regard that as targeting and as principle; I do not regard it as marketing. Why do we have to wait for a marketing exercise and for monitoring, when we have the chance to put into the bill the principle that those who are most in need of lifelong learning will get access to it?

In moving amendment 2, which is in my name, I want to make it clear to the chamber that the amendment is about targeting grants to new learners and people on low incomes. The amendment is also about setting out principles—the flimsiness of the bill was debated at stage 1. The amendment is about the commitment of the Scottish Executive to lifelong learning and social inclusion, principles that everyone in the chamber supports and would want to see in the bill. The Association of Scottish Colleges says that individual learning accounts should encourage into education and training those otherwise not inclined or able to take part, in particular, those from the most educationally and economically excluded groups, such as those in low-paid or casual employment or who are currently out of work. The Association of Scottish Colleges believes that  consideration should be given to a priority place system, to ensure that new learners and those most in need of support are taking up ILAs. The 25 per cent targeting that is suggested in the amendment would allow that. A recent poll by the National Institute of Adult Continuing Education found that 61 per cent of Scots who replied said that they were either unlikely or very unlikely to engage in any form of organised learning in the foreseeable future. That is a situation which we must address. If we believe in lifelong learning for all members of society, the chamber will welcome the amendment, which will ensure that 25 per cent of the funds will be targeted, in the first instance, towards new learners and those on low incomes. Yesterday, I met a young woman from Who Cares? Scotland, who informed me of the frightening statistic that only 1 per cent of care leavers go on to any kind of further education. We have to overcome that, and the 25 per cent rule would help us to do so. To illustrate why I felt the need to lodge the amendment, I will quote Nicol Stephen's reply to Margaret Ewing during the stage 1 debate. He said: "The system will be demand led, based on the requests that are received."— [ Official Report , 25 May 2000; Vol 6, c 1158.]  I do not believe that that is good enough to ensure that we capture everyone who needs to learn, especially those who are the most difficult to reach and are least likely to take advantage of ILAs without an extra incentive. I take heart from Nicol Stephen's comments at the stage 2 debate in the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. He suggested that, as some members of the committee had suggested, we might start to target individual groups for individual learning accounts or for priority treatment. He said that, once we have kick-started ILAs and started to change the culture and attitude towards lifelong learning, we might more closely target individual learning accounts or aspects of them on non-traditional learners and the socially excluded. I say to Nicol Stephen that, by accepting my amendment, he will ensure that we do not have to wait until we have kick-started the process and that the principles of lifelong learning and social inclusion will be included in the bill. I move amendment 2.

I will take the debate back to its serious intent. The McCrone committee report was long awaited, not just by teachers but by parents and pupils. It was  eagerly awaited because of the uncertainty and rancour that had arisen over the millennium review.

We said that the McCrone committee was a delaying tactic. That is also true of the Government's response to the report, which is a tactic to delay having to resolve the uncertainty at the heart of the teaching profession. McCrone identified that when he said that teaching is a profession under pressure and that teachers feel misunderstood and undervalued. My party and I think it right and proper to expect a response from the Government to the McCrone report, to reassure the teaching profession that it intends to take matters forward positively.

I direct Robin Harper's attention to the resolution of the annual general meeting of the EIS that called on the Scottish Executive to "clarify its attitude to the McCrone report and to confirm that it will guarantee to provide the resources necessary to fund, in full, the outcome of the negotiations which will follow the publication of the McCrone Report." That is a clear statement. The position of a union in negotiations is different from that of the Government. We are looking for a Government response—not a detailed one—that recognises the import of the McCrone report. We want to know whether the Government accepts the conclusions that McCrone reached. It has become obvious that the forthcoming consultation is just another delaying tactic. One would presume that a consultation process has a couple of purposes: to inform the Government of the views of the profession and the public; and to influence the Government's decisions. However, that does not preclude the Government from expressing an opinion on the report at this point. We know that the Government has opinions on many of the issues that were raised by McCrone. In its manifesto, Labour stated that it would free teachers to teach. Paragraph 6.19 of the McCrone report calls for a bureaucracy audit and, in paragraph 3.45, there is a call for more classroom assistants to "enable teachers to concentrate on their teaching duties." By not commenting on the McCrone report, is  the Government saying that it is going back on its manifesto commitment to give teachers time to teach? That is a simple question and I would like an answer.

I have two answers for Dr Simpson. The Labour party can back up its manifesto commitment to free the teachers to teach, as McCrone recommends. At the same time, as the Labour party is the party of government, it must fund the committee that it set up. We are the Opposition, and we will cost it in our manifesto when the time comes. We are discussing finances, so let us turn to paragraph 1.11 of the report. McCrone states: "One specific issue which has been raised a number times with the Committee is the question how any changes to pay, promotion structures and conditions of service it may recommend will be financed." The quotations on the financial aspects go on and on. We have heard them today, and it is a major issue. Malcolm McIvor of the EIS said that if the process was to go anywhere, there would have to be money on the table and that if there was no funding, the process would, in effect, be dead. David Eaglesham of the Scottish Secondary Teachers Association said that there would be no point in discussing the matter any further if the Executive did not agree to fund the recommendations and that if the price—which is huge—were not to be met, the process would have been a waste of time. I do not think that the McCrone report was a waste of time, and nor does the SNP, but if the Government does not tell us whether it thinks that the report was a waste of time, and whether it is prepared to provide the funds to ensure that the recommendations are met, the whole thing will have been a waste of time. I hope that this morning's debate has not been a waste of time, but has allowed the SNP—as the Opposition party—to raise the genuine concerns of the profession and the parents. I hope that the Government will respond to those genuine concerns, and I urge members to support the SNP motion.

Given the evidence that the committee has heard about the burden on teachers, does Mary Mulligan accept that it would be perfectly reasonable for the Executive to signal its intentions by accepting the parts of the McCrone report that made those points and acknowledging that that will have resource implications?

Will the member give way?

I will try to keep my remarks brief. In members' business debates, it is normal to thank the member in question for securing the debate. Although I thank Duncan McNeil for doing so, it is probably more important to thank the fans of Greenock Morton Football Club, who have stuck by the club through thick and thin to ensure that it has a future and that people still come to watch football. However, whether that will happen remains to be seen. As for the SFA's meeting on 20 June to decide whether Greenock Morton should be expelled from the league, it is just a shame that the organisation cannot expel Hugh Scott and be done with it, so that we can get on with playing football. [Applause.]  I apologise to the Greenock Morton fans, but we must widen the debate to discuss the lessons that Scottish football can learn from this situation. It is with great trepidation that I suggest that we can learn lessons from what is happening in English football—my apologies. The English football task force made a number of recommendations, one of which was that supporters trusts should be further investigated to ensure that community clubs are just that—community clubs. The task force also made recommendations about what to do with directors who hold the purse-strings and control the lifeblood of a club, and can thereby prevent the club from moving on and up the leagues. Perhaps our football task forces should consider what to do with directors such as Hugh Scott. The Scottish Parliament cross-party sports  group, of which I am a member, has taken persuasive and supportive evidence about supporters trusts. At one meeting, we learned that, south of the border, the Minister of Sport has given £1 million to facilitate the investigation of supporters trusts. The day after that meeting, there was a debate in this chamber on sport and social inclusion, during which several members asked the minister, Rhona Brankin, to address that point. The minister has also been asked at question time about giving financial backing to supporters trusts. Sadly, she has continually said that the Scottish Executive will not provide funding to investigate the possibility of supporters trusts in Scotland. I hope that, given the evidence that she has heard tonight about just one football club, she will examine the issue in more detail and come up with a funding package to support supporters trusts. That might ensure that, each week, fans from different football clubs will not have to come to the Parliament to try to save their club from the clutches of directors who are simply out to make money.

The minister says that the bill empowers local authorities to provide transport. Will he confirm that when the grant for pre-school provision comes to an end and is incorporated into grant-aided expenditure, he will ensure that GAE takes into account increased transport costs for pre-school provision?

Scott Barrie said that he could talk about child care on a weekly basis—I am sure that many members do that informally. Members are always talking to people who provide child care. The debate has provided an opportunity to acknowledge all the work that has been done and the Scottish National Party recognises the work that has been done by the Executive. However, the intention of the SNP's amendment is to bring into focus the fact that the work that has been done on child care often raises as many questions as it answers. The idea behind the amendment is to ensure that any future funding and policy by the Government is directed at addressing the problems that were raised in the debates in November and today and that are raised when we discuss child care in our constituencies. I would like to touch briefly on a few points that have been raised and pose questions on them for the Deputy Minister for Children and Education to  answer in his response. Children with special educational needs cost more in terms of out-of-school care and pre-school care—that is a simple fact of life. Capability Scotland ran a two-week summer scheme last year for 20 children, which cost £20,000. By my reckoning, the £2 million that the minister mentioned at the beginning of the debate for special educational needs requirements means that we can provide facilities for 80 children with special needs for one year. That would not go anywhere near addressing the problems that are faced by those children. There is similarly patchy provision for children with special needs in pre-school, so we must consider the matter seriously. Transport has been mentioned more than once. Peter Peacock has been more closely involved in the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill than I have, but I do not remember anything in the bill that says that now we have to provide pre-school places for three and four-year-olds, we must also provide them with transport to pre-school. Can he confirm how local authorities, especially in rural areas, will meet the transport needs of the 68 per cent of three-year-olds who attend pre-school facilities? Funding was mentioned in the November debate and again today. I do not want to keep asking the same question, so I hope that we will get some answers today. The sustainability of funding concerns pre-school providers and especially those who provide after-school care. One-year funding is insufficient to set up a service and ensure its continuity. I have direct experience of that in my constituency. A parent planned to set up after-school care provision, but when she told people that she could apply for only one year's funding, 20 or so parents said that they would look elsewhere because they did not want to make annual arrangements for out-of-school care for their children. Qualifications have been mentioned. Nicola Sturgeon has already asked twice about the update on the 5,000 new deal training opportunities. This is an appropriate moment for the Executive to answer those questions. When will the Executive respond to the SPRITO Scotland and Play Scotland joint initiative to set up a play-work, education and training unit? Those organisations had hoped to do that by April this year, but they have still not been given the go-ahead or any advice from the Executive. Sam Galbraith announced a total of £8 million today. Am I correct in thinking that £2 million of that sum had already been announced as part of the £49 million? I thought that he said that £2 million would be allocated to local authorities from the existing £49 million. If that is right, today's announcement is of £6 million, not £8 million. I ask  the minister to answer some of the questions and to stick to the facts.

Will the member give way?

Will Mrs McIntosh give way?

Will Keith Raffan give way?

Given Janis Hughes's remarks that young people often are homeless first and become addicts second, will she join me in asking that, when the Deputy Minister for Communities sums up, we hear for the first time something about the work that will be targeted on the young homeless? I am thinking in terms of research to find out the hidden numbers of young homeless who are sleeping on their pals' floors, which is what leads them down the road to addiction problems.

I refer the minister to the research published at the end of 1999 by two physiotherapists, Mitchell and Wood, which identified what to me—as a layman—appears a very simple test for the detection of dyspraxia. Could that be brought to the national screening committee's attention?

The minister just has to take the example of Lewis and put it into practice for all children. That is what this debate is about. In two weeks' time, when we consider stage 3 of the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill, we will be putting the presumption to mainstream into legislation. That makes it all the more important that we have in place the structures necessary to identify and support all children entering education in Scotland, no matter what condition they suffer. We have heard what dyspraxia is, but I wish to draw the minister's attention to the research done by Mitchell and Wood—two physiotherapists—on a simple test to identify dyspraxia. The test is so simple that suitably qualified and trained pre-school staff could be in the front line of identifying young children with dyspraxia. It is so simple that it can be incorporated into the current pre-school screening that is done by health visitors, to which Dr Simpson referred. We must ensure that, once we have identified the children, they have all the help they need. It is now readily available; as it was for Lewis, but not for Oliver. We have to ensure that teachers understand the situation and that all the appropriate therapists are available for the children where and when they are needed. Most often, that will be in school. I visited a special needs school this morning. I make a plea that we ensure that children with special needs have access to facilities outwith school, so that they have equal access to leisure. I heartily congratulate Duncan Hamilton on securing this debate. I would like to hear from the minister that the simple tests that have been identified by Mitchell and Wood will be incorporated into pre-school screening.

The blank-sheet approach of the bill gives us an opportunity to tell the minister and the Scottish Executive of the many areas that the Parliament would like to be addressed in the forthcoming regulations. I take the blank-sheet approach as a positive sign that the minister is here to listen to the points that are raised. It is interesting to note that a common theme is beginning to appear. The barriers to access are a main cause of concern that must be addressed in the regulations. In response to an intervention from Fergus Ewing on bank accounts, the minister said that it was not necessary to open a new bank account for an individual learning account. However, he implied that future developments of ILAs might lead to a need for bank accounts. I would like the minister to clarify that, because a problem in Scotland is that about 20 per cent of the population have no bank account. When we consider rurality and the increasing number of closures of bank branches, the issue of bank accounts will have to be addressed in both the short and the long term. If we want to promote access to learning, we must ensure that that learning is provided throughout the country and is accessible to anybody who wants it. We cannot say that a person who lives near a big city will have access but that a person who lives near Fort William will have access to one college and one college only. We have to consider where the providers of lifelong learning are. Duncan McNeil mentioned the time that is available for learning and the problems of shift workers. I know that it is a reserved issue, but we must address the fact that, in Scotland, we have the longest working hours in Europe. We have a 48-hour working week, unlike France, where there is a 35-hour working week. We should examine that. Lifelong learning is something that we need time for. We must open up the time that is available for people to obtain access to lifelong learning. Child care has been mentioned; the minister referred to the £8 million that was announced yesterday. I want an assurance from  him that the £8 million for child care costs, for those in further education, will be available to people undertaking other forms of lifelong learning, such as short courses that are available through other providers. The Scottish Enterprise Grampian pilot identified only one group within the 2,000 learners whom the minister has spoken about as being given assistance. That was assistance with child care through their local authority and their union, Unison. We must address that enormous issue. It has been mentioned already that the Scottish Enterprise Grampian pilot identified that the people who were most in need of lifelong learning were those least likely to follow up the individual learning accounts. We must see more clearly how the Executive will resolve that. If there is a 100,000 target in the first two years, we want those most in need of lifelong learning to be within that 100,000 in the first two years, so that they benefit from the £150 incentive rather than the discount. Duncan McNeil has already picked up on the point that there are individuals to whom £25 will be an insurmountable barrier. We must examine ways of releasing funds from unions or voluntary organisations, perhaps, to allow those individuals to open their learning account. I was at a special educational needs school this morning. That brought to mind the thought of where and how we will ensure that the special needs of adults with learning difficulties are accounted for. Their needs will always mean that education and training is more expensive for them or for the provider. Where will we ensure that that is resolved for them? I will discuss my hobby horse of the plethora of initiatives, which we have heard about already. A key element of SUFI is that its learning providers will provide learner support, yet we read that that will be one of the key aims of the customer services provider, a private company. The Executive has set aside £6.5 million—25 per cent of the individual learning account budget—for the customer services provider. How much of that money is being duplicated by services that are already provided by SUFI? I would like to see some joined-up government. We must ensure that we provide a solution to the problem in Scotland. The problem is how we turn Scotland into a knowledge nation. The solution is what the Parliament will look for in the forthcoming regulations.

The minister said that the second guiding principle behind his statement today was that regulation must be proportionate to risk. However, in his statement he is not meeting the Cullen recommendations that all young people up to the age of 16 should be encompassed in any regulatory framework. I should like to hear the reason for stopping at 14. I press the minister further on the opportunity to update Parliament on his fellow minister Jackie Baillie's working group on investigating the costing and charges for SCRO checks—another item mentioned in the Cullen report. The working party was set up last October to consider, for example, who would bear the costs and charges of SCRO checks and the level that the checks would come in at. Can the minister update us on when we can expect to hear about that?

In winding up for the SNP, I will reiterate the welcome given by Nicola Sturgeon and my colleagues to the substance and tone of this debate, and to the minister's opening remarks when he said that he was here to listen and learn and to proceed on that basis. I will highlight a few questions that remain about whether the Government can back its commitment on key areas with the necessary funding and resources. At the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, it was disappointing to read what Nicola Sturgeon called the get-out clauses in the Government's amendments to section 13. The amended paragraphs 13(2)(b) and 13(2)(c) use words such as "incompatible" and "significant public expenditure". Surely such language should find no place in a presumption in favour of inclusive education. Last year, I attended the equity conference in Edinburgh, at which I heard evidence from the United States showing that children with the most severe physical and mental disabilities can be taught in mainstream schools with exceptional results for all pupils at the school. Many organisations working with children with special needs will also be disappointed with the Deputy Minister for Children and Education's response to the amendment seeking to co-ordinate assessment undertaken under the Education (Scotland) Act 1980 and the Children (Scotland) Act 1995. The minister should remember that children do not live their lives in compartments or in local authority departments. Their needs are educational, social, personal and familial. We should be pushing streamlining as well as mainstreaming. Although the amendment would have been a start towards that aim, the Government rejected it. I want to return to the phrase "significant public expenditure". When we consider the provision of special educational needs, we must also examine the current settlement provided to local authorities by this Government to find the reality rather than the rhetoric, as Duncan Hamilton said. For example, in my constituency, East Renfrewshire Council has been praised in the past by parents, amongst others, as an authority committed to mainstream provision. However, the phrase  "rationalisation of SEN support" appeared in this year's budget settlement with a saving of £80,000. This innocuous phrase meant the withdrawal of SEN auxiliaries from primary schools. The parents of pupils who would have been left without their support were well nigh desperate when they contacted me. Those parents went on to convince the council that it should reverse its decision, but the anxiety that was suffered by everybody—parents, pupils and members of staff alike—should never have existed. Those services, however, will now always be at the mercy of the phrase "significant public expenditure".

As I said, that caused great distress. The reality is that the rhetoric must be backed up by appropriate funding so that no one in East Renfrewshire, or anywhere else, will be put in such a position. We know from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation's figures that it costs more money to provide mainstream education for children with special needs. We must, therefore, find that money. I finish by reminding Peter Peacock of his commitment to listening and learning and I look forward to his acceptance of the SNP amendment as a first step towards that.

One hopes that sportscotland will apply the guidelines correctly. As Mr Monteith told us, the organisations from which it most recently generated applications were the Edinburgh merchant schools, for cricket.

I am interested that two Labour members have now mentioned the top sport scheme. Do they realise that the budget for the scheme for the years 1999 to 2003 is only £700,000? The majority of its budget comes through sponsorship from British Telecom, not through money from the Executive.

As the minister has said, sport can bring us together, as players and participants or as fans and spectators. I regret that this afternoon's self-congratulatory motion will not bring this chamber together. Sport can foster well-being, physically and emotionally, and it brings a sense of belonging. Why, then, are we debating the proposition that sport can be part of social inclusion? By building on the natural benefits of sport, we can help to overcome the deep-seated problems that exist in some Scottish communities. Sport can build healthy individuals and contribute to the wealth and health of society as a whole. The SNP takes issue with the final self-congratulatory passage of the motion. The Government talks a good game but, when we consider the facts, examine the evidence and look for the cash, we find that the money is missing.  There is a £2.3 million shortfall in investment in sport in Scotland this year. That figure comes from the Government's own document, "Investing in You". Local authority grants for leisure and recreation have been frozen since 1998. In Scotland, we spend £1.91 per head of population, while Denmark spends a whopping £42 per head and Finland spends £11. We can learn lessons from that international comparison. An analysis of sportscotland reveals that the funding does not stand up to the targets in the rhetoric. Sportscotland has a sport and social inclusion forum, to which the minister referred. A recent document published by the forum said that "local and affordable facility provision right down at a neighbourhood level" was incredibly important in ensuring social inclusion. It went on to say that "the cost of participation remains a consideration". If we look at the funding that sportscotland has put into sports facilities since 1996, we find that the reality does not match up to the rhetoric. Two of the most deprived local authority areas in the country, West Dunbartonshire and Inverclyde, have received respectively four awards and seven awards from sportscotland's sports facilities awards scheme. They have each received £700,000, which represents 0.8 per cent of the total sum spent on sports facilities in Scotland by sportscotland. Over the same period, merchant company schools in Edinburgh received a grant of £2.3 million. It does not appear to me that the social inclusion rhetoric is being followed through in reality.

I am glad to hear that a private school is opening its doors to the public when it is getting public funding. The point that we return to is that two of the most deprived local authorities in Scotland—both Labour-controlled authorities—were unable to find the match funding to provide significant investment in sports for their deprived communities. All sportscotland awards reveal a similar pattern. If we look at recent awards to rural communities—which, as the minister announced, is a key group that we want to include in sport and social inclusion—we find that Borders received the amazing sum of £3,265, Dumfries and Galloway  got the astonishing sum of £1,000, and in a recent round of awards Angus did not get any award It is not just money that we have to examine: we must look at the criteria and targeting that are used to provide that money to the public. The minister referred to the key groups that sportscotland says it will fund—the disabled, women, rural areas, areas of economic and social deprivation and ethnic minorities—but as my examples show, the rhetoric does not match the reality. In fact, funding is missing those targets. Rather than leave the unelected quango of sportscotland, which I recall has nine male board members and four female, to set criteria, surely this Parliament should be setting the criteria to ensure that the country achieves our aims of social inclusion. I must praise the many volunteers who support sport in this country through the many hours they give in coaching, especially in coaching young people. Parliament has often praised the work of volunteers. The SNP amendment would not just praise them; it would give them a say in ensuring that sport is built from the grass roots up and that funding is given where it is needed. Our amendment would include the participants and the providers in sport in building a healthy and winning Scotland. I move amendment S1M-793.1, to leave out from "commends" to end and insert: "calls for the establishment of a national network of locally accountable partnerships between local authorities and sports organisations with funding directed towards community sports initiatives."

Will the minister give way?

I am sure that the minister heaved a great sigh of relief on Friday evening, along with many Scottish football fans. I want to question the minister on two points that arise from his statement. We know about the rental stream shortfall. The minister said that there are reasons for that, which we understand, but he has not explained how the rental stream shortfall of £300,000 per annum will be made up. Further, the minister has not dealt adequately with the question whether financial monitoring within the business plan will ensure that the Executive will have early warning of any similar situation that arises in the future.

Will that research break the results down geographically?

I thank Cathy Jamieson for bringing this matter before Parliament and giving me the opportunity to speak on a matter in which my family has a long-standing interest as my husband has spent his whole professional life in the safety services. I will mention more statistics. They are similar to those that Cathy Jamieson has already given us. Last year, 27 employees lost their lives in accidents in the workplace. Several thousand more were injured or suffered ill health as a result of their work. That will have long-term consequences for them. Some of those events resulted in prosecutions followed—on conviction—by fines, but most did not. The difficulty in examining stark figures is that counting accidents, even fatal ones, is not an especially good method of determining whether a job, or a workplace, is dangerous. Focusing on accidents concentrates the mind, but it is like driving a car by looking only in the rear view mirror—the driver knows only where they have been; they cannot tell where they are going. Other techniques are much better suited to predicting where and how accidents might occur. As Cathy Jamieson said, the Health and Safety Executive is the primary safety regulator in Scotland. It rightly concentrates on other techniques of safety performance measurement. Its field operations division in Scotland enforces several hundred acts of Parliament and sets of regulations in a work force of 2.3 million people in many thousands of workplaces. Cathy Jamieson has already mentioned that it is funded to the tune of £8 million per annum. No doubt London feels that that is sufficient; I hope that the minister will agree that it is insufficient to provide for safety services in Scotland. In the UK as a whole, there is a clear downward trend in the number of fatal accidents at work but, as Cathy Jamieson said, the rate of fatal injuries is higher in Scotland and Wales than it is in England. Because of the relatively small numbers involved, however, we must be careful about what conclusions we draw from the figures. The question therefore—once statistical variation has been ruled out—is what might the reasons be for the difference. If Scotland is faring worse than might be expected, what must we do about it? As Cathy Jamieson said, the root cause of most accidents at work is acts or omissions by management. The likely remedy is to improve the management's understanding of safety in the workplace and to make management accept its  responsibility. The way in which to achieve that is to enable safety regulators to explain to employers what is required. HSE can do that only if it is able to spend more time performing its inspection duties. Deciding whether to prosecute or refrain from prosecution is currently a policy matter in the HSE. The question for the Parliament is whether that policy is relevant and effective in Scotland. There are reasonable questions for the Parliament to have answered, such as whether the working man or woman is more likely to be killed or injured at work in Scotland than elsewhere. Is the safety regulator able to do its job effectively? Does our civil administration and judiciary take these issues seriously enough? We should welcome open debate on health and safety at work and support the call for a standing commission. I hope that the minister will agree with us. The proposed standing commission must be given access to all the necessary data and individuals who can assist in its task. It must be charged not only with examining the current situation but with developing strategies that will drive real improvements in workplace safety in Scotland. However, this entire endeavour will fail if resources are not made available to ensure that the remedies are implemented. I therefore call on the minister to assure Parliament that resources will be found to ensure the safety of Scotland's workers.

How much funding, last year and this, has the Government given to the Scottish Pre-school Playgroup Association, which ensures that children have free play?

rose—

Will the minister take an intervention?

I begin by saying to Johann Lamont that that is exactly the line that the SNP takes—we are talking about a constructive and creative approach to building a modern Scotland that is fit for our future. I take issue, however, with what Johann said at the beginning of her speech about the need to consider this issue in the context of 18 years of Tory neglect. I remind her that we have had three years of Labour Government. I will give her some facts and figures about what the Labour Government has done for the education  infrastructure of this country during those three years. Peter Peacock has said that it would take £1 billion to rebuild Scotland's schools to the standard that they should be at for the 21 st century. However, in the comprehensive spending review, Labour has committed only £185 million. That in turn must be seen in the context of the £23 million of cuts in education across our local authorities just two weeks ago. In East Dunbartonshire, in my constituency, an independent consultant's report said that it would take 20 years to bring our schools up to standard, at a cost of £3.3 million a year.

Nor can Johann deny that three years of Labour Government have not brought the investment for which Scotland is looking. Labour's dogma in refusing to consider public service trusts and innovative ways of financing the infrastructure of this country offers nothing to the people of Scotland. As I said, East Dunbartonshire Council needs to invest £3.3 million a year in schools. Two weeks ago, its education department suffered a cut of almost £1 million in expenditure. How will we solve the problems in Scotland's schools in those conditions? In Lenzie Academy, a school with more than 1,000 pupils, there are only three toilets. That is shocking. In an article in The Herald today, the secretary of the parent-teacher association at Larbert Village Primary School writes about the fact that children have to sit on the floor to eat their packed lunches. Those are the facts and figures that reflect what three years of Labour Government have given us. We must be more imaginative and we must look to the future. Under devolution, the SNP put forward the imaginative idea of children's centres. The idea was to examine the present financial settlement and investment and to use buildings more creatively, so releasing funding for alternative uses. In the future, under independence—which is not a dirty word, nor a word from which the SNP shies away—the Government of Scotland will set borrowing requirements to reflect the needs of our country and will therefore be able to invest in the future of  our country.

Would the member like to comment on PFI in education? We are building schools for our communities, for community use, using private finance, which means that the community cannot get access to the plans for those schools. If someone is an elected member of a school board, they have to sign secrecy waivers before they can see the plans. Is that a good use of public money to provide public facilities?

I reiterate Nicola Sturgeon's welcome on behalf of the SNP for the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Bill. However, I must respond to David Mundell and his colleagues, who used the words "dogmatic" and "dogmatism". We have listened to a debate in which every contribution from the Conservatives has concentrated on one school in Scotland. There are more than 3,000 schools in Scotland, and they should think about raising the standards in all of them. The Government disingenuously attempts to get away from the fact that we cannot improve schools in Scotland without adequate resources. A number of members, SNP and others, have said how the lack of resources hampers teachers in their vital work. We have heard a lot about Jordanhill, the school of Mr Galbraith's children. I draw the minister's attention to other schools that he and I know well in the East Dunbartonshire Council area that face a £480,000 cut in enhanced staffing levels. He talked in his opening speech about raising standards in schools in areas of deprivation, but schools in areas of deprivation in his constituency have just suffered a cut in resources of nearly £500,000.

I would hate to get involved in an internal Labour party dispute. We welcome the mainstreaming of special educational needs but resources must follow that intention. Again in the minister's constituency, East Dunbartonshire Council is about to cancel its plan to fill a post in psychological services in the education department. In that area, there is already a 34-week wait to have a child's needs recorded. That is nearly a whole school year before the child's needs are addressed. I will raise an issue that has not so far been mentioned—no one will be surprised that I raise it—the position of school libraries and school library services. Last week, Mr Galbraith said that he considered information-handling and problem-solving skills as a national priority in education. With no statutory basis for school libraries, however, we deny children the opportunity to receive professional teaching of those essential, lifelong skills. I hope that the Executive will return  to that issue and the submissions made on it by the Scottish Library Association, the Scottish Library and Information Council and COSLA. The basis of the bill is partnership in improving schools and education. That partnership must be with the most important users of the service, the pupils. We must never pay lip-service to involving pupils in their education. I said in Parliament to the Minister for Children and Education that he had left one group off the initial consultation list—pupils. I am delighted to say that he took up that suggestion and involved pupils in the consultation on the bill. However, pupils should be consulted under two sections. Section 5 deals with the annual statement of the education improvement objectives; subsection (2) states that the authority must seek to involve parents, but it does not say that pupils should be involved. Section 7(1) deals with the review of school performance; again, reference is made to parents, but not to pupils, being involved in that review. We must write pupils into the legislation to ensure that their part is recognised and acted on. Parents are at least mentioned. However, we need to be more imaginative and creative in involving them. School boards have a role to play but we must involve parents in education forums in education authorities and schools and in subject circles. We need to promote active participation of parents, pupils and teachers together. Pre-school has been mentioned. I must pick up on the question of physical punishment.

We cannot hide behind the legal technicality that physical punishment of three and four-year-olds in private nurseries cannot be prevented. We must address that in the bill. In conclusion, the SNP welcomes the bill. With my colleagues on the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, we will work hard at stage 2. However, I finish with the caveat that legislation alone will not improve education; it is the people, and the people with resources, who will enhance Scottish education and ensure that it is a world beater.

Does the Scottish Executive intend to review and reform planning law during this Parliament? In particular, will a right of appeal be introduced for individuals and local communities that make representations on a particular planning application?

rose—

We have spent a lot of time listening to members trying to define the knowledge economy and talking about the digital divide in Scotland. To make progress on those issues, we have to create a knowledge society. From that will flow the knowledge economy and everything that follows from it. I must reiterate John Swinney's comments about the lack of coherence and integration in the Government's approach. We have digital task forces, knowledge economy task forces, management task forces and so on. We have to create a coherent strategy to ensure that Scotland becomes a knowledge society that has a knowledge economy. What concerns me about the Government's approach is the over-emphasis on the technology of the future. We should put people first because, while people think, machines only do. Thought will take us into the knowledge society and the knowledge economy. How do we create thinking people? How do we create the skilled work force necessary for the knowledge economy? The 1997 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development international adult literacy survey puts 20 per cent of Scots at level 1 for literacy—the lowest level possible—yet, at the same time, funding and support for the improvement of adult literacy has been cut. From 1992 to 1998, there was a 40 per cent drop in the number of adults who participated in basic adult education courses. We must consider what the Government is doing to promote literacy and skills. While participation in basic adult literacy courses is dropping, education departments are under threat; not necessarily the school education department, but the education department that  helps with literacy skills and community education. My local authority, East Dunbartonshire Council, is contemplating doing away with community education to make up a 15 per cent budget overspend. We must start to say that lifelong learning begins in school and does not start at 16. We should be equipping our children with transferable, adaptable skills: the skills that are embodied in information-handling techniques, but there is no statutory provision for a department of a school—a library service—that can teach that. We have heard mention of the national grid for learning. At the moment, eight local authorities in Scotland are not ready even to take up the information and communications technology training that is about to start in April. A quarter of Scotland's local authorities are unprepared—for infrastructural or visionary reasons—to start to train their librarians and teachers to skill the pupils for the future. That means that up to 50 secondary schools in Scotland are unable to start on the national grid for learning. We must also talk about up-skilling adults now. How many of Scotland's small or medium enterprises have been consulted on releasing staff to access the Scottish learning network that we have heard so much about? In the debate on the Scottish university for industry, £4 million was pledged for learning centres, yet in Scotland we work the longest hours in Europe. When will people have the time to go to the learning centre to re-skill and up-skill to become the work force of the knowledge economy? Wendy Alexander is fighting the digital divide. We have heard that millions of pounds of lottery money has been allocated for cyber cafés and so on, but many do not provide the support services that would allow folk to use them. Wendy was quoted recently as saying that the "best digital initiatives" are at the Log-In Café at Barrhead, near my home, and the Middlefield Learning House in Aberdeen, but neither provides crèche facilities for women who want to use the facilities to up-skill themselves. I will finish by referring Nicol Stephen to his own words on 4 February, at the first of our annual Grampian chair lectures in public policy. He said: "Scotland cannot compete in the modern marketplace with a low-cost and low-skilled workforce." We have yet to find out how the Government is going to tackle that problem effectively.

rose—

I am concerned by the minister's answer. Young people have a lot to offer us and I would like young people to be included on the list of people whom the Executive is trying to bring on board. We do not have young people on quangos and we must put them on the list to encourage them to apply for public appointment.

I join other members in congratulating Elaine Smith on securing this debate. I want to raise an issue that is of particular relevance to article 32 and I have questions for the minister. As Cathy Jamieson said, it is horrendous that young children are out working when they should not be, with no protection at all. Cathy said that this is a difficult issue to tackle; there is an EC directive on protection of children in employment, which could go a long way towards tackling it. The EC directive ensures that there will be risk assessments for children in employment between the ages of 13 and 18 and that a special permit will be issued to show that that risk assessment has taken place. Implementation of those risk assessments requires local authorities to pass byelaws, which have to be approved by the Minister for Children and Education. Recent press coverage has told us of councils, especially Highland Council, that have been waiting six months for approval of the byelaws they have produced. I have a couple of questions for the minister on this issue. Why are councils waiting so long? How many more have produced byelaws and are waiting for the minister's approval? That problem could be overcome by the  appointment of a children's commissioner, which is long-standing SNP policy. Members will know that Nicola Sturgeon—who, unfortunately, cannot be here this evening—has a motion before Parliament on that subject. I commend it to members and hope that all of us will support it. Our having a children's commissioner might ensure that ministers comply with European directives and articles of the UN convention when it suits children, not just when it suits ministers.

I will speak about children's health. I am disappointed that I, as the last speaker from the floor, am the first to raise that issue. I should have thought that the minister, in her opening speech, would have wanted to talk about health and services for our future. She also failed to mention children's health services in her introduction to her first annual report, "Making it work together". We must consider two aspects of children's heath services, the first of which is acute services. We must ask, again, why the 1998 review of acute services had to be persuaded to set up a sub-group to examine children's health services in Scotland. That area has to be given a higher priority than it receives at the moment. We have heard much this morning about how we have adequate funding in our health service. I question that view, when—for children's health services—we have had to move from funding to fund raising. We have to wait for the likes of the Evening Times to hold an appeal to buy a scanner for Yorkhill sick children's hospital in Glasgow. This year, the Blue Peter appeal raised money for incubators for hospitals not in Peru or Africa, but in the United Kingdom. Is that the way in which we should fund health services for children in this country? Palliative care is particularly close to my heart. In Scotland, we have one hospice for children, Rachel House; it does a wonderful job, but it is a charity. We are looking for a second such hospice and we will raise the money by public appeal and by charity. Is that the way in which we should treat  the most vulnerable people in the health service? Secondly, many children's health services are about prevention, so that we can give children a good start in life and continue in that way. The statistics on children's dental health show that Scotland has a dreadful record. What is worse is that the target that the Government set itself to reduce cavities, fillings and extractions in the under-fives was missed this year and has had to be extended to 2010. Why did we miss that target? Again, it comes down to funding. Funding for the dental service is put into general dental practice rather than into the community dental service. We need general dental practice, but the community dental service is at the forefront of prevention in our most deprived areas, which is where the targets have been completely missed.

That is exactly the point that I was making. Dental health is affected by diet and nutrition, but dentists will explain that the problem is also one of poverty. The way in which we fund the service is another issue. If we fund dentists through payment for treatment rather than for prevention, the dental service will continue to treat the caries rather than prevent their occurrence. Recently, I attended Breakfast Daze, the breakfast clubs' annual conference. Within two years, a 50 per cent reduction in cavities had been achieved by introducing young children to healthy eating, fruit and daily teeth brushing. Breakfast clubs need to be supported with resources and—just as important—through joined-up government. I echo what David Davidson said about the evidence base in the health service. I tried to get statistics on child health services; it was a nightmare. It was difficult to extrapolate statistics on psychiatric services for teenagers from the statistics on provision for adults. If we want to provide resources and a health service that treats people when they need it, we need to collect statistics on children and undertake research into child health. I leave the minister with two thoughts. We are doing away with mixed-sex wards, but what about mixed-age wards? Teenagers continue to fall between the lines, sometimes being put in with children, sometimes with the dying elderly. Finally, article 24 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child says that every child has the right to a healthy life.

I am pleased to follow a number of members who have highlighted the problems of drug misuse among young people. I was pleased to read in the Executive's document "Action in Partnership": "There are, of course, inextricable links between drug misuse, smoking and alcohol misuse. Tobacco and alcohol use often provide a gateway into illicit drug use." I am glad that this Parliament and the Executive realise the problems that our young people face. I was going to give some statistics, but we have heard them. My question, therefore, is: what are we doing about our young people's problems with drug misuse? The most recent report from the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration—the first since drug and alcohol misuse became causes for referral—showed that in the year covered by the report there were 1,114 referrals for drug, alcohol or solvent misuse by young people. The chief reporter went on to say that the low availability of drug treatment services dedicated to the under-16 age group was probably the cause of the under-reporting to the children's panels at the time. That statement—that we do not have dedicated services for under 16-year-olds—is repeated again and again by all the voluntary and professional organisations working in the field. If we want to prevent continued drug misuse, we must consider how we are going to help the youngest and most vulnerable users. The key task for any drug misuse strategy for young folk is to develop responsive services. The  problems faced by young drug misusers are not the same as those faced by adults. It is also in this area that it is most important to examine user involvement in the services that we provide. Young folk's reasons for and choice of addiction tend to swing much more according to fashion than those of long-term and older addicts. In the case of solvent abuse, there is an average of 10 deaths a year in Scotland, but that figure rises dramatically in some years and falls away in others. With young people we must have services that can respond to needs as and when they arise. Education is another important area where there are swings and roundabouts, fashions and fads. We must evaluate our services and invest for the future in those that work for young people. There is no point in saying one year, "Just say no," and the next concentrating on harm reduction. I recommend that we examine two areas: alternatives for young people and peer-led services. We must consider alternatives to drug abuse. We must ask why our young people are becoming involved in drugs. Why are we hearing such terrible statistics? One of the biggest reasons is the sense of alienation that young people across all levels and classes in society feel. Young folk do not see a future, so when they are offered an alternative to boredom and no hope at 14, 15 or 16, they will take it. The worry is where that leads them. We must consider offering alternatives through community-based initiatives. Another area that concerns me greatly and about which we have heard little is the issue of children who have drug-abusing parents. We must consider how we can support those children, who, when they are a bit older, often take on care of the drug-abusing parent. We learned in the news last night the effects that a chaotic drug-abusing parental household can have on a child, and we have to invest in research to tackle such cases. We have to applaud aim (i) in "Action in Partnership", which is to prioritise young people. On aim (iv), which relates to the availability of illegal drugs, why is the Scottish Executive not following the UK line, which is that the key objective will be to "Reduce access to drugs amongst 5-16 year olds"? Perhaps a cross-cutting committee would ensure that young people are considered at every turn and under every objective.

This debate is about rights and young people. The equalisation of the age of consent is an essential right for young men in a civilised society, and I am sure all members of the Scottish Parliament want to believe that we live in a civilised society. Equalisation of the age of consent is long-held SNP policy. It is, perhaps, worth revisiting some of the reasons why it is required. The debate is about discrimination, or doing away with discrimination—young men are being discriminated against and their rights under various United Nations conventions are being denied. They are also being discriminated against in a practical way, as they cannot access the advice, support and services that would enable them to live their lives safely and healthily. I am sure that members want them to live safe and healthy lives. Discrimination leads to many other problems for  these young men, such as bullying, which has already been mentioned. However, bullying is also a problem for society and we must be positive about doing away with it. There must be no excuses for bullying, and there must be no excuses for bullies to hide behind. We have heard from a number of members that discrimination leads to mental health problems. It is beyond a joke that 16 and 17-year-old boys, on the threshold of adulthood, have to deal with the problems of discrimination, on top of which they have to deal with mental health problems. My colleague, Kenneth Gibson, called for research into the high levels of suicide among young men in Scotland. I would like to include in that research an analysis of the impact of young men's sexuality on their mental health. In last year's youth manifesto, the SNP called for all young people to be able to lead their lives free from discrimination on any grounds. We must, by pursuing the bill, remove the negative discrimination of unequal ages of consent. I echo Kate MacLean's concluding comments. We must act positively and ensure that the bill becomes part of equality—and sexuality—legislation. I support the Executive's motion.

Many of us in the chamber signed up for the children's promise and gave our pay from the final hour of 1999 to recognised children's charities. I hope that the Parliament's millennium promise is for Scotland to cherish all her children. The tone and the content of today's debate sends out that message loud and clear. The Scottish National party supports the Government in its work to help these vulnerable children for whom, as Cathy Jamieson reminded us, we all have a responsibility. We will be supporting the Government in today's vote. The SNP's amendment expresses a very real concern—a concern that has been expressed today in the chamber, but more especially by concerned professionals and volunteers who are working with children leaving care. The minister said that the majority who replied to the consultation process supported the transfer of Department of Social Security benefits. That is not my understanding from reading the papers that were submitted to that consultation. I would be  grateful if the deputy minister could enlighten me further on how many, and which, organisations support the transfer of DSS benefits. It is an important issue, which is why the SNP has put forward this amendment and will continue to argue the case on the transfer of DSS benefits on behalf of these young people. That transfer further marginalises young people. At the start of their adult life, it labels them, yet again, as different. In order to receive benefits, they have to go to a social worker; they cannot go along, as other adults do, and be treated as adults. That is important and it is why we are putting forward the amendment. As with all children, the needs, concerns and, indeed, rights of these children would be better safeguarded and highlighted by two simple steps: the incorporation of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child into the practices and policies of the Government and the appointment of a commissioner for children and young people. Those two SNP commitments should be considered urgently by the Government. In today's debate, we heard the minister tell us of his anger at past practices and his promises for the future. The SNP welcomes those promises, but we and others have raised a number of practical issues in this debate, which I hope that the deputy minister will address. Why has the Government not accepted and implemented the recommendations of the Kent report? We also raised the issue of the registration and training of social workers and those involved in looking after children. There has been an announcement of £3 million for training, but how long is that training to take and when will we have a fully trained work force? Is that £3 million it, or will more money be forthcoming? Another issue is the move towards foster care. As Nicola Sturgeon said, most of us feel in our guts that foster care is better than residential care, but we need to ensure that the practice that we put in place for the 21 st century is evidence based and that it is what young people need. We need a needs-led care system and not a finance-driven one. We must examine research that has already been done among foster carers, and look to putting in training and support for foster carers. Two of the key difficulties that foster carers say make them leave foster caring are lack of training and lack of support. I will finish by reminding members that the people we are talking about are the young people. We should not be talking about them, but talking with them. I always come back to the theme that we must involve young people in discussions about their future. We must consult them. We talk about an £800,000 grant to extend the advocacy  network, but we must ask the young people what they want out of that. As well as advocacy, they want adjudication. They do not want someone just to talk to or for them, but they want somebody who will adjudicate their case and take it forward for them. At the end of the day, we will support this motion, but I remind the ministers to listen to, to consult and to involve the young people.

Given the millions of pounds of public money and the intense public interest in Hampden, does the minister really still believe that it is best practice for the Government to continue to negotiate Hampden's future behind closed doors? As recently as yesterday, such a meeting was held with the interim managers, and it continues to be the Executive's position as restated by the minister today. That gives no accountability to the public or to this Parliament. Does the minister not think that secrecy may  have contributed to the embarrassment in which he finds himself today? Will he acknowledge that he might have got the handling of this sorry saga badly wrong? In admitting that failure, does he accept that this Parliament and its Education, Culture and Sport Committee must be given the co-ordinating role in securing Hampden's future as our national football stadium?

The minister has just stated that he was first aware of the problems when the Millennium Commission drew them to his attention in July, but that he was happy with the monitoring that was going on. Can he explain why the December 1998 accounts for Queen's Park Football Club did not alert him to any problems? How many times have he, his deputy, Rhona Brankin, and other ministers, been guests of the SFA at football matches? Were they guests during the period of negotiations for this rescue package that has put the SFA in the management position?

As we are talking about abuse of parliamentary procedure, why does the 12.15 pm statement on Hampden not appear on the business bulletin, when the minister has been spinning since Sunday that he would make a statement today?

rose—

On a point of order.

On a point of order.

On a point of order. If the Procedures Committee is going to follow Mr McCabe's recommendation, I hope that it will also look at—

It is a point of order—

I, too, welcome the fact that we have highlighted young carers today and I wish to confine my remarks to that subject. I am glad that young carers are being recognised, but I am sad that we have to recognise their existence. Many of them are not carers through choice, but because the burden lands on them. That said, we have to examine some specific areas of the strategy for young carers. We have to consider the right to assessment. A commitment to a working group, which includes public consultation in 2000 but which does not rush into legislation, will not help current young carers with their problems. The right to assessment for young carers could be brought forward now, with an interim change to the guidance issued by the Scottish Executive. The Age of Legal Capacity (Scotland) Act 1991 contains a general understanding about children aged 12 and over. We could issue guidance under that general understanding rule so that, from the age of 12, young carers could ask for an immediate assessment. I ask the Executive to examine that possibility in the interim. We also have to consider local authorities' children's service plans and ensure that, at every stage, the needs of the young carers are taken into account. That includes their education and, for those in employment, the right to take time off. We have to examine how young carers go through their education—they are taking time off it now because of their caring duties. We cannot tolerate instances such as one that I heard about recently, in which a young carer attended a carers meeting and returned home to find that the truancy officer had been to find out why she was not at school. That is an unacceptable burden to put on young carers. Training for guidance teachers has already been mentioned. We need to provide it now, not to the directors of education, but to the guidance teachers. We have to consider the support that we give young carers. They need training in how to get advice, how to get information and in the physical work they do, including lifting techniques.  It is sad that we have to talk about this, but we do. We must not put physical burdens on young carers by not training them correctly. I notice that the carers strategy mentions conducting training through GPs, but I do not think that general practices provide the correct forum for training young carers in lifting techniques. The strategy also mentions respite for young carers. That is a particular issue, and it does not mean a fortnight off once a year. Carers do not want that; they want time off with the family they care for. A young carer needs regular breaks, almost every day. If a young carer goes to a homework club, they should be assured that there is respite care: that someone else will care for their parent or sibling while they are at the club. We are talking about coherent, integrated services for young people. We cannot ask them to go on their own to social work, health, community education and leisure departments—we should be addressing leisure and transport issues too—they need someone to go to; an advocate to help them through. We cannot, unfortunately, get away from money, which is necessary to provide the services. East Dunbartonshire young carers project has a £5,000 grant for a one-year project. Young carers do not, however, have one-year care burdens—their burdens go on for longer. I remind the Executive again that we have to ask young carers what they need. We have to listen to what they want and support them. Ultimately, we have to give them back their childhood.

rose—

Will the member give way?

Mr Davidson has mentioned providing advice to companies. Would not it be better, in the spirit of the amendment, to have a national action plan that included strategies and  criteria so that advice would always be given within national criteria and would be readily acceptable?

I note that the minister did not refer to the SNP amendment in his speech, but I hope that he and the Executive will accept it in the spirit in which it is intended. This debate is about a vision for Scotland's future, which is why the SNP welcome it. However, we must insist on our amendment, as we cannot have a vision that is full of good words alone. It is important that we are told how we are to achieve that vision, and it would be in line with the aim of taking Scotland forward if the Executive were to accept our amendment. I want to talk about the vision that we have for Scotland, which Peter Peacock also talked about. It is a vision for the 21 st century, which will be the knowledge century. We want to build a knowledge society for Scotland that will empower everyone within it. We want to build a knowledge economy that will empower our industries and businesses, as we discussed in the debate on modernising the Scottish economy. We want to build a knowledge nation, because Scotland fulfils all the criteria for such a nation: we are the right size geographically, we have the right educational background and, increasingly, we have the necessary technological infrastructure to become such a nation.

I will put that into perspective. I was about to mention the plethora of initiatives, of which the national grid for learning is one. Peter  Peacock spoke about those initiatives; a good eight minutes of his speech was taken up with them. It is not the initiatives per se that bother us, but the lack of integration and coherence. It is all very well to have a national grid for learning, so long as it fits in to a coherent, co-ordinated national information strategy. I hope that that answers Maureen Macmillan's question. I had planned to list the plethora of initiatives, but Peter Peacock did that so I will not waste time by doing it again. In a previous speech in the chamber, I referred to the fact that, as a librarian, I should be happy about those initiatives. However, the profession is concerned that £144 million has been committed to them so far. On a good estimate, we could probably do the whole thing for a third of that cost. As Peter Peacock said, we must also consider content and digitisation. We have not looked at those areas yet. Government money must be put into initiatives in a co-ordinated, coherent and integrated fashion, but first we must have a strategy. I attended a meeting last week at which one of the librarians who was present said that no one had invested so much money in libraries and information, over such a short period of time, since Andrew Carnegie. I remind members that the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust set criteria and standards to ensure that the public library service that it funded became exactly that—a public library service that was free, with equal access for all. That is what today's debate and our amendment are about. The big but behind all those initiatives is that we must have integration and coherence and we must set national standards. I will quote from the Scottish Library and Information Council's 1999 publication "Enabling Seamless Access". "Yet without co-ordination, the continued growth of separate networks may in the long-term prevent the development of 'seamless access' to information and knowledge." That is what we must guard against. I will make some international comparisons. I said that Scotland is the right size to become a knowledge nation. Other countries are going down that road and have been doing so throughout the 1990s. For example, Denmark has the information society for all initiative, which I am sure that Peter Peacock knows about. It also has a Ministry of Research and Information Technology, with a division for IT and society. That is what Scotland must aim for. Ireland has the Information Society Commission, which, in its second annual report this year, talked about the fact that we have to look at awareness, infrastructure, learning, enterprise, legal issues, Government services, social inclusion and priority  areas of focus. That is what we are talking about. I know that that is what Peter Peacock also talked about, but those countries are using action plans to produce the required coherence and strategy to ensure that all the initiatives work towards one aim: producing an information society. We should also look at Finland, which I know the minister recently visited. Finland realised in the early 1990s how important being an information society would be to its future. Three per cent of the annual gross domestic product was channelled into establishing Finland as an information society. They also ensured that they had an action plan, a national information strategy, which means that the money that was put in produced results. One in five people in Finland regularly accesses e-mail, one in three regularly uses the internet and every second person has a mobile phone. We might dread the mobile telephone, but the technology is developing to allow us to access the information society with mobile telephones. Finland has done it, and we must do it too. We must not examine only other countries. We must also look at Scotland within Europe. Last year, the European Union produced a report that said that a piecemeal and sporadic approach to information society initiatives will not remove the obstacles that have been identified. The Commission considers that decisive and concerted action is needed. That shows how seriously the EU takes building the information society. I hope that we in Scotland will take it that seriously. The European Commission also recommended that by June 1999 member states should submit comprehensive national strategies. Did we submit a comprehensive national strategy by June 1999? I am not aware, even through my professional background, that we did. This will be on the agenda for the meeting of the European Council in December. Will we have to put up our hands and admit that Scotland does not have a national action plan? I am short of time and my colleagues will cover infrastructure, content, access to information and the skills that are necessary for us to become an information society, but I would like to conclude by stressing urgency. Urgency is behind what goes on in the countries I have been talking about. Those countries have been working on this since the early 1990s. Most of them have had national action plans in place since the mid-1990s. We are about to enter the knowledge century and we have no national action plan. The SNP amendment asks for that to ensure that we produce more than nice, warm, woolly words. The SNP cannot endorse the motion as it stands because it does not provide the clearly defined agenda that we need to ensure Scotland's place at  the forefront of the knowledge century that we are about to enter. If the Government does not accept our amendment, then it will have failed to take cognizance of the clearly stated views of the professionals that are out there. The minister talked about those whom he has involved in the task force. I am pleased to see that he has recommended that suggestions be made as to who that task force should include, but I must point out that the task force is dominated by the telecommunications industry, which comprises 45 per cent of it. The task force is about producing a national strategy, not about looking only at the telecommunications infrastructure. The task force must move beyond that; it must make the vision a reality. If that does not happen, we will be letting Scotland and its people down. Perhaps the minister should have attended the Information for Scotland seminar that was held last week at the University of Edinburgh. The leading lights in this field were assembled in one room. Had the minister attended he would have heard the message loud and clear that we need a national information strategy and we need it now. If he had attended the meeting, he would also have found the task force that he needs to produce the strategy—a task force that could produce the strategy in time for us to enter the 21 st century. I commend the amendment to all members and hope that they will view it in the light in which it is intended to be viewed. I move amendment S1M-295.1, to delete from "help develop" to end and insert: "produce an Integrated Information Strategy for Scotland which aims to influence the global development of the information society, ensures the development of an information society at national level and supports regional and local information society development in Scotland, which ensures the implementation of the strategy in and across every sphere and sector of Scottish society, and which will produce a National Action Plan in line with the European Commission's Information Society Action Plan that addresses the priority areas for action and has a clear timetable for achievement and progress."

rose  —

This  afternoon I rise wearing hats, rather than anoraks, as in last week's debate. As the shadow deputy minister for children, I welcome the fact that the Executive is giving child care its proper place. It is central to the life of every child and every carer. However, wearing my other hats—as a former committee member of my local mother and toddlers group, as a past convener of Westerton pre-school and playgroup and, above all, as a parent—I must question how much this strategy is driven by the interests and needs of our children, and how much by the demands of the labour market and the Government's economies.

Mr Galbraith is shaking his head, but in the introduction to the consultative document that was issued last year, "Meeting the Childcare Challenge: A Childcare Strategy for Scotland", Donald Dewar said: "In our election manifesto we undertook to produce a childcare strategy for Scotland which would 'match the requirements of a modern labour market'". In the same introduction, Tony Blair declares that he wants "to encourage more family friendly employment". For me, those are not words that inspire a vision of a child care strategy. Mr Galbraith's opening remarks gave no indication of a Government that was prepared to learn or to move on. He dismissed the SNP's amendment because it includes the dread word funding, but today that issue has been raised repeatedly by members of all parties and the minister has signally failed to deal with it. The SNP has long been committed to nursery places for all three and four-year-olds whose parents want them. However, we have taken a holistic, child-centred approach with our plans for children's centres. A child care strategy must provide an integrated service that caters for all the child's needs. We must give all children a suitable and stable environment that gives them, and their parents or carers, access to all the services that they need in one place, with no shuttling between breakfast club, pre-school care, childminder, play scheme and health visitor. Children need a centred approach to life; they do not need to be on a conveyor belt. The minister mentioned sure start Scotland and how it will apply to children up to the age of three. It will bring services to the child. As part of the vision, it would be nice if that could be broadened out to include all our children. Children's centres would be one-stop shops for child care and could be managed as such, ensuring that all aspects of a child's life were in  balance, and that the funding could be assured and long-term. One of the SNP's main criticisms of the child care strategy as it is constructed at present is the precariousness of the funding. That is a big problem. Using lottery funding to fund child care is not a sign of commitment. Using one-year lottery funding is putting many providers in jeopardy. There was almost universal condemnation of that funding mechanism in the submissions to the consultation process, and the chamber has heard nothing from the Executive today that will reassure local groups and businesses that they can plan for a secure future. Relying on the working families tax credit for the sustainability of out-of-school care seems to me to be in the same vein as the discredited voucher scheme of the Conservative party. It means that the carers have to have the money to spend first, and it therefore excludes many people from out-of-school care—people such as students. It does not allow services to have clear and assured funding that allows them to plan for the future, as is essential. Another point that is often raised by those actively involved in child care is the management of the service. A truly integrated statutory service would relieve the management burden on parent and volunteer committees. Meeting a national child care strategy through those people's free time is unacceptable. In conclusion, I again welcome the Scottish Executive's commitment to a child care strategy for Scotland. But the strategy as presented to us today leaves much to be desired in meeting the needs of all children in a flexible and fully funded manner. The minister told us that it has taken two and a half years to get here. Today's debate tells us that there is still a lot of work to be done.

Like Elaine, I was worried that people would think that we were a pair of anoraks, but I am glad that the contributions so far have shown that people have thought about the problem and realised that it affects everyday matters and so should be a high priority. I want to concentrate on the date discontinuity aspect of the problem. As John Swinney said, the so-called millennium bug is actually nothing of the sort. It is a problem that could recur intermittently on 1 April and 1 September over the next few decades up to 2035. The phrase "date discontinuity" better indicates the general nature of the problem and helps to identify what types of microchip could be affected. It especially helps us to appreciate that, whatever happens at hogmanay, the problem will not be over then but will resurface for many years to come. I ask the Executive what it proposes to do about those future critical dates—in his statement, the minister reassured neither me nor the chamber that any plans had been made to deal with the longer-term implications. Such planning is important for Governments and local authorities. It is vital that organisations such as the utilities and emergency services are fully in control at all critical times. The BCPs that we have heard about—I thought that I would be the first to introduce acronyms—should be able to cope with whatever emergencies arise at the turn of the year. We all hope that there will be minimum disruption. However, what will happen on the other predicted or potential critical dates? Will the same BCPs be effective in nine months' or two years' time? A good BCP tells an organisation how to keep its business running when problems of any sort arise. However, any management plan or routine left by itself will deteriorate over time. Although it is all very well to have emergency co-ordinating offices such as SILC—or, as I gather it is called, the bunker—in operation over hogmanay, if such date discontinuity problems arise in the foreseeable future, I have to ask whether the Executive has issued advice on on- going preparedness. What is the Executive's advice to organisations which choose to switch off vulnerable systems or equipment over the millennium while we are all having a five-day holiday? What will happen when those systems are switched on after 5 January—after SILC has stood down—and they malfunction? Although the millennium operating regime will probably work well over the millennium holiday, if too many organisations choose to suspend operation of vulnerable equipment at that time, many of them will find that they have only delayed the onset of these difficulties. That is worrying enough for the owners of small businesses. However, if there any chinks in Scotland's national armour and problems become manifest later, our preparations will have been inadequate. The day-to-day emergencies suffered by our society can be uniformly addressed. We have a framework of legislation identifying the emergency services that can be called into play on occasions such as cases of fire or murder. As the date discontinuity problem could be with us for many years, the country must decide to cope with it in a similarly coherent and sustainable way. Scotland needs to develop mechanisms to manage effectively and reliably its knowledge base—how we hold, distribute and analyse information. Furthermore, we need to develop and implement a national integrated information strategy to ensure that there are mechanisms to deal with problems when they arise and not just with such one-offs as the matter that we are discussing today.

I appreciate that we should be debating the important issues raised by Miss Goldie, but Y2K is about the preparedness of all our services to meet the problems that they might face. More important, we need the debate today. As we have learned from the statement, and the questions and  answers, there are still issues to be addressed—we need to be sure that the Executive takes them on board.

That answer prompts me to ask about Glasgow City Council's millennium operating regime and business continuity planning. The problems that arose a week past Friday, when we had two hours with no access to telephones, make me wonder  whether the millennium contingency plan, which I understood had been tested, failed on that occasion. I would like reassurance on that point. The other point that I wanted to raise is this. Will the minister consider inviting MSPs to the dry run of SILC for the media on 17 December to give us a better idea of what we would be phoning?

The evaluation report indicates that the escalation in rough sleeping was closely associated with retrenchment in welfare provision, particularly in relation to young people. One in four rough sleepers has been in local authority care and the minister has admitted this afternoon to having comprehensively failed those vulnerable young people. Will the Executive therefore make strenuous representations to Westminster that it should abandon the proposed Department of Social Security transfer of resources to local authorities, which would remove 2,000 young Scottish care leavers from the benefits system?

In line with the spirit of the words on the first page of the document, I would like to impress upon Parliament the fact that, if Scotland is to become a knowledge-driven economy in the next century, it must first become a knowledge-driven society. I welcome the Scottish university for industry development if it will assist in contributing to that aim through the development of lifelong learning in Scotland. I welcome the commitment to use a wide and innovative range of locations—such as libraries, community centres and colleges—as learning centres. However, I remind the Executive that we already have almost 3,000 learning centres in Scotland. They are called schools and they are in the heart of our communities. My concern is increasing that, as various departments and individuals in the Executive  hurtle towards the knowledge economy finishing tape, there is, as John Swinney said, a lack of a strategic approach. If SUFI is to enable our communities to participate in, and benefit from, lifelong learning, it needs to be integrated into a coherent strategy. That means that we need an integrated information strategy for Scotland. As a first step, I suggest that we require a national audit on the preparedness of our telecommunications infrastructure for SUFI and the plethora of other initiatives. Are there still pockets of communities without access to digitised telephone exchanges? If so, the vision of lifelong learning being accessed through technology is little more than a pipe dream. As well as facilitating a knowledge-driven society, SUFI should be structured so that it provides an opportunity to manage knowledge, be it that of an individual, a community or society as a whole. One way of achieving that is by creating an electronic learning environment that is accessible by everyone and from everywhere. Coherence and integration are essential if we are to ensure that any person can have access to information, no matter what their social or economic circumstances are or where they live. In providing that access, we must ensure that the right tools are used. The search engines that are employed will be one of the most important tools in the technological environment of SUFI. If we had an integrated information strategy for Scotland, specifications in those technological areas would be clear, and we would not have to look at them individually for each initiative. Copyright is another area where co-ordination and clear guidance are required. That is a complex legal issue, which sometimes baffles even the professionals—I admit that having been one myself. The issue is likely to become more complex, but it has to be considered now, in an integrated fashion. Recently, the Copyright Licensing Agency issued the first digitisation licences, but only to higher education institutions. We must find ways of licensing material in both print and electronic formats if we are to facilitate the widest possible access to information without prohibitive costs. That issue has a bearing on SUFI's ability to commission learning materials. There should be a national strategy that not only assembles the policy framework to manage the development of our information-intensive society, but co-ordinates access, infrastructure and the content of the knowledge economy and society's initiatives. To deliver that strategy, there should be a national body to oversee the creation of our knowledge society. If SUFI is to succeed—and thank goodness the name is being changed; RIP SUFI—in meeting people's aspirations and raising their expectations of what learning can do for  them, it must be an integral part of an integrated approach to delivering a knowledge-driven society and economy. I hope that this document is not just another glossy contribution to the imminent information gridlock that Scotland faces.

On that point, does Mr Monteith agree that we need a separate Scottish university for industry in order to maintain our separate Scottish national vocational qualifications and so on? If we went for a UK- driven system, we would send folk off to do qualifications that are not relevant to the geographical area in which they live.

I echo other members in thanking Andrew for bringing this matter to Parliament and I thank you, Presiding Officer, for deciding to extend the debate. As a volunteer in youth clubs and drop-in cafes in my constituency I am pleased that Parliament has the chance to underline the importance of the issue. I hope that the minister will recognise the concerns of youth organisations and will fight their corner in the Executive. I am appalled that the Government could compromise this vital component of child safety by even considering levying a tax on volunteers—and for the paltry sum of £2 million to £3 million. That figure is paltry when we hear about the number of people and the hours of work involved. Volunteers are delivering the Government's social inclusion agenda, and now they will be charged for the privilege. Local authorities should run many of the clubs, but community education budgets are always soft targets when cuts have to be made. I enjoy my volunteering—well, maybe not toilet duty at Saturday night discos. I am sure that people we have heard from today get as much value from their volunteering as they put back into their communities but that is no excuse for introducing a charge that undermines the principle of child safety and it strains volunteers' good will. The minister and the Executive must be clear that Scotland's Parliament cherishes Scotland's volunteers and Scotland's children, even if she does not.

Mr Wilson rightly says that SCRO checks are not mandatory. However, I am sure that he will agree with me and with more learned people, such as Lord Cullen, that those checks are a vital component in ensuring safe and secure environments in which our young people can flourish. I am sure that he will ask the Government to ensure that we do not put our children at risk by levying those charges, which the Police Act 1997 does not decree.

Mary was at the meeting of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee when Mr Galbraith made it clear that he would not provide more money to fund the teachers' pay settlement this year. Does she think that that will help our children's education?

Will Mr Raffan give way?

Is the £11 million for broad-band technology genuinely new money or is it part of the £144 million that has already been committed? Why has this money been committed ahead of any report from the digital Scotland network?

Does David Mundell agree that, although composite classes do not put children at an educational disadvantage, there is evidence that large classes, especially large composite  classes, could?

As we have said several times already, the money is there. It is being saved to buy votes in a year or two. Why not use it to secure children's future now?

We are discussing lack of resources. Will Malcolm comment on opening up Gordon Brown's war chest of £12 billion?

rose  —

Maureen Macmillan gives us details of all the hours that a teacher must work. How will the teachers' situation be helped by adding 50 hours of social inclusion work to that?

The minister cannot get away with posing as the children's champion when his Government has brought the teaching profession to the brink of strike action. Brian Monteith spoke of the work load of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. That committee must set priorities, and I would have hoped that Brian would agree that our children's education should be the highest priority. The SNP condemns the Labour Government's hypocrisy of constantly repeating the mantra of lowering class sizes, first stated in its election manifesto, while forcing COSLA to abolish the maximum class size for composite classes. Currently nearly 3,000 composite classes in Scottish primary schools—26 per cent of Scottish classes—have between 21 and 25 pupils in them. If that number is raised to 30, as proposed, on a conservative estimate, nearly 7,000 pupils in Scotland will be forced into bigger classes at a time when, we are told, it is the Government's mission to reduce class sizes. How will that help all children to get the best start in life? When I questioned the minister on that at the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, he asserted that there was "no educational reason why composite class sizes should be any different from non-composite class sizes".—[ Official Report , Education, Culture and Sport Committee, 8 September 1999; c 44.] He failed to answer me then, so I will ask him again now where his evidence for that statement is. If he has the evidence, why has COSLA stated that "the abolition of composite classes is a key target"? Why does the Scottish Parent Teacher Council say that "the teachers' determination to stick to a maximum of 25 in composite classes is very much in line with parents' views"? Why does a literature review of the subject reveal that policy makers should not "adopt the multigrade form of classroom organisation . . . because of economic or cost saving reasons"? I can give Sam the references. Teachers' concerns about composite classes include the lack of time to cover course work, an increased work load and less individual attention for pupils. How does that accord with the Government's stated aim of earning a world-class reputation for the Scottish education system? International comparisons show that in Norway the average number of pupils in a composite class is 9.1 and in Slovenia it is 12.23—and in Scotland  we are proposing to raise the number to 30. The situation in our small, often rural, schools is special. Peter Peacock told the Education, Culture and Sport Committee: "Most of the kids"— Peter's words, not mine— "in rural areas will remain in exactly the same situation."—[ Official Report,  Education, Culture and Sport Committee, 8 September 1999; c 44.] In Dumfries and Galloway there are 287 composite classes. If the class size is increased to 30, 30 fewer teachers will be needed. What will that do for teachers' morale? Castle Kennedy School near Stranraer has two teachers. That means that the head teacher must teach a composite class and still perform all the duties of a head teacher. If the number in her composite class continues to rise, how is she expected to cope? How do the school and the pupils cope, Peter? The proposal will disadvantage pupils and further stress teachers—and all for an efficiency saving of £20 million. How many billions does Chancellor Brown have stuffed in his war chest, Peter? I conclude by reminding the minister and the Parliament that it is the pupils who are in the middle of this mess, and no one is asking them what they think. I have been listening, and I can tell members loud and clear that pupils do not like big classes and they do not like stressed-out teachers.

Thank you, fellow Jags supporter. We should all welcome youth and community sport development, especially when it involves young children in the league football clubs, with their connotations of prestige. However, we must approach such development as part of a strategic package. Today's motion mentions only the Scottish football leagues. If we look abroad, especially to Norway and Sweden, we can find wonderful examples of indoor community football facilities, which are owned by the communities and have played a major role in enabling those countries to flourish as footballing nations. We need indoor football facilities in Scotland—we all had to walk across here in the rain this evening. The Parliament must do more than note the current financial difficulties faced by our smaller clubs. We must also investigate how the situation at the national stadium at Hampden arose. In August, the Sunday Herald reported that the lottery sports fund had been slashed by a third and that just £7 million would be allocated for all the capital projects in Scotland. Could that sum be anywhere near the amount that it is alleged in the lobbygate transcript the Government pledged following a meeting organised by Beattie Media between Sam Galbraith and the Scottish Premier League at a Rangers game? Given how long I have waited for answers on Hampden, I wonder how long it will be before we get answers on those current financial problems. We must ensure that our young footballers have access to suitable facilities in their communities and that such access is not provided at the whim of lobbyists.

Will Ms Alexander give way?

I begin by commending—

I have a point of order before I begin. At the domestic violence debate, the time was extended by half an hour.

I will be as quick as I can.

And I want to get a couple of questions in. On behalf of my constituents in Bishopbriggs and Kirkintilloch, I commend Paul for raising the matter. Many of my points have already been mentioned, so I will stick to the question of a full and meaningful consultation. The health board does not have a good track record on consultation so far. Greater Glasgow Health Board's web pages contain a code of practice on openness. The last time that the web pages mention anything about the secure care unit at Stobhill is in June 1998. There has been no other information since then. That does not strike me as full and meaningful consultation. At the meeting on 31 August at Tom Johnston House in Kirkintilloch, attended by more than 500 of my constituents, the main issue that was raised  was the threat of the secure care unit to the future of Stobhill as a general hospital. More specifically, the unit threatens the ACAD unit, which has now been trimmed and hemmed in to a very small site, almost to the point of non-viability, as Dr Dunn explained and as Paul quoted. The minister is quoted in the Kirkintilloch, Bishopbriggs & Springburn Herald today as saying that "it is important that local communities are fully involved in consultation". What will she do when the people in the area say that they have not been fully and meaningfully consulted and are not satisfied with Greater Glasgow Health Board? What will she do when Glasgow City Council refuses the planning application for the secure unit in favour of the ACAD and the future of Stobhill as a general hospital?

Will the minister give way?

I wish to address the membership of the new committee. On the list are a local authority chief executive—

Fine. Can the minister give an assurance that the vacant post will be filled by a representative from the unions, or is the Labour party now as hostile to the unions as the Tories are?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will make a detailed statement on the current financial situation at Hampden stadium and the Scottish football museum and on the implications for the future operation of the national stadium and museum. (S1O-294)

I have been asking this question since July, and I am glad that the minister is giving members an answer.

In light of today's news reports, will the Scottish Executive support a proposal to call in the receivers to put Hampden into administration, and how will that affect Scotland's crucial qualifying match against Lithuania on 9 October?

I asked it in July.

I have asked this question before in relation to another matter. Mr Galbraith is talking about consulting throughout the country. When we talked about the education improvement bill, he said that he would consult young people. I have to say that the efforts at consultation have not been inclusive of young people. Will Mr Galbraith assure us that consultation on the cultural strategy will be better than that on the education bill, whose website has received only 24 messages?

I, too, have to declare a registered interest. I am currently a member of the Library Association.  To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to implement an integrated information strategy for Scotland. R (S1O-207)

I am delighted to hear that. Will the minister give members the remit of digital Scotland to ensure that it encompasses all areas of the information profession, which is obviously interested in this, and the members of any working  group that will be set up to look at that?

I am delighted to hear about the sub-committee on digital Scotland, because I have been trying to find out about it since 2 July when I spoke to Mr McLeish. I would appreciate some early information on the remit and membership of digital Scotland.

Can Ms Deacon explain how we will educate our young people about sexually transmitted diseases and teenage pregnancies when, in the next three years, the Health Education Board for Scotland budget will be frozen in real terms?

rose-

To ask the Scottish Executive how it intends to support efforts to bring major international sporting events to Scotland. (S1O-158)

I notice that Ms Brankin made no mention of the Ryder cup. Is she aware of plans to prepare a bid to bring the Ryder cup to Scotland in 2009? That is a long way away, but it gives us time to set up a cross-party working group to support and promote that bid to bring a  major supporting event to Scotland.

I understand that the relevant golf associations need to be involved. The idea is to promote a cross-club bid, which would, in the first instance, bring the event to Scotland. That bid is coupled with the imaginative idea of establishing a youth Ryder cup at another club the week before the main tournament. Will the minister support such a bid?

I wish to ask the minister two questions, one of which is being asked again. Why cannot the document be published before the end of July? As he knows, schools in Scotland are now well into the final countdown period to the summer holidays for both pupils and teachers, and, by delaying the publication of the document for two weeks, he is effectively taking six weeks from the consultation period.  On the consultation process, the minister said in his statement:  "The people of Scotland will, therefore, have an unprecedented opportunity to express their views".  He went on to say that young people's views were very important to him. However, the list of organisations to which information will be disseminated consists of the same organisations and the same dissemination routes that were used for the white paper, "Targeting Excellence". There is no mention of pupil councils, nor of the many youth forums that have been established around the country; perhaps most glaringly, there is no mention of the Scottish Youth Parliament that is to meet for the first time on 30 June. It is very important for young people to be consulted in their own forum, not through adult forums. I hope that the minister will ensure that that happens.  Education is a major priority for Scottish people. To reiterate Nicola Sturgeon's comments, this statement offers no vision of a truly open, accessible and participative consultation process for our first major piece of legislation.

I want to address the draft information strategy. We talk about an open, accessible and participative democracy, but to achieve it we need a high standard of parliamentary information services. Any information strategy for this Parliament must be part of an integrated information strategy for the whole country.  Already, this small country has a plethora-indeed, some would say a surfeit-of information initiatives. As a librarian, I should be delighted that the information needs of our society are so high on  the agenda. Instead, I am horrified at the haphazard, unco-ordinated manner in which vast sums of public money are being spent. A rough estimate of the moneys already committed runs to hundreds of millions of pounds. One librarian recently remarked to me, "Scotland could be wired to the moon and back for these sums."  The worst aspect of many such projects is that they are often mutually exclusive and many elements of service are duplicated.  Earlier this year, the Scottish Library Information Council produced a report entitled, "Enabling seamless access: The case for a national information strategy for Scotland". It may sound boring, but I urge all members to read it and the Scottish Parliament information centre's research note 99/8 entitled, "The Parliament's information strategy". The SLIC report says that, without co-ordination, the continued growth of separate networks may in the long term prevent the development of the "seamless access" to information and knowledge that is clearly in the interests of Scotland's citizens.  The draft information strategy and annexe J of the CSG report, which deals with information and communication technologies and democratic participation, give more examples of the need for co-ordination of a national information strategy.  A total of 73 partner libraries in constituencies throughout the country are now linked with the Parliament library; all 73 are public libraries. The public libraries network, which would allow constituents access to parliamentary information at the branch library closest to them, does not yet exist, and it looks increasingly unlikely that the target date of 2002 for its launch will be met.  Even if such a network were in place, it must be remembered that the internet is not always the best solution to people's information needs. Skills are needed to use the technology and money is needed to pay the charges that most libraries are forced to levy. If the Government is able to deliver on its promise of an e-mail address for every pupil, schoolchildren will have free local access to the Scottish Parliament, yet their parents will not. That begs the question: why is there one network for schools and another for libraries?

With its new Parliament, Scotland is ideally placed to become a world leader in the knowledge century that we are about to enter, but that will happen only if we heed the professionals and adopt a coherent, integrated approach to information management.  I commend the work of Janet Seaton, Bill Bell and all the partner libraries. They worked to tight  time scales and with often scant or non-existent budgets to ensure that a fledging information service was available for the start of this Parliament.