We are all agreed that we have an unprecedented opportunity, as someone said earlier, in the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth games and, indeed, a summer of sport with the Ryder cup and other events. It is only an opportunity and whether we take advantage of it we will know sometime in the future. There is no doubt that those events could inspire and motivate young and old to get involved and to become more active not only over those two or three weeks but as a long-lasting legacy. If we work at it, it can be transformational. A transformation is required if we are to get people of all abilities, ages and groupings—irrespective of their background or gender—involved in sport and, of course, participating and volunteering in community sport and physical activity in the future under the banner of sport for all. The health benefits of an active lifestyle are well known. In previous debates, the minister reminded us—I have said it before and I will say it again—of the 50 people a week in Scotland who die from inactivity and a lack of exercise. That costs the health service £94 million a year so, irrespective of the Commonwealth games and any other opportunities that we have to motivate and inspire people, we already have a big issue that needs to be addressed. That annual cost of £94 million and the accompanying death rate are an old legacy, but if we examine some of the areas in which many organisations, whether individually or collectively, are striving to increase activity among all age groups, but particularly among young people, we find that the figures on getting children active are flatlining, that children’s participation in sport has declined from its peak in 2009 and that there has been no real change in the level of adult physical activity since 2008. Therefore, the challenge is clear. If only a small proportion of the £94 million were spent on prevention, what a difference that would make. There is no doubt that the increased participation in sport and physical activity that would result from that would make a tremendous difference to lifestyles here in Scotland. Of course, there are other aspects to the issue, as Liz Smith and Alison Johnstone said. Having the opportunity to participate is important in many other areas apart from health. It is important for social cohesion. James Dornan gave us an example of that when he mentioned his engagement with Tom Harris. That those two can get in a room together represents progress and shows that engagement works and can bring people together, which is important for fractured communities. It has been argued that giving people the opportunity to participate in such activity can be particularly important in tackling crime. Midnight league football and other diversionary activities steer young people away from breaking someone’s hedge or being a general bother and help them to develop their self-esteem. From the point of view of the health agenda, they are even more important in enabling many young people to establish an interest in an activity that they can take through the rest of their lives. Investment in such activities is important and can be made regardless of the Commonwealth games; indeed, we need to make it anyway if we are to change the lifestyle of people in Scotland fundamentally. On the legacy, the first thing that it is important to do is to understand clearly what we are trying to achieve. Are we trying to make the fundamental change that is necessary, or are we having activity for activity’s sake? I do not mean that to be pejorative. We have heard about many events that will take place, but we cannot just have a list of one-off events, even though they are important and are complementary to the games. It is necessary to put on such events to provide the welcome that we want to provide to visitors from abroad, but they cannot be taken seriously as things that will sustain activity in the longer term, which is what the preventative agenda needs to do. If we want the legacy of the Commonwealth games to have the widest possible benefits, we need to recognise that it is not just a case of the Government putting in money and that it is not just the health and sport portfolio that has responsibility in this area. I know that there are difficulties with doing all the things that I have outlined. It is not for the Government to do all of them, although it provides a lot of the infrastructure. Sportscotland accounts for around 10 per cent of the budget, but many opportunities are delivered by other people. We heard in our community sport inquiry about the role of local government, and we can layer on to that the leisure trusts and the community clubs, which want to protect their integrity and their influence. Joined-up working with those clubs is needed to offer facilities. The private sector delivers a lot of activity and opportunities for individuals to participate. Lessons can be learned from all that. The foremost point is that the legacy will be delivered by people and communities. If the Government has a role, it should be to promote and support the strategic approach. What we can do to increase volunteer numbers is important. I am afraid that, as in political parties and everywhere else in life, volunteers are harder to find and retain. A strategic approach needs to be taken to that fundamental workforce. We need to value, nurture, support and sustain it in every possible way. We need to understand where the workforce is and who the volunteers are and we need to do workforce planning to estimate the decline in numbers and the number that we need to replace annually, never mind what we need to grow the number of volunteers. We recognise the additional challenge. Many areas with a high rate of participation in sport have a high number of volunteers, whereas nearby neighbourhoods have insufficient volunteers. We are talking about deprived communities, which have fewer volunteers. Of course, there are poorer areas such as Port Glasgow, which has a boxing club that the minister may wish to visit. Young women are involved in that club and are leading it, which is in complete contradiction of what normally happens. All this is possible, but we need to get more strategic about what we do.

Does the minister agree that there are many figures and they can be interpreted in many ways? We need robust figures that we can rely on, so that we can start focusing on outcomes rather than inputs.

Thank you for mentioning that, Presiding Officer, particularly as the minister mentioned the progress that has been made in Fife and other areas. Some of us who took time last week to meet the Infertility Network heard about the issue of the number of cycles, and we also heard that although very good progress is taking place across Scotland, progress is very slow in one of the biggest health authorities in Scotland, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. I am going out on a limb here, but I am sure that it was reported to us last week that waiting times there are around 22 months. Will the minister confirm whether that is the case? If it is, what can he do to ensure that the board catches up with the rest of Scotland?

7. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Justice last met the chief constable and what was discussed. (S4O-02803)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of HM Inspectorate of Constabulary for Scotland’s review of incident and crime recording, which was published in December 2013. It recommended that Police Scotland, in co-operation with the Scottish Government and others, review the definition of serious assault, which can, as it stands, lead to serious assaults being recorded as common assaults. Does the cabinet secretary agree with that recommendation, and will he work with others to ensure that we have an accurate picture of the number of serious assaults that take place in Scotland?

I am conscious of time, so I will be very quick. First, I thank Kezia Dugdale not only for giving us the opportunity to have the debate but for all her good work in bringing forward the debtbusters campaign and the general debate on the issue. As has been mentioned, that has brought some success, but it has been limited because although we have set out a plan to prevent more people from becoming involved with payday lending companies, too many are already caught in the trap. The information that was provided by StepChange Debt Charity shows a dramatic rise in the number of people in my constituency who are seeking help with payday loans. In 2012, 16 per cent of the charity’s clients in the Inverclyde Council area had payday loans. That figure jumped to 31 per cent in the first three months of 2013. Between 2011 and 2012, the average amount owed by my constituents who were involved with payday loan companies increased by £728 to £1,957. Mike MacKenzie mentioned some of the issues about getting into debt, but this is a different type of debt. It affects people who suffer financial exclusion. People in this country happily live with £60,000 or £100,000 of debt, but those who use payday loans do not have a credit rating. They are excluded, which is why they have to go to payday loan companies to get the help and credit that we all take for granted to get us through our lives. The clue is in the name: payday loans. It is not a coincidence that, this week, the Joseph Rowntree Foundation told us that those people were the group with the biggest increase among those who are in poverty. The wider issues must be recognised. Although we can control and regulate the industry, we cannot control and regulate the need for people to get access to credit. What we can do with credit unions, for instance, is good, but the fundamental problem is that even people in work cannot escape the poverty of benefits or create job security for themselves. They cannot even create security for a single shift because of the inappropriate use of zero-hours contracts. Is it any wonder that, because of the situation that such people face, they are powerless to get from a Monday to a Friday? Some of them walk home on a Thursday night because they do not have the bus fare.

No; I will not take an intervention because I am running out of time.

Payday loans will be an issue irrespective of the constitution. It is not good enough to say to the poor that they should wait until we get independence, as has crept into the debate. That is not acceptable. How do we address the issue? How do we use the powers of local government and the Scottish Government with the procurement pound and the public pound? How do we engage with employers? It used to be that someone could go to their employer and get a loan for a week or an advance on their wage.

How do we engage those people to deal with the problem that we have here and now?

Will the minister take an intervention?

“Trust us.” That is the plea to adult survivors of sexual and physical abuse. “Trust us.” That is what we ask of them, in asking them to participate in the national confidential forum. However, trust is the most fragile of emotions; it is hard earned, easily lost and difficult to win back. Survivors have heard it all before, of course. Trust was taken from them as children in the most traumatic of circumstances, and they have heard the same thing since, with promises of psychological support and judicial action—promises that are not always kept. That is not a political point—far from it—as we learn if we listen to petitioners Helen Holland and Chris Daly. Helen Holland spoke of fellow survivors who had passed away in recent years, saying: “The people who died were denied the right to have their voices heard. Please do not deny people that right any longer.” Chris Daly talked about retraumatisation, saying: “Survivors have been making this point for years ... We have been telling the Parliament and the Government that survivors need psychological help now.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 26 March 2013; c 3554-6.] The Health and Sport Committee welcomes the aims of the national confidential forum. It was that aspect of the bill that we were asked to consider and we supported the Scottish Government’s stage 2 amendments, including lowering the age criteria, but some points from our stage 1 report are still to be addressed. We would welcome an update on the progress of the national confidential forum guidance for care providers, we would appreciate a sense of when the findings of the foster care research will be implemented, and we seek protection of training needs for those who will support participation at the forum. As one witness said, survivors will judge the success of the forum on the basis of its outcomes for them. They will also want their testimony to help children who are in care today, and we should remember the 300 children who are reported to the children’s panel every year who are directly or indirectly affected by sexual abuse. We need to remember that, nine years ago this month, Jack McConnell said sorry to adult survivors on behalf of the people of Scotland. He delivered that apology, in this chamber, “to those who were subject to such abuse and neglect and who did not receive the level of love, care and support that they deserved, and who have coped with that burden all their lives.” It is a moral imperative. We must lighten that burden and allow those troubles to be heard. We must regain that trust via justice measures as well as through healing, and we must support all survivors, whether they choose the forum or other remedies. In the words of the former First Minister, we must “do more to support them in the future than we have ever done in the past.”—[Official Report, 1 December 2004; c 12389.]

Given the involvement of Mary Scanlon and me on the Health and Sport Committee it is not surprising that we focus on this subject as a health issue. There was a shocking headline this week about 20 people a week dying as a result of alcohol. The last time that we had a debate on this subject, the minister reminded us that 50 people a week die from inactivity and lack of exercise and that the issue costs the health service about £90 million a year. I view the strategies, with all their strands, as feeding into the healthy nation, which Stewart Maxwell and Margo MacDonald referred to. It goes without saying that sport has a significant role to play in encouraging young people to live more active lifestyles, which can improve their outlook. It is to be hoped that enjoyable experiences will boost their confidence and their physical and mental wellbeing, and that they will take that into their later years. We have all been inspired by those people who are already involved. At St Joseph’s school, the key fitness initiative involved the Greenock Morton captain, Mark McLaughlin. I mention him because the power of good coaches is important. Those primary school children were not passive participants in a sports exercise; they were getting access to somebody who is a good coach. Part of the exercise that I witnessed was about the primary school pupils developing their ability to coach their fellow pupils. Taking a turn coaching developed their confidence no end, and it was really inspiring to watch. During the Health and Sport Committee’s inquiry, some of my colleagues saw the work of basketballscotland. The young women involved go through the whole process and become ambassadors for their sport. Young primary girls were watching the older girls taking a class and they were in awe—there was a connection there. That can be made meaningful; it can be made to be really great.

It is also a question of what people make of it—in terms of money, and also the enthusiasm for the particular sport. Young people want to participate in that sport and it is really important that the strategy has been developed by young people, listening to young people. We have spoken about the quality of teaching and coaching. We had PE teachers in my day, although PE was not very exciting. On a rainy day, they used to run us up Lyle Hill from Rankin park and run us back down again. It was not very inspiring. It is important that we listen to young people and, as Stewart Maxwell says, that we prepare for the legacy from and the enthusiasm that will be focused on the Commonwealth games. We need to harness that—and I will return later to what we need to do in order to do that. There is no doubt that such preparation could be an important step in developing a lasting legacy beyond 2014—as long as we listen to young people and we put in place the things that can provide encouragement. It was the Health and Sport Committee that recommended setting up a young people’s forum and we are glad that the minister took that advice. The Government has plans to extend competitive sport between schools. That could really work for people. There is no doubt that the competitive experience as described by members such as Ken Macintosh and Colin Keir can be inspiring and can motivate young people to improve their skills. However, we must also bear it in mind that we are not developing elite athletes. We hope that young people take their enjoyment and fun into their teenage years—and indeed their adult years—if we are to meet the health targets. As Patricia Ferguson said, the aim is to tackle discrimination and other issues to allow young people to be attracted to and supported in sporting activity, irrespective of their gender, race, sexuality or, indeed, class. Those are the issues that prevent young people from getting involved and we need to tackle that. The extra costs to ensure that young people with disabilities take part have been mentioned. Volunteers are vital. Unfortunately, we need to tackle the barriers to volunteering if we hope to develop a legacy. The number of people who volunteer in Scotland to enable people to participate in sport is flatlining at best. International comparisons show that we are lagging behind Finland, Ireland, the Netherlands, Denmark and Germany. We need to do better if we are to achieve a legacy. What the minister said was right, particularly in respect of Inverclyde. We have never been best served by our facilities. We cannot build a strategy on the fact that only 40 per cent of the available outdoor space in secondary schools is used and only 28 per cent of it is used in the school holidays. We need to do better.

Does the minister recognise that the hubs have many positive aspects and are a good model, but that we should also acknowledge what the sports clubs bring to our local communities—the sense of wellbeing and solidarity—and that they should not be forced into a hub model if they do not want to be in one?

7. Please accept my apologies, Presiding Officer, for not being here at the start of question time. I had a very interesting meeting with Patient Opinion Scotland. As usual, I talked too much, which is why I was late. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment last met the chief executives of Zero Waste Scotland and Keep Scotland Beautiful and what was discussed. (S4O-02663)

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement with regard to proposed Scottish Government legislation to tackle fly-tipping and all other forms of antisocial behaviour that blight the Inverclyde area and other areas throughout Scotland. In the past five years, 19,000 fly-tipping incidents were reported in Inverclyde; 4,000 of them in the past year. When can we expect the proposed legislation and what can we do in the meantime to tackle the issue?

I would like to do that—

Right—okay.

I, too, thought that Jackson Carlaw’s speech was a good one. He looked at sweating the assets that we have; we need not just new build, but to use the homes that we have more effectively. Does Patrick Harvie share my regret that there is a disconnect between the integration of health and social care policy and the Scottish Government’s housing strategy?

10. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth last met the chief executive of Scottish Enterprise and what was discussed. (S4O-02631)

In August last year, the cabinet secretary kindly agreed to come to Inverclyde to hear about the opportunities for development in our area. At the time, he said that the Scottish Government would promote Inverclyde as an area for investment and he acknowledged that we look to be in a strong position to participate in the renewables industry. In January this year, he acknowledged the significant opportunities to expand cruise liner activity at Inverclyde. What action have the Scottish Government and Scottish Enterprise taken to promote Inverclyde as an area for investment?

Only 12 days ago, the Deputy First Minister said that shipbuilding is dear to her heart and vital to the Scottish economy. However, 150,000 words later, can the 35 words in the document that refer to shipbuilding in any way match up to a new future or even to a sustainable future? Where are the assurances and guarantees to my constituents who work in Govan, Scotstoun and Rosyth that the industry will have a secure future in an independent Scotland?

As convener of the Health and Sport Committee, I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in the debate. I express my thanks and those of committee members to everyone who gave written evidence and who came along to our evidence sessions. I also thank the clerks and the team from the Scottish Parliament information centre for all their help during the process. Members of the committee undertook fact-finding visits to West Lothian and the Highlands, to see integration in action, and we appreciated the welcome that we received. I am also grateful to Lothian Centre for Inclusive Living, which hosted an event for service users and carers representing a wide range of disabled people’s organisations. Finally, I thank the cabinet secretary for his engagement with the committee and for his written responses to our report. The bill will bring about big changes in how health and social care services are structured and managed. It will require a change in working practices among front-line staff, who must identify new ways of working across teams and departments. The committee has considered the area before. Two years ago, our inquiry into the regulation of care for older people highlighted the increasing shift to the provision of care in a person’s home rather than in a care home setting. In anticipation of the integration process, we called for a review of the national care standards, which would embed principles of independent living in the framework for the delivery of care services. We would welcome progress on that. The bill reflects the shift in emphasis from acute care to community-based care. The Royal College of General Practitioners recognises the need for integration in responding to the growing older population. However, there remains a good deal of concern that general practitioners might not have adequate resources to enable them fully to participate in the design and planning of the new joint-working arrangements. The cabinet secretary is currently engaged in discussions on a renewed GP contract, and I ask him to report back to the committee in due course on the role that the contract will play in encouraging GPs to immerse themselves in the integration process. I note the Scottish Government’s intention to introduce legislation to support carers through integration, but I would like more detail on that in the bill. The bill has been drafted in the spirit of the Christie commission in that it seeks to tackle what Christie referred to as the “unduly cluttered and fragmented … public service landscape”. All that comes against a backdrop of an older population and the increasing demand on our public services to deliver more with less. In a healthcare setting, that marries with the objective of reducing bed blocking. Christie also suggested that “changes need to be driven by how we can achieve more positive outcomes”. That is a theme to which I shall return. Our report highlighted a number of issues on which we seek clarification from the Government on the effect of the legislation. Andrew Eccles of the Glasgow school of social work suggested a need for “More subtle and complex engagement with some of the issues”.—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 10 September 2013; c 4193.] The themes of strong leadership and cultural change came up repeatedly in evidence to the committee. There is a clear need for committed engagement among all involved in the processes. Health boards and local authorities are required to identify the structures that best suit their circumstances. Most areas have opted for the body corporate; so far, only the Highland region has adopted the lead agency model. The vast majority of evidence has been supportive of both approaches. However, further clarity is required on how the body corporate model will operate. How will the health boards, local authorities and the new joint boards work together in practice? In particular, there appear to be concerns about a transfer of funding from acute budgets to social services. Concern has also been recorded among recipients of social care services about charging for care services when national health services are free at the point of use. The committee has heard that around half of the total health board budgets will be under the scope of integrated plans, but there is concern about the potential for cost creep in obtaining social care services. It is important that users of the services receive assurance that they are not going to be hit with additional charges. The bill contains significant powers for Scottish ministers. In evidence to the committee, the cabinet secretary noted his intention to lodge amendments at stage 2 that would seek to mitigate the fear—held by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and others—that too much power was being given to ministers. That is a helpful and constructive offer, and I look forward to those amendments. I will now move on to what I consider to be the most important aspect of the bill. The legislation seeks not only to encourage health and care providers to work together more closely, but to improve the outcomes available to patients and service users. It is those outcomes that are crucial. The legislation is to be commended for closing the gap between the provision of health and social care. It is paramount that the bill makes it easier for patients and their carers to access the services that they need. For that reason, our report highlighted the need for a “continuous commitment to improving these individual outcomes.” I look forward to seeing more detail at stage 2 on how that important aim will be achieved. Although the bill rightly focuses on the provision of services, we should never forget the important role played by the third sector and independent providers. We heard repeated pleas from providers and their service users for assurance that they would be represented in the new integrated board structures. We accept that that is by no means a straightforward issue and that the Government has set out good reasons why that might not be possible. However, I call on the cabinet secretary to give due consideration to how the involvement of the third and independent sectors can be strengthened in the bill. The process of integration is already well under way, and the committee agrees that we are heading in the right direction. However, the Parliament has a duty to ensure that the bill delivers for all those individuals and organisations that contributed to our report, for all the staff who are affected by the changes and, most important, for the patients and carers whose quality of life depends on high-quality health and care services. We will ensure that its implementation receives appropriate scrutiny. On that basis, the Health and Sport Committee recommends that the general principles of the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill be approved.

The First Minister will be aware that due to the reckless conduct of metal thieves on Tuesday, 280 homes in Greenock lost their power and four houses were set on fire, which put people’s lives at risk. The consequences go on, in that the circuit boards of all the central heating boilers have been blown and will have to be replaced, possibly with significant investment by the social landlord and homeowners. As the First Minister knows, this is part of a growing trend. Scottish Power has reported that more than 800 substations have been subjected to attacks since 2011, and that 70,000 homes in Scotland have been affected. We appreciate that the Scottish Government is looking at legislating to address the issue, but can the First Minister assure us that it will be brought forward as soon as possible and, in the meantime, that there is co-ordinated action between the police and Scottish Power against the reckless people who are putting lives in danger?

Will the member give way?

Johann Lamont said that she has the Govan shipyard in her constituency, and I am proud to say that I have constituents who work for BAE Systems in the Govan shipyard and at Rosyth. The road has been long and it has not been an easy one. There are many reasons why we are in a situation in which so little shipbuilding is done in Scotland. There is no doubt that it has been a difficult journey. The issues that have brought about the situation do not change. EU competition laws do not change—and will not change, whether people vote yes or no in the referendum. That means that it will be difficult. It is a long time since we have won and built a merchant ship. We cannot even win the competition to build boats for CalMac Ferries. That is the scale of the challenge, and we cannot ignore it. All the other countries that have been mentioned have gone over the years. They came and we taught them. They built up their own capacity and then they decided, as independent nations, that they would rather build the ships themselves. We heard from the Deputy First Minister that we could overcome the issue and that, under independence, we could build Australian ships. I found that most offensive. I hope that it was not deliberately misleading and that she was badly advised when she read out that statement. We have not built an Australian ship for 35 years. That is the reality, and we cannot overstate the scale of the issue. About 15 years ago, when a Labour Government was in power, we got to a stage that was welcomed by all the trade unions and, I think, all the political parties. The shipbuilding industry was not the industry that we knew. It did not employ the tens of thousands of people that it had employed in the past, due to some of the things I have referred to: we could not compete effectively and we never invested effectively. We used to build out in the rain, whereas others built inside. Shipyards across Europe and in other countries now import the steel hulls. There are no steelworkers working in the shipyards in Germany. They import from Poland and exploit the cheap labour there. We have missed those chances to keep up, so we have a small number of people building ships. We used to call it the rent book on the Clyde. The grey ships were the backbone—they were what we were guaranteed. I concede to the minister that they have been seen as a rent book and a subsidy for shipbuilding ever since. Those are the only orders that we can win, and that is why it is vital that we do not risk them. Regrettably, we do not have a plan in place that will carry the workforce, so we cannot risk having a situation in which the UK Government will not sign off the ships.

No, thank you. We have not diversified, but the threat is imminent. It is only a year until the ships will be signed off—or not. Somebody mentioned Ferguson Shipbuilders, which was promised a ship in 2007. The Scottish Government and the previous Scottish Executive worked hard to get ships into Ferguson Shipbuilders. I am grateful for that, because the yard is in my constituency. However, we cancelled a ship in between. We promised Ferguson a ship and cancelled it. Do members know why we cancelled it? I suspect that we cancelled it because we came to the conclusion that we would be expending precious Scottish Government budgets to build in a shipyard that was not in Scotland. We had to wait two or three years until we finally got further contracts. It is right that, if we have Government budgets to build smaller ships, we should take every advantage and pull every string to ensure that the orders go to Scottish shipyards. Every Government would do that and I argue that the Scottish Government, whatever its shape, would do it in future. That is what the UK Government will do. The really depressing factor that hits me as we discuss the matter today is that we knew that this was coming. We have talked about the gap in the orders. What have we done about diversification since then? What has Scottish Enterprise done to ensure that we build on the skills of the 800 ship designers who have designed a world-class product that people want to build?

I think that both Governments need to get together to discuss diversification in shipbuilding, with the defence contracts being used as a core or backbone. We need to keep the First Minister, Mr Salmond, to his promise about the reindustrialisation of the Clyde. We need to deliver on renewable jobs. We need to re-equip the North Sea. We need to do all those things. There is no point in pointing to history and saying that it was all someone else’s fault when in our time we are not doing any better. Where is our manufacturing strategy? That is the challenge to us today and in the future. Let us develop our manufacturing strategy, irrespective of whether people vote for independence or to remain within the union. That is our responsibility. Let us face up to it.

I concede that I did not intend to take the minister back to that point. The point that I tried to focus on was that it is surely not beyond the Scottish Government, which has been in power for six years, to connect up the skills shortage in the North Sea with the overabundance of skills on the west coast of Scotland. We could have delivered renewables and manufacturing jobs, and we could be renewing vessels in the North Sea. Why is that beyond us after six years of SNP government?

Will Sandra White give way?

I will begin in the same way as many other members have begun by quoting some definitions of person-centred care. The NHS Scotland quality improvement hub defines person-centred care as: “providing care that is responsive to individual personal preferences, needs and values and assuring that patients guide all clinical decisions.” Inclusion Scotland welcomes the move towards person-centred care, but says: “we are concerned that this approach remains focused on the management of conditions and not on the wider needs of the person, such as access issues, how they are treated by others, and support for independent living”. It is important to say that, because we have heard many different definitions of personalised care; I am sure that someone will count them all up but everyone seems to have their own. It would make a nice start if those who receive the services, those who provide them and the Government, which develops the policy and legislation, could all agree on a clear definition of the purpose that we are chasing. What is not in dispute is the action that all parties are taking on developing policy that will move in the direction of the personalisation of care, although that concept might still be ill-defined. We could also agree that progress on the journey has been slow and frustrating. Some speakers here believe that we are bounding ahead and that there are no problems at all. That borders on complacency. I believe that the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Act 2013, which we supported and welcomed, and the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill, which we are working on now, are both evidence of that shared frustration about how we move this agenda on. We have come up against many barriers, which we describe generally as the need for a culture shift, the lack of leadership or whatever, but there is no accusation against this Government or indeed others that they have not tried to tackle the issue. As a group of politicians supporting the Government, we are looking for more sustained action and outcomes. The Health and Sport Committee inquiry into elderly care some 18 months ago highlighted many of the issues raised in the debate. Although the inquiry brought about a U-turn in the inspection of care homes, which we welcome, we also made recommendations on the impact of procurement and commissioning—something that was described by one of the members today as having nothing to do with the debate. There have been two committees in the Parliament that I have convened—one was the Local Government and Communities Committee. When we were confronted with a Panorama programme about e-procurement and its disastrous impact on the care of the elderly, we had an inquiry and e-procurement did not survive a week—it did not survive the session. Unfortunately, in the world in which we live, procurement and commissioning have consistently impacted on the day-to-day care that is provided. Our ambition is to deliver more and more health services at home, which people clearly want. Whether there are pots of money or whether the budgets are shrinking, that is the right thing to do, irrespective of budgets. How do we sustain that move when we have commissioning and procurement policies that bring about the 10-minute visit—something that is bringing great reputational risk and damage to care in our communities? There is a complete absence of continuity of care, which is a recognised principle right across the provision of care. People might get six, seven, eight, 10 or 28 carers coming into their home over a month and they do not know who is coming to visit—that issue needs to be dealt with. The Health and Sport Committee also called for a review of the national care standards in that elderly care inquiry. As I said, that inquiry was 18 months ago. The national care standards are now 12 years old. The cabinet secretary may want to respond to the points about procurement and the review of care standards. When the minister winds up, he may want to say something about that. The lack of progress and the lack of impact on policy, standards, guidelines or legislation are not dry matters; they are very personal indeed. One of the other outcomes of the inquiry into elderly care was the announcement by the previous cabinet secretary of the inspection of elderly care services in our hospitals. The inspections produced by Healthcare Improvement Scotland have emphasised the lack of personalised healthcare plans that meet the needs of patients in the acute hospital setting. Indeed, the most recent inspection report, for St John’s hospital in NHS Lothian—it was an unannounced inspection that came a full two years after the test inspections that showed the same things and highlighted the very same issues—states in relation to the care that is provided to dementia patients: “Care plans were generic, pre-printed documents which were not specific to the needs of individual patients. This does not provide a clear record of the care required and given to a patient and does not demonstrate evaluation of that patient’s care.” Two years on, despite report after report and the push or direction from the Government that was announced by the cabinet secretary on the ground, there is still an issue there with delivery. Yesterday, I met David Robertson of the learning disabilities advocacy group, which is doing a really good job of working with health boards, with the Government’s support, to ensure that publications are fit for use by people with learning disabilities. Those campaigners are still campaigning for a voice with GPs. We know that people are entitled to an annual health check, but people with learning disabilities still have problems when calling or visiting the GP. For example, they complain about GP staff such as GP receptionists—I reminded him that many of us have had cause to complain about GP receptionists—who lack the training to engage with people with disabilities. Although the Government’s policy and drive is to create change there, their experience tells a different story. Obviously, we also need to recognise the challenges that we face. As others have said, this is a journey and we all hope to arrive successfully, but there is a dramatic increase in demand and less public money. Governments past and present have made efforts, with cross-party agreement, to introduce change funds to provide changes in direction for budgets. However, one thing that is missing is that the people who are in receipt of services are not at the table. The people who are debating person-centred care are the politicians and the budget holders. It is time that people power came to the table, so that we can ensure that we get a change of culture within organisations. People must have positive rights to ensure that there is the change that they deserve.

Answer the question!

When will we finally receive the evaluation of the cashback scheme? I and many others have raised concerns about outcomes and the meeting of its objectives. When will that evaluation come before the Parliament?

I put on record my thanks to the Presiding Officer for ensuring that I can speak in this debate on behalf of the Health and Sport Committee. Bums on seats, Presiding Officer. What counts is “more bums on more seats more often, more flexibly and more cost effectively.”—[Official Report, Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, 15 May 2013; c 1706.] That is what Highland Council told the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee during its inquiry. Highland Council aimed to pool national health service vehicles, ambulance service vehicles, school buses and other community transport. Indeed, that is catching on. One of the outcomes of a seminar that we organised in Inverclyde was discussions about how we could best use our community resources, and I hope that a pilot scheme is on its way. Those are good local initiatives that we on the Health and Sport Committee wish to see extended nationwide. I thank my fellow convener, Maureen Watt, and her ICI committee colleagues for inviting Health and Sport Committee input to their work. We were pleased to make a modest contribution, but one that, I hope, might encourage a more integrated approach and shift us from what Voluntary Action Scotland saw as “a patchwork quilt of arrangements that can be developed locally.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 28 May 2013; c 3902.] As well as VAS, we took evidence from NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, the Scottish Ambulance Service, the British Red Cross, and the Royal Voluntary Service. We were also aware of the Scottish Government’s short-life working group on the delivery of effective patient transport to healthcare services. The group did not report in time for the committee to reflect its work, but I detected similar themes to those that were suggested by our witnesses, and to those in Audit Scotland’s 2011 report. To recap, the findings of that report were inequity of access, poor integration, lack of leadership and planning, and poor recording of data and spend. We conducted our own scrutiny under three headings—co-ordination, cost, and issues for remote and rural communities—and I will touch on each of those in turn. Audit Scotland’s report said that transport should be an integral part of care planning and co-ordination. However, the tone of the evidence that we heard suggested that that is more an aspiration than a reality. The Royal Voluntary Service said: “it needs to be built into the systems that are being created for health and social care integration.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 28 May 2013; c 3900.] An initiative to improve the patient transport system was highlighted by the Scottish Ambulance Service. After a recent speech on new medicines, Jackson Carlaw said that he came close to drowning in alphabet soup, which reminded me of the line in “Yes, Minister” “The Minister doesn’t know his Acas from his NALGO.” The SAS told us about integrated patient transport models in Lochaber, Elgin and Wigtownshire. We recognise, of course, that local variation and circumstances must be taken into account, but is now not the time for piloted and proven good practice to be applied more widely? The auditors also found that data on transport costs for health and social care were poor. Transport on medical and mobility grounds tends to be funded by the NHS, while the cost of transport for those of limited means or who are living in remote areas is met by councils. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde said that a different approach was needed but, so far, such efforts have not moved beyond small-scale projects. As the Royal Voluntary Service told us, the costs that are involved in community transport are relatively small when compared to the costs of missed appointments. Surely an integrated model for funding patient transport is not beyond the wit of man, woman or short-life working group.

I will refer to the question of leadership later. In my locality, and from witnesses, we hear a lot about what people cannot do. I ask those people what is preventing them from doing what they want to do. If we ask the question differently and involve more people who deliver the service, we certainly can make progress. That is a personal departure from the committee line—I must watch what I am saying. Our third and final theme was remote and rural communities. SAS has worked with the health board and community transport providers in Wigtownshire to pilot a new approach, which involved zoning patients and improving scheduling, which increased passenger and journey numbers. The ambulance service described it as “particularly helpful” to its thinking about how to better serve patients in rural settings. Co-ordination, costs and rural communities were our hat trick of themes. The worry is that the improved planning of community transport is still being talked about more than practised. Audit Scotland’s report underlined the significance of the leadership and ownership of services. I want to reinforce that before I put my bottom back on my seat.

First, I thank the clerks, the Scottish Parliament information centre and all those who contributed written evidence and gave of their time to participate in the committee’s public sessions. It is just as important to thank all those people who came forward over the period of the committee’s inquiry at a difficult and vulnerable time in their life and spoke out about the failings in terms of the patient experience. I am speaking on behalf of the Juszczak family in my constituency and the family of Anne Fisher, who is sadly deceased, who spoke out at a very difficult time. All those contributions ensured that the Health and Sport Committee approached the whole issue with sensitivity and consensus. Access to medicines is a big, complex and deeply emotive issue. The committee first looked at the matter in March 2012 when we received a trio of petitions on orphan medicines. Now, as they say, for the science bit: orphan medicines are those used to treat very rare diseases. We have learned a lot in the past 18 months and I hope to share some of it with members in the next 13 minutes. I want to retrace our steps as a reminder of why we are discussing the issue today. Along with the usual who, what and when, I will set out the main findings of the report that we published in early July, which is the how. I shall also offer some thoughts on yesterday’s statement from the cabinet secretary in the where-we-are-headed bit. My colleagues on the Public Petitions Committee deserve credit for their role in this story. It was with their committee that the petitioners first raised their concerns. The petitioners were Alastair Kent, Allan Muir, Lesley Loeliger and Professor Peter Hillmen, individuals working on behalf of Rare Disease UK, the Association for Glycogen Storage Disease, and PNH Scotland, respectively. I am sure that they would all acknowledge the work on an earlier petition of January 2008 by Tina McGeever, on behalf of the late Mike Gray, which resulted in revision of the guidelines to the end-to-end process, which is the licensing of medicines through to individual patient treatment requests, or IPTRs. The petitioners argued that the revision had not resulted in improved access to orphan medicines for patients with rare diseases. The committee took evidence last March from the petitioners and then from the Scottish Medicines Consortium, the SMC, and the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry, the ABPI. I apologise for all the acronyms—it is like a secret services convention. We followed up the earlier evidence with evidence from clinicians and patient representative bodies. On 14 November 2012, the cabinet secretary announced the Routledge and Swainson reviews. The committee heard from the authors of the reviews and from the cabinet secretary and the chief pharmaceutical officer on 7 May 2013. On 21 May, we held a further round-table session with interested parties to gauge reaction to the twin reviews. The report of the committee’s findings was published on 3 July. The committee found that there is enthusiasm from all quarters to work together to improve the system for accessing new medicines and create a system that enables a wider assessment of their value with more of what might be termed a societal dimension. Our report welcomes the recommendations from Swainson and Routledge, but we want both the IPTR and the SMC processes to be improved to ensure that we have a more transparent system for accessing new medicines. In short, we want more yeses. Many of the suggestions in the reviews are welcome, including those on meetings being held in public, the standardisation of paperwork, the monitoring of applications and the publication of decisions, but they are about process and would do little to improve access. One of the difficulties with the IPTR system lies in establishing the exceptionality of the patient’s circumstances. We said that the Scottish Government must outline the steps that it will take to improve the system. Decisions on whether to recommend a medicine for use in Scotland depend on the cost of the additional quality-adjusted life years—a system known as QALY. I hope that the official reporters have a glossary, because there are a lot of acronyms in this area. Nobody told us of a better system than QALY for assessing the value of competing treatments. Who knew that an equation could be as brutal as cost divided by the number of weeks for which a life might be extended? However, the way in which so-called modifiers are applied is crucial in determining the cost effectiveness of medicines. We asked the SMC and the Scottish Government to review how modifiers and thresholds are applied to take better account of orphan and ultra-orphan conditions, end of life and innovation. After all, our work began with the petitions on orphan and ultra-orphan medicines. We welcomed the interim £21 million rare conditions medicines fund, but questions remain about the extent to which it can improve access to medicines. The committee said that clear guidance should be published and that decisions about specific cancer medicines should be made on the same basis as decisions on medicines for other conditions. We said that cancer should not be singled out in comparison with other life-shortening conditions. The committee accepted that this was a difficult issue. Nevertheless, we did not believe that a cancer drugs fund was the Scottish answer. The committee recognised that there were concerns about the impact of innovative medicines not routinely being available in Scotland and we asked the Scottish Government to investigate. Likewise, we said that developments with value-based pricing, or VBP, should be monitored. I am afraid that I do not have time to tell you about ADTCs, which are area drug and therapeutics committees, about PPRS, which is the pharmaceutical price regulation scheme or about NICE, which is the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. I could say “NICE but naughty”—speaking of which, I note that it was only yesterday morning when we received a copy of the Scottish Government’s response to our report. That is a shame, as we would have liked to have fully considered it and come to a view as a committee. What I can say is that I appreciate the language and the intention of what is proposed. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing wants to move to a more flexible approach to the evaluation of medicines for end-of-life care and rare conditions and he wants to increase access to new medicines, which is good. The committee and the cabinet secretary are on the same page, but we need to see the detail, which is where the devil lurks, as always. The Scottish Government says that value-based pricing will not be delivered. It believes that the pricing element of pharmaceutical price regulation is a reserved matter but medicines assessment is devolved, and it will develop a new value-based assessment, or VBA, process for Scotland. As a first step, the SMC has begun to look at the evaluation of orphan, ultra-orphan and end-of-life medicines. That is to include a review of the wider aspects of value and QALYs to increase access to those medicines. The report states that the SMC is due to report its findings to the cabinet secretary before Christmas. As somebody once said, “I love deadlines. I like the whooshing sound they make as they fly by”. Let this please be one of those deadlines that we are able to stick to. That is particularly important for those who have been diagnosed with these conditions last week or today, or who will be diagnosed with them tomorrow or next week. Some consideration should be given to how the system operates in the transitional phase, but we need to stick to the deadline. The IPTR system is being replaced with a new peer approved clinical system—PACS. We are told that guidance will be published shortly and I seek assurances that the old double act of “postcode” and “lottery” are not reunited by PACS. In all honesty, it is hard to tell whether the committee’s recommendations will be matched by the new systems, as we are short of information. I would be grateful if the cabinet secretary could offer some clues about timescales. We are told that the rare conditions medicines fund will continue until 2016, but it is still unclear whether the £20 million is an annual budget or total funding until 2016. I would be obliged if the cabinet secretary could elaborate. The Scottish Government agrees that there should be scope for a temporary pause in the appraisal process to permit further dialogue with the manufacturer. That was a recommendation from Routledge and the committee welcomed it. The Scottish Government says that a pause would allow a confidential discussion with the manufacturer about cost through a new or improved patient access scheme. However, no picture has yet emerged of how the scheme will look. I have another one for the cabinet secretary, who I appreciate is listening patiently—I hope that he is not getting writer’s cramp as a result of taking notes. There is to be £1 million of funding for the SMC’s engagement with the public and the pharmaceutical industry, but it is not clear whether more money would be required following the development of VBA. Scepticism is a good thing, but let us give credit where credit is due. I sense that the direction in which we are heading is the right one. The frustration, for me, is that we have yet to arrive. I want to say something more about the cost side. It is clear that the Scottish Government considers there to be a devolved element in that regard, and I want to make a couple of observations. In March, the chief executive officer of GlaxoSmithKline described the often-mentioned $1 billion research and development price tag as “one of the great myths of the industry”. I think that that is significant and interesting. Doctors Without Borders said: “It is true that innovative new drugs can change the way we treat people and we need more of them. But innovation is of little use if people cannot access new treatments because they are so expensive.” The pricing of medicines is, in many ways, a global issue. The issue is big, complex and deeply emotive—we had better believe it. I commend the inclusive and listening approach of the person who will speak next in the debate. We have come a long way, policy-wise, in the past 18 months. Things have moved relatively quickly since the committee took evidence, and we welcome announcements. However, things can never move quickly enough for people who are diagnosed with rare conditions and terminal diseases. Three months is a lifetime to such people. I hope that the cabinet secretary will report back to us on progress by December. Perhaps he can give us that undertaking. The committee believes that we can improve the processes. We can remove some of the bumps in what clinicians call the patient journey, and we can devise a system that is fair, objective, transparent, robust and within our means. We need to ensure that there is access for all people who have orphan and ultra-orphan and life-threatening diseases. That is what people petitioned the Parliament for. We owe them nothing less and they deserve nothing less.

How does the cabinet secretary expect to overcome that problem when those decisions will be constrained by the current modifiers and QALY thresholds during an interim period of up to three months?

I appreciate the cabinet secretary’s answer, but the issue whether, during the transitional period, drugs will be turned down under the new regime or the old regime has not been resolved. The cabinet secretary has said that he would expect the SMC to take into cognisance his current position. Has he made his current position clear to the SMC?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his answers so far. He has covered the incident in a lot of detail. I ask the cabinet secretary not to underestimate the scale of the incident, although I am sure that he does not. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde books 20,000 appointments a week, and a large number of people have missed appointments, although many others have not. In the interest of not wasting a crisis, I ask the cabinet secretary whether lessons can be learned. I am sure that he has had representations from staff about the introduction of TrakCare and their concerns about it. The redeployment and scaling down of secretarial staff has had an impact, and there have been issues and problems on the ground with the promised hardware. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will take those issues on board while the full scale of the incident is investigated, and that he will ensure that resources are put in place to resolve the issues that have arisen for many of my constituents and others in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde’s area.

5. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Justice last met the chief executive of the Scottish Court Service and what was discussed. (S4O-02406)

In the past three financial years, offenders in Scotland have received a staggering 450,000 warning letters for defaulting on their fines. On top of that, 200,000 court citations and 90,000 arrest warrants were issued for non-payment between 2009 and 2012 and, in my constituency, three offenders have amassed nearly 100 unpaid fines among them. Does the cabinet secretary accept that those figures show a serious weakness in our justice system? What is he going to do to address this serious problem?

Will the minister take an intervention?

5. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing last met the chief executive of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and what was discussed. (S4O-02376)

As the cabinet secretary will be aware, in August 2011 NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde published its property asset management strategy, which showed a maintenance backlog bill in Port Glasgow health centre of £240,000, one in Gourock health centre of £20,000 and a staggering bill in Greenock health centre of £900,000, which surely puts it beyond repair. What can the cabinet secretary do to ensure that capital moneys are targeted at those areas with the greatest need to ensure that they have effective community health services?

Oh!

The creative industries are, indeed, an opportunity for Scotland and Inverclyde. We have made some real progress there. Will the minister clarify that the new Scottish film studio that the Government and its agencies are considering will not focus simply on Glasgow? Will Inverclyde have an opportunity to bid for the location of that studio?

It has been a long day and I thank all the members who have been able to stay behind and, of course, all those who signed the motion. In 1973, the Scottish committee of Action on Smoking and Health, as it was originally known, was established by the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. It operated from a small backroom in the RCPE buildings with just two part-time staff—its medical director, Dr Eileen Crofton, the wife of Sir John Crofton, and its secretary, Alison Hillhouse, who became ASH Scotland’s chief executive in 1984. The world was very different then and smoking was accepted as the norm in Scotland in public and private. People then were just as likely to see somebody smoking in hospital as we are to see people smoking outside a hospital entrance now, since action has been taken. ASH Scotland campaigned to limit the influence of the tobacco industry through advertising and sponsorship, to increase tobacco taxation, to create smoke-free places and to provide advice to smokers who wanted to quit. ASH Scotland worked hard to communicate to policy makers the evidence of the harm that smoking does. Many of us will remember the successful publication in 1982 of the facts constituency by constituency—that is almost the norm now—to influence politicians and to make the Scottish epidemic more vivid to parliamentarians. By the late 1990s and into the new millennium, ASH Scotland had grown from two people to nearly 20 and offered the public specialist tobacco information and smoking cessation services. It also developed and delivered projects to reduce the health inequalities resulting from tobacco. The 2000s saw a raft of strong controls on tobacco from Holyrood and Westminster. Scotland led the United Kingdom by introducing smoke-free public places in 2006. We also saw a UK-wide ban on tobacco advertising and sponsorship and a rise in the minimum age of sale from 16 to 18, along with graphic warnings on each pack and the expansion throughout Scotland of free national health service support for people who want to stop smoking. Forty years of action on smoking and health is the proud boast of ASH Scotland. Although it would not claim to have done all that on its own, it has worked with organisations such as the British Heart Foundation and the Government to achieve a legacy of which to be proud in highlighting the hazards and risks of smoking for individuals, groups, children and young people. Since ASH Scotland was formed more than four decades ago, the number of adults in Scotland who smoke has more than halved, from 50 per cent of the population in the early 1970s to less than 25 per cent today. That means that about a million fewer adults in Scotland are now smoking. We cannot discuss the ASH Scotland story without mentioning the impact that it has had in the Parliament. No one who was in and around the Parliament in the lead-up to and during the passage of the bill that introduced the ban on smoking in public places could have been unaware of the campaigning zeal of ASH Scotland—it could not be ignored. Its impact in the Parliament was significant as it pushed and encouraged us to make decisions that, it must be conceded, resulted in what some people described as a ban too far, although others described it as the single biggest public health measure that we could have taken to improve the health of the people of Scotland. That was when I and many others came across the organisation up close. I confess that, as a member of the then Health Committee, which scrutinised the bill, I was sceptical about what the ban could achieve and what was possible. I was unconvinced not about the harm of smoking but about what we could achieve. I asked many tough questions of organisations and others throughout that process. It was a tough gig to be on that committee. The then convener, Roseanna Cunningham, was uncompromising. She dragged us off to Dublin on a fact-finding mission. We visited bar after bar in the Temple Bar area long into the night, with many hours given to the examination of the impact of the smoking ban in Ireland.

After the visit, I freely accept that, far from being sceptical, I became optimistic about what could be achieved. I was, if members like, converted on the road back from Dublin. My efforts to get on board were not always welcome. My amendment to the Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Bill to change the minimum legal age for buying tobacco to 18 did not get off to the best start. ASH was sceptical about whether that would be a good measure, but I was pleased to convert it on that occasion. I see that it now lists the increase in the age at which tobacco can be purchased as a significant milestone. Although this is a night to congratulate ASH on its work and achievements, we agree that much more needs to be done. There are issues that relate to young adolescents and inequalities that must be addressed, and we agree on that point, too. I thank the Presiding Officer for his indulgence.

I, too, express my thanks and appreciation for all those who allowed us to do our job in support of the Justice Committee in considering the bill, with a particular focus on the national confidential forum. It must be said that the process was not without challenges, because people did not see the split in responsibilities. It is worth noting that the justice aspects of the forum posed some difficulties as we took evidence. On one hand, our committee’s focus was clearly on health and wellbeing. On the other, a number of witnesses suggested to us that the absence of accountability itself proved detrimental to the health and wellbeing of some survivors. There was a difficulty in that. We did not ignore the justice-related issues as we heard and listened to them, but we had to make it clear to the witnesses that we were not considering in depth issues such as the time bar and consultation. We heard, listened to and recorded their evidence on them and we respectfully suggest that, if those matters need to be dealt with, that should be done by the Justice Committee. Therefore, I will concentrate my remarks on the Health and Sport Committee’s work, with a particular focus on the national confidential forum. Sorry is the hardest word and even more difficult than saying the word is acting upon it. Nine years ago, Jack McConnell stood where the cabinet secretary is sitting and offered a full apology to adult survivors of childhood abuse. The then First Minister said: “we in the Parliament, on behalf of the people of Scotland, recognise that they were wronged and that we will do more to support them in the future than we have ever done in the past.”—[Official Report, 1 December 2004; c 12389.] The national confidential forum will provide a voice to some who, until now, have been denied the right to have their say. One participant in the time to be heard pilot forum told of their experience of abuse in a children’s home in the 1940s. They had to shoulder that burden alone for 70 years. It is unimaginable. The forum will certainly meet the needs of some people but it will not satisfy everyone. The expectations of the survivor community are high and anyone who has spent time with survivors, as we did in our engagement, can tell members that they place great value on trust. However, their trust is fragile. People have been promised help in the past, only to be let down. Therefore, we were pleased to hear that the Scottish Government is contributing to the interactive process. There is also activity on the civil litigation time bar and other justice-related issues. I am sure that we all agree that that momentum must be maintained if the interests of all survivors are to be served. The committee heard evidence at stage 1 from individuals, survivors groups, children’s organisations, care providers, regulators and human rights experts. One witness told us: “Survivors will judge the process, the bill, the act and the national confidential forum on the personal outcomes for them.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 23 April 2013; c 3640.] For those who choose to participate in the forum, it is crucial—we heard it time and again—that support be provided before they take part so that they know what to expect out of it and what the process will be. An element of support is also needed during and, indeed, after the process because, as we heard, there is a real risk of retraumatisation as a result of it. Another issue on which we took evidence was the exclusion of those who had been in foster care. We would like that part of the eligibility criteria to be given further consideration. Kathleen Marshall, who was involved in the time to be heard pilot and was formerly Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People, told us that it was an area from which there was most to learn, and learning lessons was something of a theme in what we heard. The Care Leavers Association said that measures and outcomes were all fine and well, but that “A life in care and beyond care is much bigger than that ... this debate brings in the emotional side—the love, care and support that are seriously lacking in our current care system”.—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 23 April 2013; c 3659.] How the work of the national confidential forum will inform in practice that care system now and in the future is not entirely clear from the bill. The centre for excellence for looked after children in Scotland asked for more detail; perhaps the minister will be able to elaborate later. The Church of Scotland raised the point about exploring links between the forum and the care providers, and we took other evidence on that, so I hope that that point is taken up. We acknowledge the wider approach that is being taken by the Scottish Government via its survivors strategy. We recognise that access to counselling, support, mental health services and advocacy is crucial. From the evidence that we took, we saw the need for a choice of accessible services, long-term support and a skilled mental health workforce. The Health and Sport Committee welcomes the therapeutic value that the national confidential forum will bring. We recall that apology from the First Minister in 2004 and pledge to do more to help those who were abused as children in the care of the state. There is a moral imperative here. A tailored choice of therapeutic supports and other remedies should be available to survivors.

Whether we call it a person-centred approach or the right thing to do, or say that it is not before time, action is necessary. We support the bill at stage 1.

The cabinet secretary has said that he is not aware of the use of zero-hours contracts in public procurement, but he cannot say that about the awarding of grants to companies that use zero-hours contracts, can he?

The committee has produced a very interesting report and should be commended for it. It challenges the Parliament to come together and look at the changing nature of employment and work, how people can be gainfully employed and how they can derive from that not just economic benefit but the social interaction that we all—certainly people of my age—grew up with. It was good to have an apprenticeship and a job and to be the charge-hand and the yard manager. All that held our society together. I hope that the report is a start in getting us as politicians to focus on some of the challenges for the people whom we purport to represent. There has been a cosy view of the workplace as a place in which people had some power, whether because of the status of their job, because they were in a trade union or because people had confidence in their skills. However, the workplace has changed dramatically. I suspect that not many of us know about the powerlessness that exists in our workforces. Many years ago, some of us were part of the industrial workforce. It is hard to appreciate the change that has happened over time as a result of the deindustrialisation—that has, rightly, been mentioned—that has taken place. Unemployment is recognised as a bad thing, and underemployment is equally bad. People are taking jobs that they do not really want; there is low pay, subcontracting, shift working and zero-hours contracts; and people are laid off. When the line stops at 6 o’clock in the morning, there is no means of getting home, so a person will sit unpaid in the canteen for two or three hours until the transport arrives. That is the reality of what is right under our noses, irrespective of our different views on how that was brought about. Those views are probably not as different as we would expect them to be.

There have been massive shifts, with deindustrialisation over the piece that the Government has supported, but I would never sneer at or criticise somebody who goes out and works for the minimum wage, because that is not my choice to make. People go out there and accept such situations and conditions, despite having a trade union or other people to represent them, because they need to support their families. They do not do that through choice. That is the reality. I and my colleagues on the Health and Sport Committee have struggled with the issue of health inequalities. The World Health Organization and others have stated that, unless we shift power and wealth, we will not deal with health inequalities. The conditions that people have to put up with also have an impact on their wellbeing. The heart disease rate is 50 per cent higher in lower-grade employees, and mortality rates for temporary workers are 20 per cent higher than those for permanent workers. Those are the hard realities of what people face. Some people say that the situation has never been any different and that, if employers get a free hand, they will exploit workers. Professor Clare Bambra had a slide on that in her presentation to the Health and Sport Committee. William Morris said: “at least I know this, that if a man is overworked in any degree”— it was in 1884, which is why he used the word “man”. I say that in case my sisters get—[Laughter.] They are a dangerous bunch. William Morris said: “at least I know this, that if a man is overworked in any degree he cannot enjoy the sort of health I am speaking of; nor can he if he is continually chained to one dull round of mechanical work, with no hope at the other end of it; nor if he lives in continual sordid anxiety for his livelihood”. That is an apt description of the working poor in our country today. They worry about getting a job and holding on to it, and the jobs that they take do not satisfy or fulfil them economically or in terms of their wellbeing. I hope that we can use the committee’s report to deal with some of those issues. Members have said today that looking at the constitutional perspective will solve things, but they are not easily solved. We will still need to attack employers and we will need to try hard to get new employers.

I say to Mike MacKenzie that we cannot absolve ourselves. This is happening right under our noses. It is not just in the private sector that people are being exploited. We in the Parliament are creating conditions that enable the subcontracting of caring responsibilities by our local authorities for cheaper rates of pay. We have people cleaning ministerial offices who do not get the living wage. We have a responsibility. Of course, other Governments should take responsibility for employment rights and other things.

I would need to be convinced that, under this or any future Government, such powers would be used on behalf of the workers. I do not know whether there is any evidence—I have not seen any—that that would be the case because, right under our noses, we see women workers being contracted out of local authorities and being asked to work with poorer conditions and fewer holidays. That is happening now, so we need to get our act together and deal with those issues. Only after doing that can we perhaps argue about the nuances of where the power lies. Is there the will in this place to put some of those matters right? We had very good cross-party recommendations on the care of older people, in which we asked for a review of the competitive nature of local authorities’ processes, for the Care Inspectorate to be looked at and for the living wage to be applied to those who look after our elderly. That is the test for this Parliament. Are we prepared to make that happen? I leave that to members.

2. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Justice last met the chief executive of the Scottish Court Service and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02096)

Did the cabinet secretary discuss the recent progress in enabling SCS to access information held by the Department for Work and Pensions and other Whitehall departments in order to pursue Scotland’s 150,000 defaulters on fines? Does he agree that, in order to make real progress, we need to increase the number of dedicated fines enforcement officers to pursue the nearly 6,000 people who need to be pursued each year? Those officers sometimes operate with a hand behind their back, and they have their job made more difficult by sheriffs and fiscals who continue to impose fines on people who have already defaulted. What action will the cabinet secretary take to address that issue in Scotland?

A lot has been said about the change in demographics, which it is noticeable was referred to by all my colleagues on the Health and Sport Committee as well as by others. One of our greatest challenges—whether that be under the current budget or under an increased budget to meet increased demand—will be how we manage that change. What is surprising, though, is that we did not discover that just today, given the reports that we have had from Beveridge, Christie and Lord Sutherland. We have also had six years of an SNP Government. I recognise that the cabinet secretary has been in the job for only seven months—as he keeps telling us—so I do not hold him personally responsible, but that challenge needs to be recognised. We all know and should accept that change is difficult for all politicians, but it seems to be even more difficult for Governments that want to win a referendum. As I have said to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, I am concerned that we are dodging hard decisions and building up pressure for the future. We need to deal with the issues that we face. I think that we should judge Governments on their actions rather than on their good intentions, but I know that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing would like to get to that point and I hope that he wins his fight in the Cabinet and is able to address these issues. As has been rightly said, we should look at what those who deliver services, who are seeking such a change, have said about the Government’s strategic approach. In its comments on the change funds that have been designed to drive change in the care system, the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisation stated: “We need to see a significantly accelerated shift of spend away from institutions”— the reference to institutional care includes residential care. The SCVO submission continued: “There is nothing in the current budget structure - on the face of it - that would serve as the necessary catalyst for this change.” Another concern was mentioned by the BMA, which stated: “The reduction in eHealth funding is concerning given that the Government is expecting IT integration between health and social care”. We need to be clear that, as part of that process, investment in information technology is carried through. The BMA submission goes on to say that it is very worried that the planned integration of health and social care will not be achievable. There is concern about the strategic approach, but there is also concern about the limited funds that are available and how they are being used. The Coalition of Care and Support Providers in Scotland said that the change fund spend on services and activities is “questionable in terms of the contribution they make to the agenda for reshaping care.” Age Scotland pointed out that research that it has carried out found that “despite the guidance prescribing 20 per cent of funding”— that is, the change fund— “be allocated for carers services in 2012/13, the reality is much less.” In Aberdeenshire, only £153,000 has been spent on carers services from a budget of £1.9 million. In Angus—

I could go on. There is a difference between the good intentions of Government and what we must do. Let us not allow things to continue to drift. We need to address the issue now—it cannot wait for an independence referendum.

I agree with Malcolm Chisholm, who said that he was puzzled by the nature of the debate. We had a flat performance from the cabinet secretary in his opening speech, confirming the embarrassing situation that he finds himself in, in being forced publicly to deny the views that he has argued in private. Whatever has happened to this modernising cabinet secretary? In the heady days of the historic concordat, we had the single outcome agreements, outcome-focused policy decisions, shared services across the public sector, and the integration of public services—and, of course, he has brought about the independent budget review. They were all radical at the time and prepared us for the change that needed to take place. That was in 2010. Crawford Beveridge described the financial challenge of our public sector as the biggest since the second world war. John Swinney has distanced himself from Crawford Beveridge today, but in 2010 he went on tour with Crawford Beveridge. John Swinney was so enthused by Beveridge’s report and what it found that he went on a public tour with him and attended public meetings with him. I distinctly recall one meeting that was reported to the Local Government and Communities Committee at that time, in Livingston the night before John Swinney gave evidence to my committee. If Crawford Beveridge was used to provide the economic imperative for action—I am not saying that John Swinney was wrong; I am saying that he was right—the Campbell Christie review was, of course, to provide the moral imperative. The message from Christie could not be any clearer. He said: “Alongside a decade of growth in public spending, inequalities have grown, too. Between the highest and lowest achievers at school, between the life expectancy and health of the richest and the poorest, and between the static wages of the lowest paid and the booming bonuses of the highest, our public services have somehow failed to make our country fairer.” That was what the cabinet secretary was presented with at the time. In hard times, we have a bigger responsibility—which John Swinney is now shirking—to get this right.

the cabinet secretary may puff himself up like a peacock in the chamber, but we know that he is the chicken in the Cabinet who is not prepared to fight for what is right. In hard times, we as politicians have a bigger responsibility to get this right. That is the cause—it is serious stuff. It is our cause, because there is a price being paid by people across the country because of his failure to act and he will be held to account for that. That is the cause that motivates Labour. We want—as others here do—a fairer Scotland that shares the burden. Those of us who value public services cannot stand back and allow the quality of those services to diminish. At a time of disinvestment, it is even more important to plan that disinvestment. If only we had a cabinet secretary who was prepared to act on what he really believes. As the Joseph Rowntree Foundation has said, to secure social justice and sustainable economic growth, “The real test will be achieving fairness in the midst of cuts.” Disinvesting how—I am sorry, but I cannot read my own writing. Deciding now to cut spending is an even more important issue.

We all know—this is why we need a debate on universality—that universal healthcare does not cure the inequality between rich and poor. The fundamental issue is that universality in itself does not cure those ills. It is dishonest to say that universality cures all. Universality is not a bad thing, but we are arguing that deciding how to cut spending and who should take more of the strain is even more important than deciding how much the cuts should be. That is what the Joseph Rowntree Foundation says. It is important that we get this right and that we get beyond the referendum. Whatever our constitutional position, we will still have the problems. To put off the decisions from 2010 until 2014 and then 2016 will be a betrayal of the people whom we are supposed to represent. We need to act; John Swinney knows that we need to act, but he has been prevented from acting because he has lost the debate in the Cabinet. We need somebody to make that case in the Cabinet and we need an SNP Government that can match the rhetoric with action.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

8. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Justice last met with cashback partners and what was discussed. (S4O-01982)

I refer the cabinet secretary to the recently published cashback for communities programme, which acknowledged that, disappointingly, we do not know the extent of the impact of the programme on young people. Given that the cashback programme has been running for six years and that £30 million has been claimed by the partners, is it not scandalous that we do not know how it has helped to divert young people from crime and antisocial behaviour? What will the cabinet secretary do to address those failings?

You rightly say that the objective of the reform is to widen access to education for people in deprived areas, for example, and vulnerable people with learning difficulties. A thousand learners are in James Watt College for precisely that reason. How will we ensure that the bill will ensure the best outcomes for people with learning disabilities? How will it ensure that they are not pushed out of our colleges as an unintended consequence?

The good news is that we are living longer; the bad news is that old age does not come alone and those extra years are not always healthy ones. Men and women can commonly expect to spend, respectively, about seven and nine years in poor health. Scotland’s national dementia strategy tells us that approximately 71,000 people in Scotland have dementia and that the figure is likely to double in the next 25 years. On Tuesday, the Finance Committee was the latest parliamentary committee to highlight the significant demographic change, which the Office for Budget Responsibility has identified as the key source of long-term pressure on public finances. Local authorities, which are contending with increased demand and less money, and health services, which are having to deal with and manage unplanned admissions, clearly need no reminding of the task or the situation that we face. Despite the recognition of the challenge of delivering health and care services at a time of rising demand and reduced finances, despite the work of committees of the Parliament—through my convenership of the former Local Government and Communities Committee and the Health and Sport Committee I, like others, have been on the case for a considerable time—and despite the work of Beveridge and Christie, and the Government and others, progress has been slow and patchy. It is good that we have arrived at the current point, because we cannot continue as we are. It is important that we move forward and instigate significant cultural change in the delivery of services. If we are to address the huge challenges that are to come, as the cabinet secretary recognises, the integration of health and social care must be at the heart of that change. However, as he knows and has referred to today, the barriers are significant. Reform of public services is difficult. If it were easy, we would have done it. It is worth recognising that sustained cultural change can be achieved best through working in co-operation, however difficult that can sometimes be. If we are to achieve change, it cannot be seen to be done simply because of financial pressures. The truth is that we should have been doing this many years ago when there was more money. The objective is to improve services, and we must be careful not to lose the focus on that. As we have seen with self-directed support, change cannot be perceived as a cheap option. If the major budget holders—the Government, the health service and local authorities—are still wrestling with one another and do not trust one another to share or shift budgets, is it any wonder that the minor parties in the process, the third and independent sectors, feel put upon, as my Health and Sport Committee colleague Aileen McLeod referred to? That tension seeps into the workforce and into public perception. People are sometimes fearful about change and think that the process will lead to a decline in standards or working conditions. Although the Health and Sport Committee of course wants the focus to be on putting the person first—we all agree on that—we need to address such fears and concerns. We have had the current national care standards for 10 years. Before the bill is introduced, we need to produce a new set of national care standards, which has human rights at its heart, to reassure all the people who use and work in the health service that the main objective of the integration process and the bill is to maintain and improve the services that we provide. We need to ensure that we have good regulation when those rights are established. If we are to ensure that rights and standards are properly implemented, maintained and monitored, it is essential that we bring together and properly resource and fund the care inspectorate and Healthcare Improvement Scotland. We must deal honestly with a commissioning and procurement process that is predatory and causes great mistrust and pain in the third sector, where we see people shuffling along their problems. It is unfortunate that the process is often regarded not as improving services and efficiency but as a crude attempt to drive down costs at the expense of quality. Committees of the Parliament have dealt with some of the worst excesses during the past few years. If we are saying that the integration of health and social care is the most important issue, we cannot ignore workforce planning in the area. The people who work in the area deserve and must have our respect. The status of the existing and newly emerging workforce, which is essential to delivery, must be recognised, and the sector must be offered training and at least the living wage. Only if we address those issues can we have a successful process that improves efficiency and quality of delivery of public services to our most vulnerable people. If we address some of the issues before we introduce the bill or alongside it, the process will be easier. If the cabinet secretary is up for revolutionary change and wants to be radical, he will have my support.

Mark McDonald promised that the extra time that he was given would be worth it. When will the member stop reading out the minutes of Aberdeen City Council and get to the good part of his speech?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the consultation be completed and the national care standards put in place in order to inform those who set the outcomes? That seems a natural process.

I thank the minister for his statement. We should not forget that yesterday was a sad and disappointing day, which will not be forgiven lightly, as Jim Murphy said. In his statement, the minister moved on quickly to describe the benefits of independence. There was a wee debate about different budgets. Will he say what the start-up costs would be for the Scottish armed forces? How much does a single jet fighter cost, or a single conventional submarine? We need to worry about not just the budgets but the start-up costs. Has the Scottish Government done any work on that?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what action the Cabinet Secretary for Justice will take to reduce delays in post-mortems in the west of Scotland. (S4O-01854)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that response, although the information that I have is clearly different from the information that his officials have provided to him. I am sure that the cabinet secretary appreciates the traumatic experience of a sudden death in any family. The information that I have is that the average wait for a post-mortem in the Southern general hospital is 10 days. It can go beyond that, of course. In a recent, but not isolated, incident in my constituency, my constituent’s mother passed away on the seventh of the month, the post-mortem did not take place until the 22nd and the funeral could not take place until the 26th. I am sure that the cabinet secretary would agree that that is an unacceptable wait for any bereaved family, and that it adds to the trauma of a sudden death. Will the cabinet secretary work with the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to investigate those matters and end the unacceptable delays that affect bereaved families in the west of Scotland?

Mr Green confirmed the details that I have outlined this morning, which contradict the cabinet secretary. There was a 10-day wait, according to Mr Green. However, the point is that there are two cabinet secretaries involved in this matter—the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. Since I spoke to Mr Green, I have asked the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing questions about the issue. Both cabinet secretaries should get together and get it sorted.

I am sure that we will hear a lot in the debate about the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, the Scottish Medicines Consortium, individual patient treatment requests, quality-adjusted life years—QALY—costs, modifiers, area drug and therapeutic committees, value-based pricing, new duties and so on. If anybody is confused after hearing that list, they will know why we need a review into what is a complex set of arrangements that is supposedly designed to ensure that people get access to the medicines that they require when they face serious circumstances. I will not say too much about the Health and Sport Committee’s point of view on the issue, because we have not come to a view on it, so I will be careful in that regard. However, I am very proud that we have been able to help push the issue along. I would argue that pushing it along was required. The then Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy said in the chamber on 29 September 2011 that she would give “further consideration” to the role of area drug and therapeutic committees and that she would need to look at that issue and that of individual patient treatment requests to inform the Government’s point of view. Indeed, I was in correspondence with the cabinet secretary at that time and was told in January 2012 that the chief medical officer for Scotland and the chief pharmaceutical officer for Scotland had convened a clinical group that would focus on ensuring timeous consideration of SMC processes and would look at individual patient treatment requests. It has therefore taken us a wee while. It would be remiss of me not to recognise the important role played by the people who campaigned to get access to medicines not just for themselves and who were seriously denigrated in a recent article in the Daily Record—one of them is a constituent of mine. They have done a good job in bringing the issue to the Parliament and have campaigned not just for themselves but against an unjust system that they found difficult to understand and that denied them life-changing medicines.

The member will speak in the debate. I hope that I will be given additional time.

I accept that the premise of Ms McAlpine’s article was that politicians should not be involved in the process at all. However, we set the parameters and we provide the money, so we have a legitimate role in the process, which I have described. We have debated the issue, but we have delayed and dragged our feet in dealing with a process that is acknowledged to be failing people.

That is why the cabinet secretary instigated a review of the process. It matters that we lost precious time. That time was not as precious for us as it was for Anne Fisher, whose access to a particular medicine has been determined through procedures that are being reviewed and which the Parliament has found to be not fit for purpose. It is time that we reviewed Anne Fisher’s case.

14. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing last met the chief executive of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and what was discussed. (S4O-01782)

The sudden death of a loved one can be a traumatic experience for any family, and in most cases it will result in a post mortem. In the west of Scotland, that procedure would likely be carried out at the Southern general hospital in Glasgow. The current wait for a post mortem there is 10 days, but in some local circumstances that can stretch to more than two weeks. Such a wait increases the trauma for the family, disrupts religious and cultural practice, and makes the bereavement process even more difficult. Will the minister instruct his officials to bring together Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board and the Scottish fatalities investigation unit to ensure that there is an investigation into that unacceptable situation for bereaved families?

10. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth last met the chief executive of Scottish Enterprise and what issues were discussed. (S4O-01718)

I recognise that, on his visit to Inverclyde, the cabinet secretary recognised the significant potential for cruise liner business there and in the rest of Scotland. The Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism has also said encouraging words about cruise liners.

The potential at Inverclyde needs to be extended and maximised. Given the support of the cabinet secretary and the minister, have they taken the time to impress on Scottish Enterprise’s chief executive the importance of the project in Inverclyde? Will the cabinet secretary give us an update on that?

2. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Justice last met the chief executive of the Scottish Court Service and what was discussed. (S4O-01670)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his response. I have obtained figures from the Scottish Court Service that show that, in the past three financial years, 90,000 fines that were issued by the justice system had to be chased up with an arrest warrant because offenders failed to pay up. In addition, more than 200,000 citations have been issued ordering offenders to appear before the courts for non-payment. In light of those figures, can we now acknowledge that a policy that allows more offenders to be fined as an alternative to prosecution has failed to achieve its objectives, is wasting police and court time and, more worryingly, is letting down victims of crime? Will the cabinet secretary instigate a review of that failed policy to ensure that those who break the law face the full consequences of their actions?

If Scotland has lots of water, Greenock and Inverclyde is blessed with an abundance of water, which the bill recognises as a real resource. In Greenock history, water was long ago recognised as a resource. Loch Thom is an internationally renowned engineering marvel designed by the Scottish civil engineer Robert Thom who used water assets to address public health issues through the provision of clean drinking water for the town while, at the same time, fuelling the industrial revolution by providing water power for our mills and refineries. Although those mills and refineries may now be gone, the good-quality water that I drink at home every day has been sustained—a core responsibility delivered by a public company, Scottish Water, that is clearly valued in that context and supported by the Scottish public. Whatever the recognised benefits of the bill, there are clear responsibilities, of which the provision of clean, good-quality water should remain a priority. If the bill can achieve the worthy aims and outcomes of Robert Thom’s invention and engineering skills, it will have achieved what it sets out to achieve—the greater good and impressive outcomes for social, business and other interests. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement today, in response to the committee, that the Scottish Government recognises the importance of our water resource in the widest possible terms—in terms of the environment and the social benefits as well as any financial benefit that may accrue to Scottish Water and its customers. Although the ambitions are clear and worthy, we need to recognise that questions remain. Who will ensure that the environmental and social considerations are given equal weighting in any discussions? Who will make the decisions? There is a genuine worry that, although it is worthy to see the benefit of water as a resource and to have the commercial development associated with that, that may divert Scottish Water away from its core principles. These questions need to be asked. Who will ensure that the partnership working that happens now will continue and that the views of those partners will be respected? What of the community planning process, involving public bodies, that takes place now? How will that be recognised in the bill? What requirements will be placed on Scottish Water to work effectively with other public bodies—as happens now—and communities, particularly in the area of renewables? Those questions are important to my constituency and its community, which wishes to be a full member of the Scottish hydro nation. We want to use to the full the infrastructure that has been bequeathed to us—Loch Thom, the Greenock Cut and all the infrastructure that is on the hills that stretch along the Greenock to Port Glasgow waterfront. We want to be able to use that effectively and to good purpose, particularly to develop the ideas that have come from the community and been taken up by the local authority about how we can best develop a renewable electricity supply from those resources and the natural environment. I believe that the bill moves us in the right direction. Nevertheless, given the cabinet secretary’s opening remarks, I am sure that she recognises that there are still more questions to be answered and much more work to be done if we are to realise our ambitions both in the Greenock and Inverclyde area and for our nation to be a hydro nation. I welcome the bill.

4. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing last met Healthcare Improvement Scotland and what was discussed. (S4O-01611)

I draw the minister’s attention to Healthcare Improvement Scotland’s recently published thematic report as part of its inspections of care for older people in acute hospitals. Although there are no doubt positive things in the report, I am sure that he will be as concerned and disappointed as I am that six out of eight hospitals inspected failed to screen patients for dementia; seven out of eight failed to put care plans in place; four out of four failed to screen patients for nutrition and hydration; and three out of four did not provide patients with the appropriate utensils for eating and drinking. What are the minister and his officials doing to ensure that action is taken to address the issues in all hospitals in Scotland?

It is our national health service—it does not belong to any political party—and that is what the debate, although limited in time, is about. We recognise that, as the cabinet secretary stated, the NHS budget has been protected and health is certainly better off than some of the other portfolios, which have suffered greater cuts. However, as Jackson Carlaw pointed out, that is not the point. Significantly, the budget is not keeping pace with the increasing cost of health service inflation, which, as everyone knows, is a serious problem. It is difficult to keep pace because of the increased demand for staffing resulting in increased staffing costs and—as has been highlighted over the past few days—an increase in prescription costs. Those are all demands on our health service. We are also well aware of the projected 67 per cent increase in the population with a disability over the next 20 years, of the fact that the number of over-85-year-olds will double over the same period and of the estimated 40 per cent increase in heart disease, stroke and dementia by 2025. It is in that context—not the context of one year to another, or of one Government to another—that we must ensure that our health service sustains and maintains its reputational value to us all. Warning signs abound. There is a £1 billion maintenance backlog. I concede that perhaps half of that is more serious, but even half of that figure is an indication that we are unable, at this time, to maintain the fabric of hospital buildings. There is an amber warning from Audit Scotland about financial planning. Boards are selling off the family silver to get from one year to another. We understand what will happen if that is allowed to continue. The Argyll and Clyde NHS Board is no longer here because it tried to sell off land to survive and pay its bills, which, of course, got larger and larger. Audit Scotland also points out the significant high risk relating to the efficiencies that need to be made in our health service. The risk of health boards not meeting the efficiency savings is another warning sign. To return to Jackson Carlaw’s point, the warning signs have been well recognised and they are accepted across the board. They must be addressed. There are concerns that were not addressed as they should have been during the period of the previous cabinet secretary. We have not heeded Campbell Christie’s warning to radically change the health service strategy to one of prevention. We have not made a fast enough change in pace to integrate health and social care. We still do not have a clear understanding of how the budgets work between local government and the health boards, or of what they do and what they are expected to do. There are big gaps. Plaudits are given to the health service staff—we have done that in all our speeches—but they are used as a shield so that no criticism can be made. Let us listen to them. The Royal College of Nursing said quite clearly that there is a difference between protecting the budget and protecting the quality of services; the British Medical Association says that we cannot go on as we are; the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations says that we cannot continue in the same way; Unison says that salami slicing of the budget cannot go on forever; and RCN-BMA says that the lack of joined-up thinking in the workplace is not acceptable. Take those messages away today; listen and act, and save our national health service.

I ask myself why I am speaking in a debate about business tourism. I asked some people earlier, “I am from Inverclyde—why am I in the debate at all?” but I put my mind to it. I am here to recognise the potential of tourism in the widest sense for a community that was based on traditional industries. As we know—actually, we cannot believe it—Greenock has turned into a gateway to Scotland for more than 60,000 passengers every year. We are constrained only by the physical resources. We have had positive discussions with Scottish Government ministers about a bid to extend the quay and the quayside. This week, I had an update from Scottish Enterprise and the urban regeneration company on that project, which should increase the number of passengers. The passengers flow out of the area, because they come to visit Glasgow and Edinburgh, but there are significant benefits for us locally. We look for a bit in return. We are the gateway. The visitors flow into Glasgow and other places and we will never be able to compete with the bigger venues for conferences, but we ask Glasgow in particular to recognise the wider offer. The experience that people have in Scotland should not be bound to the cities. We should make connections out into places such as Inverclyde where, 20 minutes away, people can sail on the Firth of Clyde in conditions that Chay Blyth considers some of the best sailing in the world. It is less than an hour from the SECC. People could come down and have lunch on one of those massive cruise liners that come and visit. They could also visit the film set of “Waterloo Road”, which is one of the most popular dramas in the UK, with 5 million viewers every week. The important point is that we recognise that getting people into the area transforms their mindset that this is an old shipyard town and allows them to see the area’s potential for the future. Of course, there is also the effect on the sense of pride of local people, who will welcome visitors to the area. Finally, we are also giving notice that we want to break into the small conference business market. The new Beacon arts centre, which has been supported by successive Governments here in the Scottish Parliament and by the lottery, will open shortly. With that 500-seat theatre, we will have an opportunity to work in that market and to make a claim for small conferences. Maybe a new hotel will spring up to support that initiative and will work alongside the existing budget hotels as well as Gleddoch House, which has all the leisure facilities—golf and everything else—with spectacular views over the Clyde. That is all only 20 minutes from Glasgow airport. Although I recognise that we will never compete with the big boys, it is important that people recognise the wider offer and the facilities that are on their doorstep that will enhance the experience of those who attend conferences. Although my comments today might be ambitious or speculative, I think that I can say with certainty that all those who have had the experience of visiting Inverclyde will recognise that there is nothing uncertain about the warm welcome that visitors will get when they arrive in Inverclyde.

The member will agree that the Commonwealth games are a great opportunity for places such as Inverclyde, not just in sporting links but in cultural links. Many of the grandparents or ancestors of participants in the games from Australia, New Zealand and Canada left these shores from Greenock, and more could be done to ensure that they walk the streets that their forefathers walked.

Does the cabinet secretary accept that, although we all support that policy, the issue is how we pay for it? Does he believe that a regressive pay freeze should not be subsidising free personal care?

I have been around in the Parliament for as long as many others, although there are not as many of us as there used to be. We were around for some of those debates, and obviously we believed in what we were doing at that time, particularly around supporting people in elderly care. There is no doubt about that. However, in looking back over that time, I do not remember there being a great debate about the Scottish welfare system in those years. It is not about that; we are talking about a short-term crisis. Members can call me a cynic if they like, but I recall that many of the policies that are being lauded in this afternoon’s debate came about partly as a result of political wheeling and dealing rather than as a result of sound cost benefit analysis and a clear objective to create a better Scotland. In some cases, they were about coalition politics. We extended to the whole of Scotland the free travel that was already available in Fife and Strathclyde. We were anxious at that time to be different from down south, and the policies were sometimes reactions to what was happening elsewhere. As politicians, we all like our nuggets in the manifesto, do we not? We all had our offers to people in our manifestos, to harvest their votes. Let us get the issue into perspective. This is not a debate about the Scottish welfare system, and it never has been. As I said, we thought that it would be a good idea to extend the free travel that was being delivered locally in places such as Strathclyde and Fife. For good measure, we made it available to everybody aged 60 and over. Did we really believe at that time that 20 per cent of those people—I am saying “we”, because we did most of it—

It is 20 per cent according to Bruce Crawford’s own figures. Did we expect that 20 per cent of the people who were entitled to a card would use it to travel to work? Is that what we intended? The unintended consequence has been that the lowest-paid workers in Scotland have faced increasing costs to travel to work because the scheme is not being funded as it should be.

Yes, but as I mentioned, the scheme is not being funded as it should be. SNP candidates in Inverclyde who have some knowledge of the bus system have protested loudly that that is not being done. Who would have thought, when we put in place support for elderly care, that that would be at the cost of quality? When care workers go into pensioners’ homes, they do not even take their coats off and they do not make eye contact with people. That is not quality. Given the expense of the system, that should not happen. Who would have thought that, as the Health and Sport Committee has discovered, free personal care would be subsidised by a wage freeze and the pushing down of the wages of workers in the field? Alex Neil rose— I see Alex Neil rising to his feet. Of course I accept his intervention.

Everyone in the chamber recognises the need to support elderly people in the community. We all agree with that; there is no difference of opinion on it. However, there is a difference on whether the commitment is there to ensure that that is properly funded and that the outcomes are what we would want for our own parents—that should be the test. More recently, who would have believed that free tuition fees are to be paid for by those who are striving to get to university? What an irony. If we do nothing else, it is time to acknowledge that we did not get it right in times of plenty. The words of Campbell Christie—who has been lauded today by SNP members—are crystal clear. He says: “Alongside a decade of growth in public spending, inequalities have grown, too. Between the highest and lowest achievers at school, between the life expectancy and health of the richest and the poorest, and between the static wages of the lowest paid and the booming bonuses of the highest, our public services have somehow failed to make our country fairer.” We have a big responsibility to get this right, in hard times. That is the cause that motivates those of us on this side of the chamber. We want to get a fairer Scotland that shares the burden better. In the face of what Crawford Beveridge has called the biggest public finance crisis since the second world war, those of us who value public services cannot allow the quality of those services, and the standing that they have in the community, to ebb away. At a time of disinvestment, it is even more important to plan that disinvestment. It is up to Scotland’s policy makers, as the Joseph Rowntree Foundation has said, to secure social justice and sustainable economic growth. The real test will be achieving fairness in the midst of cuts. Deciding how to cut spending and who should take more of the strain is even more important than deciding how much that cut should be. We face a reality check for devolution and we have a chance to prove that the new reality matches the rhetoric.

Will the member promise the chamber that she will look at the Official Report tomorrow and give me an apology?

Does the member have any outcomes for or proof of the advantages of residential rehab centres to show that they work better than any of the other proposals?

Will the member give way?

I give notice that I want to make a number of points and do not have enough time to take interventions. The consensus in the chamber and over time is that we have a very challenging problem, which has confronted previous Governments here and Governments throughout the world. We hear the minister’s justifiable claims for improvement in investment, but we must also recognise that the strategy has serious challenges. A point that I need to make, which has not been made too often, is that the issue is not just for the addicts. The families and communities that live with the problem should not be forgotten, and the enforcement aspects cannot be forgotten. There are low seizures of heroin in this country, which indicates where more work can be done. There are genuine worries about increasing use of cocaine, there is recent evidence of widespread use of so-called legal high drugs, and more evidence is coming forward on the long-term harmful effects of cannabis use. We should not forget that. Obviously, one issue that we are focusing on is that drug deaths in Scotland are at a 10-year high—the figure is as high as or higher than that in any other European country. Tragically, problem drug users have increased in my constituency since 2006. The current estimate is that there are 1,400, which is up from 600 in 2006. I have raised that issue not only today; last year, I had the opportunity to discuss with the minister last year’s peak of drug deaths. There are also the 20 deaths that we have faced this year. They are all tragedies. We must conclude or concede that topping up with methadone is a high-risk activity, and it should be recognised as that. In more than 50 per cent of the deaths in Inverclyde, methadone and topping up with it were issues. As I say, it needs to be recognised as a high-risk activity, and we need to implement measures to deal with it. We are not talking about the investment or the strategy today; rather, we are talking about outcomes. The strategy’s focus on the benefits of a focus on recovery was clear, but we still do not know how many drug users are being prescribed methadone across Scotland, how many are leaving the programme drug free, or how long they have been on the programme. There are no benchmarks for recovery that are based on the drug strategy, so we have no way of knowing how far down the road to recovery we are or how far there is to go before the goal of recovery-focused treatment for all drug users is realised. Until we get those benchmarks, we cannot examine what works and does not work. We must recognise that not all the 60,000 drug users whom Willie Rennie mentioned are recoverable. That is a horrible and hard thing to say, but some people take drugs because they enjoy them. They are in a particular age group, and will continue to take drugs and the top-up of methadone. That is the tragic reality. We also need to face up to the fact that some grandparents, who have been mentioned, have been heroin users for many years. They now take drugs just to feel normal—not to socialise or to have a party, but just to feel normal. It is unlikely that we will move those people on, so some radical strategies probably need to be applied to that group. They are not interested in or committed to recovery and are expending or soaking up money that could be used to support those who are committed to the programme. We cannot ignore that. That is one of the issues that we need to face up to. We need to test people’s commitment. People who are on the methadone programme should be tested regularly for topping up in order to identify their commitment, keep them safe and ensure that they are complying with the programme. If they are not complying and are not committed to recovery, appropriate action needs to be taken. If they are not committed to the programme, we cannot extend our commitment. The precious resources need to be shifted to ensure that those who are committed to recovery get the best treatment to ensure the best opportunity for recovery. I see that the minister is not in her place, but I hope that she will read the Official Report of the debate, take on some of those ideas and feed them into the review of the strategy that is under way.

For clarity, I mentioned that there are some people who are beyond help because they have been addicted for so many years that they take it to be normal. I do not write off those people for ever but, for significant periods of time, which may mean years, they will not be susceptible to committing to recovery. However, we are supporting those people at great cost, not just in financial terms but at the expense of those who are committed to coming off drugs now.

Presiding Officer—

9. To ask the Scottish Government how it ensures that people can access opportunities in further education. (S4O-01374)

As Audit Scotland has confirmed, colleges face major reforms and financial challenges, raising further concerns for the future of my local college, James Watt College, which, as the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will be aware, is in line for a further reduction in grant funding and is now expected to pay for a forced merger that it did not want. In that context, I ask again that access and opportunity for vulnerable students with complex needs be protected fully at this uncertain time. What specific measures are in place to ensure that vulnerable students will be taken into account and their needs will be acted on?

I thank David Torrance, my colleague from the Health and Sport Committee. We are well represented by speakers who are members—or former members, at least—of that committee; I am glad to be in that group. The motion gives us an opportunity to support and congratulate the 5th Fife scout group of Kirkcaldy in winning the Scottish championship award. I do not have the experience of personal involvement in the scouting movement that David Torrance and Dennis Robertson speak of. I was with the other lot—the Boys Brigade. By way of mitigation, my grandson is on his way to 1st Gourock beavers tonight at six o’clock, which he thoroughly enjoys and which I hope he will participate in for a long, long time. I was tempted to speak in the debate tonight to give a wee mention to Black’s of Greenock. The mention of Black’s in the motion caught my eye. and I thought that there was an opportunity for me to lead into scouting in Inverclyde. Black’s of Greenock was established when Thomas Black gave up his seagoing and established a sailmakers in Greenock in 1861. It is good to see that his name goes on long after him. Remembering scouting in Greenock and district gives me the opportunity to say that scouts there will recognise the efforts and achievements of the 5th Fife scout group of Kirkcaldy because, in the past 10 years, scouts in Inverclyde have won the championship in 2002 and 2009. I suppose that we are here to boast as well and share the congratulations. Scouting in the Inverclyde area has been long established. Members may know the Everton campsite, which was established in 1923. However, the scouting movement is not just a historical fact, of course; it is alive and surviving—indeed, it is thriving—and it has a future. There are just over 1,600 Inverclyde scouts, which is an increase of more than 100 per cent since 2007, among the communities of Wemyss Bay, Inverkip, Gourock, Greenock and Port Glasgow right up to Quarrier’s Village. They must be doing something right. Although he would deny it, the scouts are ably led by the irrepressible and ever-enthusiastic district commissioner, David McCallum, who makes not only scouts but MSPs work. I do not know how many events we have attended this year. There was the presentation of the millennium awards in St Patrick’s school in February. Apart from the Queen’s visit, of course, the single biggest event in the jubilee celebrations in Greenock was the scouts event. I joined them for that in Westburn church in June. The gang show will take place in November—David McCallum is organising it as we speak. Those events happen only because of the commitment of the volunteers. David McCallum would probably reject my mentioning him only, but I cannot mention all the volunteers and he represents an enthusiasm and commitment to serving the scouts well. In all the events, activities and achievements that have been mentioned and will, it is hoped, be accomplished, one of the proudest achievements that the scouts talk about is the initiative at Glenburn special needs school. There are 40 beavers and cub scouts there, supported by a dedicated team that ensures that even the most vulnerable children in our community can participate in scouting. With that commitment and dedication, they will always have a future.

We have not.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to assist the regeneration of Inverclyde. (S4O-01338)

Although I thank the minister for her response, I clearly differ with her about the investment in the URC. I see the Cabinet secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities shaking her head, but the evidence is clear. Nevertheless, I seek not conflict but consensus in how we can be positive and move forward in the area. Next year’s cruise season at Clydeport’s ocean terminal is set to be a record breaker, with 85,000 passengers coming through Inverclyde as the gateway to Scotland, and I am sure that the minister agrees that Andrew Hemphill, the terminal’s general manager, and his team deserve great credit for that. However, visitor numbers could be increased by 20 per cent if berthing capacity at the quayside were extended. Does the minister agree that such a move would provide a significant opportunity not just for Inverclyde but for tourism in Scotland, and will she meet the partners to ensure that that opportunity appears in Inverclyde’s business development plan?

Today we have deliberately moved the goalposts, Presiding Officer, but at least the playing field is level—and, if you are lucky, it is even a state-of-the-art 3G playing field. I should explain that this debate on grass-roots sport comes not on the back of a published report, but midway through an inquiry by the Health and Sport Committee. It is not the first time that a parliamentary committee has sought wider input in this way—my colleagues on the Education and Culture Committee would confirm that—but it is a first for the Health and Sport Committee. I would like to give a sense of the evidence that we have heard to date and I hope to do that within the allotted time. The message is that the committee welcomes members’ views, whether they are those of back benchers, ministers, or members of the cross-party group on sport. I am confident that the redoubtable convener of that group will have a thing or two to tell us later. I do not know whether any members went along to salute our Olympic heroes in Glasgow or Edinburgh last weekend or were among the 15,000-plus who turned out to welcome Andy Murray home. That inspiration, bounce and energy is something that we all want to continue into the build-up to Glasgow 2014. It was well described by a witness from Active Stirling, who told the committee about Andy Murray tweeting his 400m “split time” as compared with Mo Farah’s. It caused quite a stir online, apparently. The witness also said: “It is not about someone trying to be a gold-medal tennis player or 10,000m athlete, but it is vital that we capture the motivation that performance sport can give to physical activity.” There was mention of a “double-strand pathway”, which sounds high-falutin’, but just means both focusing on the elite side and ensuring that my granddaughter will still want to go swimming when she is a teenager. Our inquiry addresses three policy strands: the contribution of volunteers, the impact of sports clubs on their communities, and the importance of facilities—or, if you prefer, people, participation and places. It is people—the volunteers and the can-doers—who make community sport what it is. A gentleman from Argyll and Bute Council told us: “community sport hubs are not about buildings ... They are about people”. Leisure and Culture Dundee said that sports development through the hubs was about nurturing volunteers to pursue their “ambitions, dreams, visions, and aims”.—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 4 September 2012; c 2525, 2520.] We were told that volunteers should be given clear information about what was being asked of them and what they could expect in return. Atlantis Leisure, which is widely seen as a paragon of community-led facilities, talked about taking “the pain out of volunteering”. Its chairman told us that if administration was the issue, it would do the administration. He also said: “If the netball girls said, ‘We’d love to get new tunics, but we can’t afford them,’ we would get them tunics.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 11 September 2012; c 2585, 2586.] He said that small things made a big difference. Other witnesses spoke of the social value of local clubs. We were told that the clubs provide a network of volunteers, foster a sense of belonging, and bring people together through a sense of pride and collective purpose. It was even suggested that their strength can provide an indication of the levels of wellbeing in our communities. Development of community sport hubs is the prevailing direction of policy, and we heard much that sounded positive in that regard. However, several witnesses advised us not to overlook the clubs and individuals—who we all know about—that do valuable work outside that model. It is crucial that we increase participation, particularly among hard-to-reach groups such as young people in deprived areas, teenage girls, black and ethnic minorities, people with disabilities, those who have been put off sport at school and the older generation. It was Mark Twain who said: “I am pushing 60. That is enough exercise for me.” That might be apt in my case. However, as more of us live longer, such a view becomes less tenable. Indeed, one witness talked about a demand from the over-60s and over-70s for something called walking football, which, given his recent five-a-side injury, might be something for my deputy convener. I do not know what Bob Doris would say to that—I think that he already practises it.

Margo MacDonald will not draw me on that one. I am feeling enough hurt as it is. I am still not ready to talk about it, and certainly not publicly. We were told that accessibility is not just about affordability or proximity. A witness said that it is also about “allowing people who are entering their working lives, and beyond that, to find time in their day to take part in sport.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 11 September 2012; c 2608.] At the other end of the age spectrum, Swimming Scotland reported that 25 per cent of children leave primary school unable to swim, and that that figure is highest in poorer areas. One of Save the Children’s Scotland’s ambassadors, 16-year old Stefanie, said: “We’re just asking for the opportunity to swim … this is really important because it means you can stay safe, fit and connected.” Teenage girls are one of the groups that it is notoriously hard to get into sport. NHS Scotland therefore chose to try something different in putting together the fit for girls project. Rather than seeing the girls as the problem, it asked whether it might not be better to seek their buy-in at the point of design. The Robertson Trust echoed the approach, pointing to the success of its girls on the move initiative, which it said was achieved by allowing the target group to have a say in the development of the programme in a way that ensured that the girls were able to take part in activities that were of interest to them, such as dance, boxercise and yoga. The result of that approach was an impressive rate of continued participation, promoting personal development alongside the girls becoming more active. We frequently hear that there are not enough facilities, that they are expensive, that they are difficult to reach, or that they are of poor quality. Access to the schools estate and the facilities that are springing up appears to be a recurring theme in our evidence. Sportscotland is to report on the matter, and that report will be keenly read, even if it is published outwith the timeline of our inquiry. Schools are part of what is out there—or, perhaps, what is not out there. I was amused to read a submission from Ayr United football academy. Asked to list three issues about facilities, it wrote: “1) Lack of, 2) lack of, and 3) lack of—in no particular order!” Surely we can address some of those problems. Of course, even when there is somewhere for people to go, there is a concern about how the place will be treated. The secretary of Broxburn United Sports Club was relieved to report that his fears had gone unrealised. He said: “When we built the new facility, I was really worried about vandalism, but nothing like that has happened … in the two years since it opened. It has been great, and the kids treat it as their place now”.—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 11 September 2012; c 2605.] Before I finish, I want to touch on a theme that recurs through much of the committee’s work: preventive health.

I should recognise that you have blown the final whistle and sit down.

In that case, I will address the issue of preventive health. A number of witnesses mentioned the idea of general practitioner referrals to sport, but the most progress has been made by Atlantis Leisure. Its chairman told us that although the project was only a year old, the results were already “stunning” and he described the project as “a game changer”. I am conscious that a lot of our evidence so far has come from exemplar organisations. I think that committee members would agree that their enthusiasm and what they achieve in our communities comes across in their evidence. Their enthusiasm is infectious. However, we must recognise that we are dealing with the enthusiasts—the really committed people who are delivering. I will definitely sit down before the Presiding Officer blows the final whistle. I move, That the Parliament notes that the Health and Sport Committee is undertaking an inquiry into support for community sport, focusing on the contribution of people, particularly the role of volunteers, the contribution of local sports clubs, both to the preventative health agenda and their communities, the role that community sports hubs should play in encouraging sport in local communities and the importance of places for sport in terms of availability, accessibility, affordability and the quality of facilities, and that, in order to inform its final report, the committee would welcome the views of all members on these key themes and what has emerged so far in evidence.

We have heard from colleagues who have touched on a number of areas where patient care has fallen below acceptable standards. In my brief speech, I will focus on the levels of care for elderly patients with dementia or cognitive impairment. Concerns were identified by Healthcare Improvement Scotland during its recent inspection of wards across the country and have been raised by Alzheimer Scotland—Action on Dementia and the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. I have taken time to analyse some of Healthcare Improvement Scotland’s reports and, although it is important to note that the inspection watchdog has often highlighted the positive interactions between staff and patients, unfortunately it has also underlined a number of areas where the health boards must and need to improve. Ten inspection reports have been published so far, and I hope that the facts arising from them will not be disputed by the SNP front bench. Some concerns occur again and again. Patients are not being routinely assessed for dementia or cognitive impairment upon admission. Indeed, the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh recently reinforced that concern by stating that almost half of elderly patients on wards have dementia but have not been diagnosed. Care plans are not always put in place; health records are often incomplete; the number of times a patient is moved from one ward to another is not monitored; and the environment in the wards is not suited to the needs of patients with dementia. The result of those failures is that there will be elderly patients who, during their stay in hospital, will feel confused, frightened and isolated, which culminates in, as described earlier by Jackie Baillie, a loss of dignity to them as individuals, upset to their families and great reputational risk to the national health service. Those patients will not only feel a sense of helplessness, but be put at risk. The Royal College of Physicians has warned that the 1,600 patients with dementia who are in Scotland’s hospitals at any one time are “highly vulnerable” and at higher risk of death while in hospital. Now that I have covered some of the issues and concerns that have been raised by the reports, I will say a few words about the role of the health boards and Healthcare Improvement Scotland. Health boards need to understand the reasons for the poor level of care that has been identified by HIS, to ensure that they develop action plans that fully address the problems. However, at this time, I do not have full confidence that that is happening. HIS recently confirmed to me that it does not ask the health boards to examine the reasons for the inappropriate care that has been identified. Furthermore, HIS does not appear to monitor the action plans produced by the health boards. Moreover, it does not have the power to enforce action if the boards are failing to meet their own standards. It also appears that HIS does not have to validate the claims in the health boards’ self-assessments. I could go on and on. The minister, in his opening remarks, said that we should judge a Government by its actions. The question is, in light of the evidence, why has there been so little response? Why is there even less action? Why are we waiting for action in what is a serious situation?

I have two issues with the national planning framework 2. First, in my constituency, we felt that we lost out unjustifiably because of a matrix, a weighting and a decision-making process that acted against us in relation to offshore renewables construction. Secondly, the committee of which I am convener took evidence from many of the applicants to the national planning framework who lost out in that process. Can the minister assure us that the process will be open, transparent and well understood to ensure that there is the maximum number of applications and the maximum amount of success for jobs in Scotland?

Legislation and policy making can be an impersonal business, but I want to recount the very human story of Omar Haq, to whom the minister referred. Omar is an intelligent young man with his life and career ahead of him. He graduated a couple of years ago with a masters degree in human resources management and is currently looking for work. Employers take note. Omar Haq has cerebral palsy and he spoke eloquently to the Health and Sport Committee during its stage 1 consideration of the bill about the positive impact that access to self-directed support has had on his life. The bill has four options for self-directed support, one of which is the use of direct payments to employ a personal assistant. That is what Omar does. He described his personal assistant as fulfilling a personal need by enabling him to go about his day-to-day activities, including travelling on a bus and filling out application forms. Ultimately, the flexibility that is offered by direct payments enables Omar to take more control over not just his care but his life. It raises his ambition to what is possible and drives him on to greater levels of independence. That striving for independent living is at the heart of the aims of the bill. The committee received compelling evidence from Pam Duncan of the independent living in Scotland project that we should not be too focused on the process of self-directed support as an end in itself; instead, we were urged to look at its ability to empower those who use it to lead independent lives so that they may participate in society and live a full and ordinary life. As in Omar Haq’s case, it is not just the system of support that is important but what the system enables people to achieve. The committee believes that the core principle of independent living should be more explicit in the bill. I welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to explore the possibility of such an amendment. There are high expectations that the bill will bring greater freedom, choice, dignity and indeed control for people like Omar Haq, who require social care to maintain a quality of life and fulfil their potential. However, in the course of our scrutiny, the committee heard the changes that will be required of local authorities and independent and voluntary sector providers to ensure the success of the policy described as dramatic, wide ranging and difficult in every area. We heard evidence from practitioners about the individual, rather than collective files that will need to be kept. The changes were described as “seismic”. Local authorities seem to be in a variety of states of readiness. Some are further down the line than others in areas such as decommissioning group services, creating individual budgets around packages and embedding the concept of self-directed support in their assessment and care management processes. Concerns were raised with the committee about the approach of some councils to implementing self-directed support, and the impact of that on service users. The issue appears to get very complex at that level, although the problems are no less for that. We drilled down below the usual suspects as we took evidence. We found invaluable the insight that was provided by service users and carers at discussion sessions co-ordinated by the Princess Royal Trust for Carers and the independent living in Scotland project. Strong views were expressed by individuals about the implementation of self-directed support alongside reassessment processes in Glasgow. Bob Doris touched on that. That negativity was put into context by service users who had been on the receiving end of cuts to their budgets. For them, self-directed support had got off to a bad start and was not an empowering process. Self-directed support cannot be seen as camouflage for cuts—I was pleased to hear the minister recognise that. The perception of the bill is important in terms of poisoning the process at an early stage. If things seem to be imposed on people, the bill could be seen as having a cuts agenda—that denies the opportunities that the bill would offer people. The Scottish Government must ensure that the system is robust and that service users are offered a package that meets their needs. I understand that officials are working with COSLA to assess whether there is merit in establishing a national threshold for access to formal support. Perhaps the minister can say something about that later. The committee believes that the statutory complaints procedure is inappropriate for dealing with disputes that arise regarding an individual’s social care assessment . As the Law Society of Scotland told the committee: “An appeals procedure is about saying that we think that something has not gone right and asking where we want to get to and what we want to put in place. Complaints procedures tend to be backwards looking”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 15 May 2012; c 2269.] and focused on apportioning blame. Local authorities need to make a clear distinction between complaints and appeals. The committee urges the forthcoming Scottish Government working group on social work complaints procedures to endorse the need for such a distinction. I heard the minister’s comments earlier that that work is going on. As well as focusing on service users, the committee’s scrutiny took into account the views of unpaid carers, because without Scotland’s army of unpaid carers our health and social care system would grind to a halt. They play a vital role in the provision of care in Scotland. We heard first hand from carers of their desire for the proposed discretionary power to become a duty on local authorities to provide support following an assessment. Florence Burke of the Princess Royal Trust for Carers suggested: “Potentially, a small investment for carers ... who want to take up self-directed support in their own right” could go a long way. She told us that it could even “help to maintain the £10 billion savings to the public purse that carers provide by giving unpaid support.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 22 May 2012; c 2325.] The committee recognises that it is vital that carers are given support to protect their physical and mental wellbeing. The bill should underline that most moral of imperatives. Another key strand is the cost of the bill’s implementation, particularly at a time of reduced budgets. There is a major discrepancy in the estimates of how much the bill will cost to implement, with COSLA estimating that it could cost double the amount claimed by the Scottish Government. That difference is so great that it cannot be explained simply as the result of different methodologies. COSLA’s failure to share with the committee the details of individual cost estimates by local authorities is unacceptable—it is not acceptable for it to come to a committee and not be prepared to back up its argument, because the committee cannot determine whether the funding gap that was identified is real or imaginary. I am keen to seek assurances that there are sufficient resources to ensure that the bill can be implemented effectively. I look forward to hearing further updates from the minister on the on-going discussions that he described. Seriously, those discussions need to be out in the open—this is not something for back rooms. The committees exist to enable such open discussion. The bill holds challenges for service users and service providers alike. However, the committee believes that legislating on the policy of self-directed support should ensure uptake and promote greater consistency of approach across local authorities. The committee welcomes the proposed legislation.

Sadly, the minister will be aware of the increasing number of deaths from drug addiction and, of course, of the high figures in Inverclyde, which we discussed last year. She will also understand that there is a maturing population of drug addicts who live alone and in isolation. How will the naloxone programme help those people who are using on their own?

I, too, thank Annabel Goldie for giving us the opportunity to have the debate. I have no doubt that “River City” has gained a place in our hearts. It seems to interest people across the board. My family—from my youngest grandson to his great-grandfather, my father, who is 86—are regular viewers. The programme has a message for everyone. In addition to the programme’s entertainment value and all that it brings in economic terms to the community of Dumbarton and the lower reaches of the Clyde, I contend that its 10 years of production—in which it saw off the difficult early years—must have positively influenced the BBC’s significant decision to relocate its top award-winning drama to Inverclyde. “Waterloo Road” is a successful drama that has 5 million viewers UK-wide. That gives us undoubted opportunities to market the area. We have seen all the earlier benefits of connections with the community and we expect good economic and cultural benefits from “Waterloo Road”, too.

The BBC has made a good start in Greenock and Inverclyde, including at the old Greenock academy, which Annabel Goldie knows well. As I said, such programmes present us with tremendous opportunities to market the area. Our shared river location is a great spot for filming. A storyline on “Waterloo Road” was about not Inverclyde but the attraction of the river and had a link to Faslane naval base. We also have the Argyll hills. We have a great marketing opportunity. For film-makers, we have the other attraction of a varied urban background—of Victorian architecture and the post-industrial, sad areas that excite and attract film-makers, just as they attracted the makers of the beautiful film “Dear Frankie” and the more challenging “Sweet Sixteen”. Such activity needs to be recognised for the opportunity that it presents. Over the period, our public services have gained the experience to deal with film production, with all the advantages that that can bring. Strathclyde Police works with film production and has a knowledge of its needs, and the local authorities now have greater experience of film crews out on location, which is an advantage. Whether we like it or not, we are also developing a shared campus for Clydebank, Paisley, James Watt and Greenock colleges. As we develop that shared campus, we have the opportunity to take advantage of and recognise the excellent state-of-the-art facilities for sound and video production at James Watt College. If we add to that the exciting prospect of local television, the opportunities are extensive. Our new Beacon arts centre in Inverclyde will also provide modern facilities right in the heart of the community for both travelling film crews and the local community. Patricia Ferguson kicked off the project years ago with her announcement of £12 million in funding to support it. I mention all those advantages because I believe that the assets that we have in the lower Clyde area give us a great and significant opportunity. Can we use the 10th birthday celebration of “River City” and the birth of “Waterloo Road” on the other side of the river to recognise that we have a tremendous opportunity to create a new hub of creative activity and innovation in the lower reaches of the Clyde, with all the economic and cultural benefits that that can bring? I have contacted Creative Scotland and hope to get it into the area so that we can use some of its expertise to help us to do that. I hope that the minister will support that endeavour.

Has the cabinet secretary further considered those who are most vulnerable, who need the support of our further education colleges and who do not naturally go into employment—those with special needs?

I thank the minister for mentioning me in his speech and for reminding people that I have had a concern about the issue since 2005. Indeed, for the completeness of the record, that was so much so that, on the day that was mentioned, I voted against the minister and my own Government because the minister refused to give assurances on the application of TUPE. Since then, of course, we have had the Gourock to Dunoon tender without the assurance of TUPE. I will get to the nub of the matter. When the contract for the Clyde and Hebrides ferries, which is about to expire, is replaced, will the minister give assurances to those people who work at CalMac headquarters ticketing operation in Gourock that they will be protected in the process, unlike the people involved in the Gourock to Dunoon run?

You stopped it happening.

This week we all recognise the contribution that Scotland’s 650,000 carers make. I am confident that the cabinet secretary will be as concerned as I am and others are about this week’s survey of more than 3,000 carers, 80 per cent of whom believe that their caring role has an impact on their health. We know that work takes place, as she has just described, and that support is in place for many but, obviously, many carers are missing out. What action can we take to ensure that all carers receive the help that they need?

This has been an interesting debate, and it has been interesting to listen to the expert views of many solicitors who have participated in it: the majority of members who have spoken up to now are or were legal practitioners. However, as the subject is the rights of victims, I will follow Mark McDonald’s lead and discuss the stories and experiences of constituents who have come to me because, as victims, they have felt let down by the justice system. A woman came to me who had suffered domestic abuse, harassment and violence for many years at the hands of her former partner. He appeared in court but was let off by the sheriff with the warning that, if stitches had been required following the latest assault, he would have gone to prison. Within months, he was back in court. He had gone to her house and stabbed her, as a result of which she required an emergency procedure and hospitalisation. The stabbing also took place in front of an infant. Despite the brutality of the attack, however, he did not receive a custodial sentence. Given that the woman’s previous experience was of another sheriff saying that if she had required hospitalisation he would have gone to prison, she was amazed that the process could lead to such an outcome. My constituent made representations and we spoke to the procurator fiscal. We argued that the decision was unduly lenient. Most people are not aware that there is an appeal process that can be followed by the Crown if it believes that a decision is unduly lenient, but the time in which such discussions can take place is very constrained. My constituent has appealed, but how long the appeal will take and whether it will be successful is another test for the courts. We all know that people who have been convicted of serious crimes have the right to appeal—we frequently read about such cases—and that some appeals are dealt with relatively quickly. I ask the cabinet secretary whether the consultation will address the imbalance in the system, and whether he will ensure that victims are not passive participants in the process, as he suggested, and are made aware of their right to make representations to the fiscal and the court if they think that there has been undue leniency. Another constituent, who raised his head above the parapet after witnessing a murder, has been badly let down. After giving his witness statement in court, he and his family were subjected to systematic intimidation. In direct breach of their bail conditions, the accused would stand outside my constituent’s house, looking into the property, threatening physical violence and threatening to petrol bomb the home. Despite the threats of physical violence—which are hard to prove, of course—and the fear and anxiety that they caused the witness and his family, the court did not enforce the bail conditions. That surprised my constituent, given that the police had thought it necessary to install a panic button in their home. That is another example of the disconnect between services that Mark McDonald mentioned. Such inconsistency does much to affect people’s confidence in coming forward as witnesses to less serious crimes. I could go on, but this will be my final story from my constituency. Many members will be familiar with John Muir, who campaigned for tougher sentences for people who are convicted of knife crime. His son Damian was stabbed to death in Greenock nearly five years ago by someone who had numerous convictions and who had been let out on bail but had breached the bail conditions. I am sad to say that in my 13 years as an MSP that is not the only murder case that I have come across involving a perpetrator who was out on bail. There is an issue there. I know that it is difficult to address such issues—if it was easy we would have sorted them—but I wanted to talk about the issues that victims have raised with me and about the inconsistencies in the system. The responses from the justice system cause confusion and uncertainty and sometimes add insult to injury, compounding the trouble that victims face. What is more, such inconsistency undermines people’s faith in the justice system. People lose faith and stop reporting crimes, and criminals go free as a result. I welcome a number of the aims in the Government’s consultation paper, such as improving the information that is available to victims and witnesses about the cases that affect them, involving victims more in the judicial process and giving victims the opportunity to make oral representations to the Parole Board. I also support the principle of “Requiring the courts to consider compensation in every case where a victim has suffered injury, loss or distress”, although I heard what Christine Grahame said about the practical problems in that regard. I also take the point about how such an approach might relate to the criminal injuries compensation scheme. However, there are anomalies in the scheme. If someone has the misfortune to suffer a serious assault, as another of my constituents did, the loss of earnings for the first 28 weeks is discounted and is not compensated for. For a low-paid worker who has a temporary contract at Amazon, the financial impact is immediate, whereas someone who works in the public sector will not have the same concerns during that period, because under their contract they are normally provided with help.

I appreciate that I have run out of time, Presiding Officer, and I thank you for allowing me to make a small contribution to the debate.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate on parliamentary reform. I suppose that it is surprising how quickly we can become set in our ways. When change is not part of the culture, as in this institution, it is often difficult to create the necessary change. Thankfully, we had the consultative steering group, which has been mentioned. Henry McLeish, the late Campbell Christie, Joyce McMillan, George Reid and Jim Wallace among others foresaw the need for on-going change in the Parliament, and they recommended that there should be self-assessment, monitoring and a taking stock of our policy and performance on an annual basis, set against the principles of power sharing, access, participation and equal opportunities. I welcome the committee’s work: although the changes have been long in coming, that is no reflection on the work of the current committee. I look forward to its on-going work, which has particular relevance for the business of the committees. The consultative steering group envisaged powerful committees that would ensure that our Parliament would not simply focus on debates in the chamber. The committees would have powers and responsibilities to initiate legislation, scrutinise the Government of the day, conduct inquiries and play a pre-legislative role in the development of policy. By any assessment—self-assessment, monitoring or taking stock—and balancing the results against the principles of the Parliament, the committees are sadly unable to meet that expectation. Why has that happened? Perhaps the expectations were too high. In our desire to be different from Westminster, we created committees with both standing and select functions, but we have been more successful in the area of scrutinising legislation than we have been on policy development. Perhaps the steering group was too optimistic in the degree and level of cross-party co-operation that it expected to take place. There are other practical intrusions such as the loss of institutional knowledge—which is sometimes referred to as churn—when the members of committees change, which does not add to the strength of those committees in some instances. There is limited time in which committees can be independent and proactive, and set work programmes with those who have an interest in them. We have lost out institutionally to an Executive, to its desire and drive, and to its policy and manifesto. None of those is a crime in itself, but I am suggesting that there are imperatives in that regard that work against the stature of our committees. Political parties are reluctant to share power on policy—indeed, they think that only they should be developing policy. Given the focus on the chamber and the set-piece debates, the Parliamentary Bureau, with its need to get the job done in the squeeze of time, impacts on committees and what they are able to do. The SPCB, with all its responsibilities to run the Parliament efficiently, naturally works with those powers in the Parliament to achieve that aim. It is clear that the 15 committees of this Parliament are no match for that collective, but that situation has led to an unequal balance of power within the institution, which was clearly not the consultative steering group’s intention. The committees have been passive in that process, which has happened over a period of time. They now reflect the majority in the Parliament, which is an added complication that we need to examine. The system was never designed for a Government with a majority, but the process has been happening over time. Committee members and conveners have been too passive and too willing to accept the pressure of time; too willing to toe the party line; too slow to accept innovation and change in the committees; and too ready to discuss issues in private rather than in public. I say that as someone who has some understanding of all the committees. I have been a whip in the Parliament, so I have had responsibility for ensuring that others toed the party line. I served two terms on the SPCB, I am currently serving my second term as a convener of a committee in the Parliament and I have served on the Parliamentary Bureau. I am therefore complicit in the process, but I am afraid that our committees have lost out. Many of those issues have been recognised, and the Presiding Officer recognises them too. Many solutions have been discussed, but although they may improve the situation in the short term, we now need to ask the hard questions about whether we as parliamentarians want to fulfil our ambitions for our committees. I now—

We need to ask whether our committees are fit for purpose at present, for dealing with additional powers or, indeed, for the situation that some foresee, which would involve an independent Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

I will take advantage of Bob Doris’s mentioning of legionnaire’s disease. Does he recognise that it is also important for the work of the committees to be topical? Next week, there is a space in the Health and Sport Committee’s work programme, when we could get in, rather than the politicians, some of the people who will not make a statement tomorrow—namely, someone from NHS Lothian, someone from the Health and Safety Executive and other people who are involved in the process. Let us do that next week.

My question follows on from Bill Kidd’s pertinent question about safety. Moorfoot primary school in Gourock requires significant investment in modernisation to ensure that all the children are taught in a newer, modern school. The downside of that process is that construction work must take place, and older buildings often reveal the presence of asbestos, which obviously raises concerns among parents. I was interested to hear the minister’s previous answer. I accept what he says about reserved matters, but does he not have a role in ensuring that best practice is implemented across local authorities, that the strictest possible safety regime is in place and that children do not suffer undue disruption during teaching hours? Should there not also be a proper consultation when such work has to take place, to reassure the parents throughout the process?

14. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on its reform of post-16 education. (S4O-01082)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the work of the Health and Sport Committee on the progress of the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill, which, as he knows, focuses primarily on the role and duties of local authorities. Concerns have been raised about the multi-agency approach to planning, which should enable students with complex needs to make the transition from school to further education, ensure the best outcomes for those young people and avoid increased pressure on the families who support them. What discussion has the cabinet secretary had with his ministerial colleagues about the role of further education with regard to the bill?

6. To ask the Scottish Government how it ensures that the work of the national health service’s national planning forum and its sub-groups is widely reported. (S4O-01014)

As the cabinet secretary will be aware, the national planning forum completed a crucial report on transcatheter aortic valve implantation in November 2010, but the report was not published until 17 months later. It has been suggested to me that the report was kept hidden for fear of fuelling an already hot debate on the issue. However, it would appear that it is not the only report dealing with a controversial issue that has been held back. The health economic evaluation study of Eculizumab—a paper that has been referred to on the Scottish Medicines Consortium website since late 2010—has still not been published. Does the cabinet secretary agree that in the interests of trust and transparency, reports such as those should be made widely available as soon as possible so that patients and clinicians can be fully informed of the conclusions and so that we avoid the suspicion that is bound to arise in issues that are a focus of debate.

1. To ask the Scottish Government when the Minister for Housing and Transport last met the chief executive of Strathclyde partnership for transport. (S4O-00969)

I hope that the minister took the time to discuss the Gourock to Kilcreggan ferry crossing in that meeting. I acknowledge his responses to my correspondence on the issue and the time that he gave Jackie Baillie and me in a meeting about it. The minister will be aware that the troubles that the current ferry crossing faces were entirely predictable and that the position is now becoming farcical. SPT’s response to passengers’ concerns is completely unacceptable, and it has led some to conclude that SPT is not merely seeking efficiencies for the public purse but is operating a hidden agenda to end the service altogether and blame the passengers for that outcome. In the minister’s correspondence of 23 April, he discussed the future responsibility of current providers of ferry services. Is it not time that he discussed seriously with SPT future responsibility for the Gourock to Kilcreggan service? Passengers who use the service have come to the conclusion that transferring responsibility away from SPT would be a very good—

13. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to ensure that Greenock and Inverclyde is not disproportionately affected by the current economic climate. (S4O-00961)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that he and the Scottish Government’s economic adviser have assured me that they recognise that communities such as Inverclyde will be disproportionately hit in the budget process. I took comfort from what was said, but since then, we have suffered a disappointing and significant loss of regeneration funding. We have lost out on exciting potential renewables jobs and enterprise area status, and our long-term youth unemployment has increased by 200 per cent over the past year. Will the cabinet secretary use his office to come to Greenock and work with the agencies, the local authority, Scottish Enterprise and everyone else who is interested in dealing with the problem in the Inverclyde area? We can address the serious problems that exist only by working together and taking serious action. Will the cabinet secretary assure me that he will do that?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to tackle youth unemployment in Greenock and Inverclyde. (S4O-00854)

The minister will surely recognise the disappointment that none of the £9 million balance from the initial funding allocation of £30 million to the youth employment strategy reached the Inverclyde area, which, according to the Scottish Government’s figures, has the sixth-highest claimant count in Scotland and currently has 905 young people aged 18 to 24 in receipt of jobseekers allowance. It is unacceptable that that clear unmet need failed to gain recognition in the recent funding allocation. Will the minister agree to come to Inverclyde to meet local interests and to ensure that we address the significant issue of youth unemployment in the area?

Will the cabinet secretary ensure that proposals from NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde are subject to full consultation before changes are made to the midwife-led service at Inverclyde?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I apologise to you and the cabinet secretary for missing her opening remarks. There was a bit of confusion. The eyes of the world are upon us. Several witnesses said as much during our stage 1 consideration of the bill. The Washington Post, RTE, the Chicago Tribune, Fox News and, would you believe, even The Guardian have been reporting on minimum pricing. The international scrutiny is welcome, but it is as much to do with our renowned affinity with alcohol as with the policy that has been proposed. From the glasses that are raised at Burns suppers and the biggest hogmanay party in the world to the mischief of “Whisky Galore” and the lyrics of Gerry Rafferty’s music as he wound his way down Baker Street, drink plays a starring role in Scottish life. It is centre stage in so much of our culture, our sense of identity and our popular imagination, and hence in the image that we project to others. Whisky is one of the symbols most commonly associated with us. It is part of our identity, along with tartan and golf. That is a gift in terms of global marketing, export sales and the strength of our economy. What country would not wish for such a calling card? However, increasingly we face the sobering reality that alcohol can be a destructive force for many people. I was shocked—like others, I am sure—to learn that at least 900 children in Scotland were damaged by alcohol before they were born, that thousands more children live with a drink-dependent adult, and that one Scot dies every three hours from an alcohol-related cause. Children 1st told the Health and Sport Committee: “Scotland needs to shift its attitude and behaviour towards and relationship with alcohol.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 17 January 2012; c 878.] We recognise that that will not be an easy change to bring about. Professor Tim Stockwell, a respected academic in the field, said: “minimum pricing is felt to be an attack on individual freedoms; the right to drink is very dear to many people”.—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 10 January 2012; c 786.] Other witnesses spoke of the link between social deprivation and the incidence of drink and indeed substance abuse, which is a further complication. The committee heard a good deal about the impact of alcohol misuse, not just on individuals but beyond that, on our health and social services, our justice system and the family members who bear the burden and are left to pick up the pieces. Alcohol Focus Scotland told us: “It is very easy to point at young people and say how antisocial and irresponsible their drinking behaviour is, but all they are doing is reflecting the adult society that they see ... an environment that promotes access and excess and which saturates them in images of alcohol”.—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 10 January 2012; c 760.] That Scotland’s relationship with alcohol can rightly be described as unhealthy, damaging, problematic and dysfunctional is beyond question. The Health and Sport Committee is not alone in that conviction. Along with the Scottish Government, the medical profession, academia, the police, children’s charities, the drinks industry, retailers, civic society, media commentators and others, the committee believes that we must act to counter the generational harm that is caused by drink, for our misuse and abuse of alcohol are problems that not just merit our attention but demand our remedy. Some people consider minimum pricing to be an integral part of that remedial action, while others are not so readily persuaded. The committee agrees that a range of initiatives must be pursued, from awareness-raising campaigns for young people and parents to interventions with individuals and packages of intense support. We believe that such a multifaceted approach is essential if we are to challenge and overcome Scotland’s booze culture. A majority of the committee—boosted by one since last Thursday, or so it would appear—is persuaded by the assertion that the bill will help to reduce alcohol consumption. The members in that majority considered the evidence we heard to be overwhelming and compelling. In their view, minimum pricing can cut alcohol consumption by harmful drinkers and reduce the impact of alcohol misuse on public health, crime, productivity and the economy. Professor Stockwell told the committee: “You will be doing something that—from the scientific point of view—will without a shred of doubt save lives, reduce healthcare costs, prevent death and injury on the roads, prevent birth defects, and reduce public violence”.—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 10 January 2012; c 786.] That majority believes the bill to be a significant contribution to the package of measures that is necessary to curtail Scotland’s dangerous affinity with alcohol. A minority of the committee remains sceptical but is hopeful that the health and social benefits suggested by the Scottish Government may transpire. Some are still unconvinced by the ability of minimum pricing to produce the desired result, and they believe that a universal approach could have an unfair impact on moderate drinkers and those on lower incomes. Among other concerns is the market response—“the big unknown”, as the Institute for Fiscal Studies puts it. It was not covered by either the Sheffield modelling or the evidence from Canada. We simply do not know how producers or retailers will react to minimum pricing, nor do we know the extent to which profits will be accrued from the policy by some businesses. As the Centre for Economics and Business Research told us: “The retailers stand to make windfall profits at the expense of poor consumers”.—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 10 January 2012; c 742.] The question of legality in a European context is also an issue in the minority view. Much depends on the level at which the cabinet secretary decides to set the price and on the balance struck between market intervention and health benefits. I welcome her letter to me last week stating that she intends to notify the order setting a minimum price to the European Union. I shall file the correspondence under “P” for progress. The cabinet secretary’s recent pronouncement on the merits of a sunset clause was similarly encouraging, and the committee will no doubt consider that matter at stage 2.

I regret the intervention and the inference that I am not responding correctly or appropriately to the committee’s report. The report laid out a majority view and a minority view. I am sure that I will be judged by my committee members at the end of the day, but I am confident that I have tried effectively to represent both views. If members will let me complete my speech, I will do so. I want to highlight the positive and constructive nature of the committee’s work on this bill. We speak as one in stating that Scotland’s relationship with drink must change. A number of committee witnesses spoke about the link between social deprivation and drink and substance abuse. In written evidence, the Salvation Army said that “people living in the most deprived areas of Scotland are eight times more likely to be admitted to a psychiatric unit with an alcohol-related disorder”. It argued that there is a disconnect between those who live with poverty and those who do not. When life becomes a daily struggle, as it does for many, drinking can be seen as a coping mechanism in dire circumstances. This is a complex social and cultural problem, and all of us on the committee recognise the need for a range of actions. We acknowledge the public health motivations behind the bill and endorse the wider programme for tackling alcohol misuse detailed in the Scottish Government’s framework for action. Certainly, what the committee heard in evidence, opinion and argument—a good deal of it alarming, most of it cogent and not all of it consensual—made clear that the time has come to throw off the stereotype of the drink-sodden Scot, to embrace the word “moderation” without fear of ridicule and to work towards the goal of a healthier and happier society. Our stage 1 report details the committee’s consideration of the bill and sets out our conclusions and recommendations. I hope that it will also provide a solid contribution to the work that lies ahead to achieve the desired goal. There may be differences of opinion on the policy, but supporters and sceptics alike welcome further debate. We look forward to the cabinet secretary’s decision before stage 3 on the level at which she will set the minimum price.

Yes.

Today we are to debate—not for the first time, nor, I suspect, the last—the age-old question of how we care for the elderly. With the death of an elderly resident at the Elsie Inglis nursing home in Edinburgh under investigation by the police and following the collapse of Southern Cross Healthcare Group, the Health and Sport Committee decided to launch its inquiry into the regulation of care for older people. We wanted to ensure that the system was fit for purpose and that it was delivering the appropriate scrutiny of and improvement in all our care for the elderly. The inquiry was the committee’s first of the parliamentary session. I thank the 51 organisations that submitted evidence to the inquiry, the clerks, the Scottish Parliament information centre and, in particular, the service users and carers whom we met on our fact-finding visits. The committee’s report is a consensual one, and it is all the stronger for that. It enables us to provide the Government with a clear steer on areas for improvement in the regulatory system, because although we found the system to be sufficiently rigorous to identify care services for older people that are failing to deliver high-quality care, there are some areas that the Government needs to address. I will cover those that relate to inspections of care services by Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland—the care inspectorate—complaints, the national care standards, the workforce, and commissioning and procurement practices. I am sure that other members of the committee will pick up other subjects. A key issue that was raised right at the start of the inquiry was the proposed reduction in the frequency of inspections of care homes conducted by the care inspectorate. That was criticised, and we were pleased that the committee’s inquiry prompted the Government to address that concern by increasing the frequency of inspections. Inspections are conducted against four grade themes, but not all the themes are covered in each inspection. That approach was criticised by Age Scotland, which felt that each theme should be assessed as part of a “whole care service review” whenever an inspection was conducted. There seems to be some contradiction between the Scottish Government and the care inspectorate on the issue of inspecting against the four themes. The Government states that the care inspectorate is assessing whether efficiency savings can be made and resources redirected to inspecting all four themes in all inspections. However, in its response, the care inspectorate states that that will not happen and that although all four themes will be inspected in medium to high-risk assessments, only a sample of 10 per cent of better-performing services will be inspected against all four quality themes. Therefore, the care inspectorate will not provide a blanket approach involving inspection against all the themes in all inspections. Does the cabinet secretary believe that, to provide maximum assurance of the quality of care, all four themes should be covered in every inspection? The committee calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that the care inspectorate has all the necessary support to fulfil its role. We heard evidence that the complaints system should be bolstered by greater support for whistleblowers. Our recommendation is that the care inspectorate should publish guidance for all care staff who wish to raise concerns confidentially. The Government’s response refers to the Scottish Social Services Council guidance on whistleblowing, but that guidance does not make specific reference to the whistleblower’s confidentiality being protected. I therefore seek the cabinet secretary’s views on confidentiality as it relates to whistleblowing. Another key recommendation of our report called on the Government to conduct a review of the national care standards. I am pleased that the Government has accepted our recommendation by announcing that it will conduct a review of those standards, but I ask it to tell us when that review will get under way. The committee felt that, as well as being in need of an update, the national care standards should have equality and human rights issues at their very heart. The Scottish Human Rights Commission has told me that it believes that the care inspectorate should be encouraged to develop its understanding of human rights standards as they apply in care settings. Those are not simply dry words. They include, for instance, the right to be free from unintended or careless neglect; the right to be protected from pharmaceutical or medical abuse; the right to live as independently as possible; respect for privacy; and the right to modesty when dressing and bathing. The Government’s response to our report made no explicit reference to human rights, and I am keen to hear an assurance from the cabinet secretary that human rights will be embedded in the national care standards. That can only help to improve people’s understanding of how those rights can be delivered in practice. Another area that the committee considered was the care workforce. Its members are vital to ensuring that our care services are of the highest quality, but for many years, the social care workforce has been undervalued and often poorly paid, poorly treated and poorly trained. Its members must be registered, invested in and paid at least the living wage. We heard from Lord Sutherland during our evidence sessions that there were instances in Edinburgh in which care home staff had left their jobs during the summer to take on casual jobs at the Edinburgh festival because those jobs were better paid. What does that say about the value that we place on the social care workforce? Good commissioning and procurement practices go hand in hand in determining the quality of care that is delivered by a care service. The committee supports the view of the Coalition of Care and Support Providers in Scotland—CCPS—that the care inspectorate has “far fewer teeth” to challenge commissioning practice in comparison with its powers of intervention in service delivery. The Government’s response is at odds with that view. The CCPS has reiterated its position on the issue, and it points to a number of issues to support its view. First, there are no national standards for commissioning and procurement against which to assess an authority’s performance. Secondly, there is no minimum frequency of inspection of those functions. Thirdly, there are no provisions under which the care inspectorate can issue improvement or condition notices for poor practice in commissioning. In addition to the CCPS’s comments, “Commissioning social care”, which Audit Scotland published last week, states: “Councils ... have been slow to develop strategic commissioning. Only 11 of the 32 council areas had commissioning strategies covering all social care services.” It also notes that “there is a risk that councils focus too much on reducing costs when procuring services and give insufficient regard to the range and quality of services and their impact on individuals.” Given the CCPS’s position and the Audit Scotland report, will the Government explore further the merit in extending the care inspectorate’s powers in that area? I am sure that I speak for all my colleagues on the committee when I say that I do not view this debate as the end of our work on the issue. Our current inquiry into the integration of health and social care services will doubtless raise issues about the assessment and monitoring of different services. We will also explore in further detail the provision of care-at-home services during our forthcoming scrutiny of the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill. I believe that we all recognise that the commitment to elderly care has been promoted across Governments, across parties and across the Parliament. We must maintain that commitment and never lose sight of the fact that dignity, compassion and kindness should always be at the heart of care for the elderly. I believe that our inquiry has been about doing just that. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Health and Sport Committee’s 3rd Report, 2011 (Session 4): Report on Inquiry into the Regulation of Care for Older People (SP Paper 40).

Will the cabinet secretary give an assurance that mature students who return to further education to build on their skills or go on to higher education will be recognised and supported, and not disadvantaged as a result of his wide-ranging strategy of reducing budgets and of centralisation?

Given his optimistic view of opportunities on the west coast, will the First Minister tell us when we can expect a review of the national renewables infrastructure plan to ensure that the skills and infrastructure that we have in places such as Inverclyde are fully recognised to give us the best chance of gaining green jobs?

How will the cabinet secretary ensure that areas such as Inverclyde that have not been afforded enterprise status, on top of a cut in the regeneration budget, will not be the net losers for the gain in jobs in nearby areas?

14. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy last met the chief executive of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. (S4O-00562)

At that meeting, did the cabinet secretary discuss with the chief executive, Robert Calderwood, his view that the Scottish Government’s criteria for the provision of certain drugs for those with rare conditions have created a cross-border split in access to those medications? The cabinet secretary recently met my constituent, Joyce Juszczak, who is a case in point. Although the recently announced review involving the chief medical officer, Harry Burns, and the chief pharmaceutical officer, Bill Scott, which is to examine the existing process, is welcome, will the cabinet secretary give an assurance that the review will also examine the wider and more immediate issues relating to Scottish patients accessing treatment for very rare conditions?

Before I deal with the committee’s response, I should do the political broadcast and say that I appreciate the opportunity to record our thanks to the people who participated in the work of the committee. I am delighted that Labour, in the Westminster Parliament and the House of Lords, is taking the Government to task by highlighting the unfairness of the proposals and questioning their impact, which is still unclear, on many families across the country. In my constituency, as in the cabinet secretary’s constituency, we are dealing with increasing unemployment at a time when we are threatening to use the big stick on people, including the poor. My experience is that the work ethic is strong in my constituency. In welfare reform, we are not talking about simply forcing people back into work and people chasing jobs that no longer exist. I accept that work is the best route out of poverty and that it has a higher value than does simple provision of an income, but I meet people who are in work in my constituency who are struggling with the system. Some of them have more than one job. They have part-time or temporary work and are not clear of poverty. Their children will suffer and the proposals will, of course, make their plight even more difficult. We cannot answer questions against that backdrop of fear and apprehension. As a constituency MSP, I am unable to answer questions from kinship carers and from people who receive council tax benefit about how they will end up, and I am unable to confirm whether free school meals will continue. That is the case for all members in our constituencies. The Health and Sport Committee began its work informally over the summer. Many of us engaged with campaigning groups outwith the Parliament and listened to their concerns, and that work progressed to the committee inquiry later in the year, the report on which we have completed. I thank everyone who participated in the process, including our clerks. We gave ourselves increased time to ensure appropriate scrutiny by the committee. Members of the committee did not always appreciate the all-day sessions, but they stuck with it and were determined to give views a hearing. We heard evidence from the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, the Child Poverty Action Group in Scotland, the Poverty Alliance, Citizens Advice Scotland, Action for Children Scotland, Children 1st, One Parent Families Scotland, Inclusion Scotland, Capability Scotland and SAMH, all of which brought us stories of fear and apprehension. It was clear that they did not know how things would work out. Unfortunately, we were not able to get a minister from the Department for Work and Pensions, and we expressed regret about that. We believed that it was important to have a UK Government minister at the committee, but it was decided that one would not be sent, and officials were sent instead. I thought that it would have been important to the UK ministers to come to the Scottish Parliament to defend the policy and the implications that it might have for many of our most vulnerable people. It would also have been interesting to get some insight into the discussions and negotiations that were taking place between the Scottish Government and the UK Government, but we were unable to get that. Much of what we concluded has been put on the record today. We concluded that “the legislative consent memorandum did not contain a draft motion, but rather set out in detail the five areas of the Bill, as it stands now, which would require consent from the Scottish Parliament.” We said that the committee was clear—as, I am sure, Parliament is— “that voting against a motion which seeks legislative consent for the provisions of the Bill which fall within the competence of the Scottish Parliament would not prevent the Welfare Reform Bill from completing its passage at Westminster and receiving Royal Assent.” The committee considered that “in respect of the provisions regarding data sharing and industrial injuries disablement benefit there is little controversy and consent should be given. However, the Committee has heard from witnesses many strong criticisms”— how could we ignore them?— “about the changes … proposed in the Welfare Reform Bill. These legitimate concerns centre on the proposals for Universal Credit and Personal Independence Payments. The Committee acknowledges that many of these concerns arise from a lack of detailed information but, nevertheless, believes that they cannot simply be ignored. It is appropriate for the Scottish Parliament to scrutinise these changes, particularly where they will impact directly on areas of devolved policy. The Committee notes that an alternative to giving consent in relation to Universal Credit and Personal Independence Payments would be for the Scottish Government to introduce a Bill to the Scottish Parliament. The Committee considers that this approach may be preferable as it would allow the Scottish Parliament time to consider more fully the implications of the forthcoming welfare reforms and the appropriate Scottish policy response to them. However, the Committee is uncertain whether”— and, obviously, it looks for reassurance that— “such a Scottish Bill could be drafted, scrutinised and passed by the Parliament in sufficient time to ensure that the Scottish statute book reflects the changes introduced by the Welfare Reform Bill prior to their implementation. The Committee therefore invites the Scottish Government to consider whether this is a practical alternative to allowing the UK Parliament to legislate on behalf of Scotland in these areas and to report its view to the Parliament.” We accept that that is unprecedented. It is the first time that a committee has recommended that course of action and we did not take that decision lightly. We reached that conclusion after a lot of consideration and really serious and impressive evidence. I commend the report to Parliament.

Will Murdo Fraser give way?

Those who usually come to the chamber on a Thursday morning for a Donnybrook will be disappointed this morning, because there is a great deal of consensus. I certainly welcome the Scottish Government’s moves. I will repeat some of the themes that my deputy convener on the Health and Sport Committee, Bob Doris, has just spoken about. It must be recognised that the Government is trying to address an imposing and complicated problem. I believe that it is an extremely worthwhile cause. Jackie Baillie referred to cost-shunting issues, as did the cabinet secretary earlier this week. As Jackie Baillie described it, there is pass the parcel between the national health service and local authorities. That is a good example of a serious failure of the current separated system, which all too often leaves elderly people with the short end of the stick. Delaying elderly people in hospital beds at a cost of £2,000 a week when residential and nursing home services can cost a fraction of that is not only a blatant waste of funds but offensive to the high standards to which we hold our health service. The integration of health and social care is a way in which to spend precious funding more effectively, and it should also be a way in which to provide higher-quality services to the elderly. As I said, it is an extremely worthwhile cause, but we all understand that it is not a cure-all for the issues that face the health and social care system as it applies to the elderly. In 2002, the Parliament made the bold decision to provide free personal care for the elderly men and women of Scotland, and for nearly 10 years the Scottish Government, in one way or another, has paid the health and social care bills for nearly every Scot over the age of 65. However, as has been mentioned, much has changed in those 10 years. Scotland’s demographic has been ageing and the cost of providing people with that healthcare has nearly doubled to a staggering £370 million a year. At the same time, we have seen the economy crumble around us. Budgets across the board are on the chopping block and the personal care funding gap has grown to about £40 million a year. So far, the Scottish Government has stepped in to plug the gap, but the reality of Scotland’s ageing population and the Government’s diminishing funds in these difficult economic times have put the sustainability of the system under question. Experts challenge us with warnings to Government. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the independent budget review group, the Association of Directors of Social Work, the Centre for Public Policy for Regions and Lord Sutherland, who was the architect of free personal care, have all called into question the sustainability of the policy. Against that stark backdrop, those of us who support affordable, good-quality care for the elderly recognise that progress must be made and that the status quo is not an option. We also recognise that the integration of budgets is a step in a long but necessary journey, but that is not the only area in which we need integration in order to improve services. The Health and Sport Committee recently produced our “Report on Inquiry into the Regulation of Care for Older People”, in which we welcome moves towards greater integration of health and social care, and with it, the integration of the regulatory regimes that oversee those services. In recommending a review of the national care standards, we believe that there is an opportunity to include “the introduction of joint inspections of care pathways”, which Bob Doris mentioned, “including clinical care in the community and the inspection of social care for older people in ... acute services.” The committee also recommends that the Scottish Government should consider establishing “a single point of entry” into the complaints procedure, “with a view to greater integration in future.” We all want to ensure the best outcomes for elderly people, but the integration and securing of care will be easier said than done. That is the challenge that the policy presents. However, I am sure that I speak for all members of the Health and Sport Committee when I say that we look forward to working with the Scottish Government to make progress in this challenging area and, through that, to keeping our focus on improving care for our elderly people in Scotland.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to create jobs in Inverclyde. (S4O-00492)

The minister will be aware that, according to the unemployment figures that were released last week, Inverclyde suffered the biggest rise of any area in Scotland in the past year. With year-on-year cuts in the urban regeneration company budget, the challenge of attracting jobs and businesses gets ever more difficult. Against that background, does the minister recognise the efforts to attract green manufacturing jobs to Inchgreen dry dock? Will he and the Scottish Government take that into consideration when they designate their enterprise zone areas later this year?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate, which opens up two significant issues for my community, one positive and the other negative.

Okay. I will not repeat the first bit—I am sure that it is on the record. The first issue is the positive role of local newspapers in campaigning on issues that are important to their readership in the wider community. I have been involved in successful campaigns with the Greenock Telegraph over 30 years. In recent years, I have worked with it to save our accident and emergency services, our local football team and even the hospital tea bar. I am sure that many members will have similar experiences. It was great to be able to repay the favour to the newspaper industry, particularly the Greenock Telegraph, in a debate almost two years ago, in January 2010, when the Scottish Government was threatening to withdraw public notice advertising from newspapers, which is vital to sustaining local newspapers through difficult times. I note that Stuart McMillan also took part in that debate, when he extolled the virtues of new media in Inverclyde and described the different perspective that they provide as “refreshing”, compared with that provided by the local newspaper. He also told the chamber that day that quite a few people tell him that “they are sceptical about their local papers”.—[Official Report, 28 January 2010; c 23215.] I wonder who he was referring to.

Yes.

I will discuss that. I think that the motion refers to the role of the newspaper’s campaign. In the course of my contribution, I will mention that, too. I welcome Stuart McMillan’s conversion to the cause of local newspapers and his belated recognition of the good work of the Greenock Telegraph, which is mentioned in the motion. Sadly, he has not always been able to support recent campaigns. He will remember the Tele’s award-winning campaign against knife crime, which supported John Muir’s call for tough action—a campaign that came within just two votes in the chamber of bringing about a change in the law. It was a very successful campaign, which received an award. He will also remember the campaign earlier this year against the cuts to Inverclyde’s regeneration budget. Our community demanded its fair share from the SNP Government, only for that money to be diverted to other parts of the country. That campaign continues. That leads me to the current campaign on fuel prices. Every motorist has cause to grumble about the price at the pumps, but we in Inverclyde have particular grounds to be unhappy because, as the Tele’s petrol and diesel watch highlights, we are consistently asked to pay higher prices than our near neighbours. The lack of competition in Inverclyde is at the heart of the matter. The two large Tesco shops and one Morrisons store keep prices high and, in effect, fund a price war in other parts of Scotland that enjoy greater competition. I have repeatedly made representations to the supermarkets involved—Tesco and Morrisons, for the avoidance of doubt—and have spoken and written to the Competition Commission, regrettably without success. I have also raised the issue of anti-competitive planning law with the Scottish Government. The minister will be aware that planning law can restrict new applications for supermarkets coming into an area such as Inverclyde. Tesco and Morrisons value that protection, but it is time that we asked whether, given that they are using their dominance to inflate fuel prices, they deserve it. The minister has an opportunity to review planning legislation that would make the supermarkets sit up and address loyal consumers who repeatedly complain about the price that they pay to fund price wars in other areas. The prize for Inverclyde could be a reduction of 5p a litre on average. I ask the Scottish Government to consider reviewing planning legislation that supports such practices.

Does the minister—

I give up. I am sure that the minister could hear me clearly, though.

I will try again. Will the minister give way?

I thank the minister. He has commended the campaign, but representations to the Competition Commission and to supermarkets—who are turning away the representations of loyal customers—have had no success. Is there a possibility that the minister and the Scottish Government can aid consumers who are in the situation that he described, by reviewing the planning laws that supermarkets value and suggesting that competition issues will be dealt with and other supermarkets encouraged to come into areas, which would reduce consumer prices?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the reorganisation of Caledonian MacBrayne will have on the communities who rely on its services. (S4O-00435)

The minister is aware of the importance of CalMac in my constituency, where the headquarters and ticketing centre provide much-needed jobs. Given that a number of jobs were lost there earlier in the year with changes to the Gourock to Dunoon crossing, can he give an assurance that the impending tendering process, which I understand is to be completed by September 2013, will not impact negatively on jobs in Inverclyde?

The consensus in the debate is welcome, but it is a bit disconcerting, because it makes it hard to find something to argue about or to say something that has not been mentioned already. We obviously regret very much the announcement at Westminster by the shipping minister, Mike Penning. It is sad for my constituency and I hope that he does not come to regret it. The consensus in the debate gives me an opportunity to highlight, despite its disappointing outcome, some positives from the campaign, which I hope has not ended this week. We should never have had to fight the campaign, never mind lose it. The workers at Clyde coastguard centre are proud of their work, the knowledge and skills that they have acquired and the lives that they have saved. They have approached the adversity with great dignity. Although 31 jobs are under threat, that has never been at the centre of the workers’ campaign. They are committed to their work and to what they have achieved over the years. Stuart Atkinson, who is the PCS members’ rep at the Navy buildings on Eldon Street in Greenock, has presented a compelling and forensic case for retaining the Clyde coastguard and has exposed many of the myths and the political posturing that are at the decision’s heart. I am sad that it took the threat of closure before many people realised the importance and range of the work that the coastguard service does. The workers have got on with that quietly for many years and have delivered consistently. They have not looked for medals and have done a wonderful job. Another positive is that the campaign has brought together levels of government—the Scottish Government and local authorities—and has gone across party-political divisions and local authority boundaries and rivalries. A year ago in the Parliament, I was pleased to gain the First Minister’s support for the campaign. He made good on that. At my request, he met the campaigners at Bute House earlier this year, prior to the Scottish Government’s response to the UK Government being submitted. A year ago, when the announcement was made and we had a debate in the Parliament, I feared that it was already a done deal. Despite the compelling case that has been made, that has come to pass. Local knowledge has been dismissed. We have arrived at a decision that will ensure that traffic on the west coast of Scotland is managed outside Scotland—traffic that includes significant cargo traffic, MOD traffic, including nuclear submarines, 30 cruise liners a year with a large number of passengers, and significant ferry traffic with more than 4 million passengers, in waters whose dangers were vividly described by Mike MacKenzie. The decision undoubtedly increases the potential for human, environmental—and, for Mr Penning and his Government, political—disaster. We now move to a new stage of the campaign—that of vigilance. Closure cannot be rushed; it cannot be taken forward—or taken for granted—without robust testing of the proposed network. The commitment to that has to be more significant and honest than the commitment to an open and transparent consultation, which we do not believe that we have had. I hope that the Scottish Government will continue to work with the PCS members, the coastal communities and the wider emergency services to ensure that those networks are tested robustly and that the UK Government thinks again before it puts our coastal waters and the people who use them at further risk.

15. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy last met the chief executive of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. (S4O-00413)

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that discussions will be held with the health boards about the concerns of the Royal College of Midwives about the long-term shortfall in midwife numbers? Will she assure me that action will be taken to secure and ensure the sustainability of midwife-led maternity units? I am particularly speaking about the successful unit at Inverclyde royal hospital.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Justice last met the Scottish Prison Service. (S4O-00369)

From those regular meetings, the cabinet secretary will be aware of the SPS’s plans to close HMP Gateside in Greenock and replace it with HMP Inverclyde on the former site of Greenock high school. The new prison is due to open in August 2015. Can he confirm that work will begin on schedule by 2013 and that the prison will open for use in 2015? Given the reported current and projected capacity problems in Scotland’s prisons, has discussion taken place on prolonging HMP Gateside’s life beyond 2015?

Will the member give way?

I was wondering how long it would take the member to tell us to get on our bikes. Does the member accept that regeneration is not just about economic growth, important though that is, but about the wellbeing of communities? In these days of preventative spending, do we recognise the impact of mass unemployment and poor health outcomes that, I am afraid to say, are the legacy of the previous Conservative Government?

I am also pleased to be able to take part in the debate and I welcome the minister’s comments about focusing on the hard-pressed communities that are less resilient to the recession and downturn that we face. Like other members, I know all too well, given the profile of my constituency of Greenock and Inverclyde, that the regeneration game has faced challenges and had difficulties over the years. With the decline of heavy industry in my community and subsequent mass unemployment, the results have become predictable and evident over time: depopulation, deprivation, poverty, poor health outcomes, and an increase in crime and in drug and alcohol dependency. However, the real result has been the dashing of expectation and ambition in communities, wasted talent and destroyed communities. Adam Ingram mentioned some figures. Over the years, many quick fixes have been tried in an effort to replace the large number of jobs lost from the shipyards and the engine works. We have learned over time that we cannot simply reverse the decline by replacing industries with something that is not sustainable. We cannot put a Band-aid on a problem that has been caused by years of neglect and decline. The sunrise industries were a classic example. Electronic manufacturing took up a lot of the slack in places such as Inverclyde and North Ayrshire. Employment in such manufacturing was plentiful but, of course, it was low paid, there was increased casualisation and the legacy, because we did not get the cycle right, is empty factories. During that process, we created a new class of people who are known as the working poor—those who work for what is now the minimum wage and who cannot provide for their families without state aid. The quick fixes involved big announcements followed by even bigger disappointments. We had the failure of the enterprise zones and the failure of Government and the enterprise agencies to work together. Ambitious community plans were left to gather dust and we could not move on because of disputes about planning and who owned land. At times during that period, the challenges that we faced in Inverclyde appeared to be almost insurmountable, and it seemed that we could not move on at all. However, at last, we moved on from the quick fixes. They were replaced with a longer-term model—the urban regeneration company, which has a tight focus on the community and is tasked to work across it. The URC model is long term and recognises that we need to invest not just in business, but in the community. Thanks to the URC Riverside Inverclyde, those advances have come to the Inverclyde area. The changes are there for everybody to see. There are new businesses and there has been wider investment in colleges, housing and new schools, which I believe is the result of the thinking and ambition in the URC. Many members were in Inverclyde during the recent by-election and were confronted by the new Inverclyde and what has been achieved. It might have been a backhanded compliment, but many members took me aside in the Parliament to tell me about the changes that they had noticed, which were not what they had expected. A transformation has taken place. I cannot argue with the overall thinking in the strategy and the cabinet secretary’s comments, although I suppose that the devil will be in the detail. The benefit of that type of thinking in the URC and of its can-do attitude reaches far beyond the obvious physical improvements in facilities and infrastructure. Riverside Inverclyde has become a catalyst for change in the area and an infectious model for action that has been picked up by other agencies in the Inverclyde community, resulting in changes in schools and housing. With the necessary support, Riverside Inverclyde can offer much more, such as the development of the famous sugar sheds and the James Watt dock area. Recently, the popular television drama “Waterloo Road” relocated to Inverclyde. That can be part of how we promote the identity of Greenock and Inverclyde. Members would not expect me to say anything else but, sadly, we are fearful that that progress is under threat because of the deep cuts to the URC. The cuts to Inverclyde’s regeneration funding have been serious and we are worried that they put a question mark over the continuation of the steady progress that has been made. How can we expect long-term results when a crucial 10-year project is to be abandoned halfway through? How can the URC make good on its commitment to those deprived communities when the Government cannot even make good on its commitment to the urban regeneration companies? How do we look forward and commit to a new strategy, which needs to be long term, when our experience is that commitments are not being seen through? My challenge to the Scottish Government and the cabinet secretary is to make good on the commitment to regeneration and to back a wider manifesto for the regeneration of Inverclyde. Our ambitions have increased. I say clearly to the Scottish Government that it must keep its side of the bargain and allow Riverside Inverclyde to see through its long-term plans by making good on previous commitments and ending the uncertainty about future funding.

Right. Sorry, Presiding Officer. The urban regeneration company is but one part of our wider manifesto. We have great ambition to see the renewables industry come to Inverclyde, and we want to see Inverclyde get a share of the £100 million fossil fuel levy to make that a reality. However, we must test the Government’s words and actions and look for continued support for a hard-pressed community.

I accept that there has been a failing for 30 or 50 years, although well-meaning attempts have been made, such as the bringing in of the sunrise industries, which failed. Those industries lifted up communities, but they were not sustainable. What we have now is a sustainable model that is being damaged and put in jeopardy by the current Administration. I hope that that attitude will change, and I am sure that it will. We might hear something about that later, in the minister’s response.

Just for clarity, the budget of the Inverclyde regeneration company Riverside Inverclyde is down by 57 per cent, whereas the Scottish Government’s overall capital budget is down by 25 per cent. Those are the figures for 2011-12. The proposed budget for Riverside Inverclyde for 2012-13 is down by 37 per cent, whereas the Scottish Government’s overall capital budget is down by only 4.9 per cent. Are there any conceivable circumstances in which the member can justify that cut to the URC?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

You are nothing but a patsy.

You are a patsy.

Will the minister take an intervention?

The minister offered a meeting to the constituency MSP. Will he extend the invitation to all West Scotland representatives? I do not know why he would invite only Stuart McMillan in particular.

Will the minister take an intervention?

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the General Medical Council survey suggesting that junior doctors feel pressured to work more than a 48-hour week. (S4F-00258) That would breach the European working time directive.

Against a backdrop of delays in replacing staff, a drive to reduce expenditure on temporary staff and locums, and uncertainty about future employment for junior doctors at the end of their training, is it any surprise that junior doctors feel that they must break the law and lie to meet the demands of the job? Does the First Minister share my concern about the consequences that that might have for patients and junior doctors, as in the tragic case of Lauren Connelly, who served at Inverclyde royal hospital?

That is not new money at all.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy last met the chief executive of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. (S4O-00249)

When the cabinet secretary met managers last week, did she discuss NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde’s position on the prescribing of eculizumab? The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence recognises that drug for the treatment of severe blood disorders and it is widely available in England and Wales and, indeed, in health boards throughout Scotland. The cabinet secretary will be aware of my representations on the fairness of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde’s policy on behalf of my constituent Mrs Joyce Juszczak, who is with us in the chamber. Mrs Juszczak has a life-threatening blood disorder and would greatly benefit from the prescription of that drug. It seems that only bureaucracy is preventing her from getting the treatment that she deserves. Could the cabinet secretary assist us to ensure that we get through that bureaucracy and that Mrs Juszczak is given the treatment for the benefit of her quality of life and, more important, for her life itself?

I think that we all agree that the Parliament faces a significant challenge in ensuring that the most vulnerable in our society are given the dignity, care and support that they need and deserve. We need to face up to the difficult demographic changes and falling budgets, which are creating real pressures. Irrespective of who is to blame, that is the situation that we are dealing with. Just last week, in his evidence to the Health and Sport Committee, the architect of free personal care, Lord Sutherland, compared our approach to that significant challenge with our approach to global warming. There has been a lot of planning and there have been many calls for investment, but we still have not seized the issue. We have heard about that this morning. I am pleased that we have the opportunity to focus on at least one key area: procurement. That area is not part of the Health and Sport Committee’s on-going inquiry into regulation, but it continues to raise its head regardless. We know from our constituencies, wider experience and even personal experience that the pressures go right across the board. Wherever care is delivered—whether in the public sector, the private sector or even in the third sector—the pressures and issues have been present for some time.

I am sorry, but I do not have enough time, as we have under four minutes. In the public sector, there was a stark example in April 2009 of the consequences when we get procurement wrong. A “Panorama” programme exposed the delivery of services in the country in a very bad light. It showed that we had a system in place in which our elderly people were being humiliated and mistreated in their own homes. That was a wake-up call to many people. I see members shaking their heads, but the experience was horrible. The programme forced the Local Government and Communities Committee, which I convened at the time, to look at e-procurement practices—the reverse auctions that drove prices down to the bottom. Thankfully, the Scottish Government intervened after the inquiry to end those practices altogether. Low pay and the high turnover of staff are problems in the private sector. What about continuity? How can people’s skills be developed in that situation? A situation has been delivered that is lowering standards. In his evidence last week, Lord Sutherland spoke about care homes in Edinburgh that have difficulties in recruiting workers during August. It seems that we live in a country where it is more lucrative to hand out flyers during the festival than it is to provide vital care for the most vulnerable in our society. If that is the reward that we attach to this difficult job, it can be no surprise that concerns are raised about standards. In the third sector, the Coalition of Care and Support Providers in Scotland showed this week that 79 per cent of the workers who provide these valuable services have not been awarded a cost-of-living pay rise for three years—it is the lowest-paid people who are delivering these services—and 57 per cent of the organisations that deliver care have implemented pay freezes. We realise the necessity of training people to understand the situation that they are working in, yet 60 per cent of the organisations in the third sector that are delivering that care for us are cutting their training budgets. There are very real consequences of all that. It is not just about the hard facts and figures in the budget; we are dealing with people. They are the victims of the squeeze on social care. If we do not value the people who deliver these care services, we devalue the care that we provide to those vulnerable people.

I would expect a place such as Inverclyde to be high on the cabinet secretary’s priority list. Can he assure us that the enterprise zone work that the Government is going to carry out will be in addition to, supportive of and complementary to the existing work of the urban regeneration companies in such areas rather than to its detriment?

I welcome this and every opportunity to make the case for the Clyde coastguard based at Greenock. However, as Stuart McMillan pointed out, I was a bit cynical and suspicious about the nature of the debate, given that we have had lots of opportunity to discuss the issue in a united way across the parties in the Parliament. I was delighted to take the opportunity to seek and receive the First Minister’s support on the issue at First Minister’s questions some time ago, and of course Alasdair Allan’s very good members’ business debate on the issue was well attended, which clearly sent the message that the Parliament was united on the issue. I was therefore surprised to see the issue back on the agenda for this debate and was suspicious of the motives. However, I heard what Stuart McMillan said and I am happy with his reassurances that he is not using the response from David MacBrayne and his company as a political tool in the current by-election. I make no apology for repeating some of the important issues about the Greenock coastguard station, which is better known as the navy buildings after the buildings that house the station. There are a wealth of experts in that station who are available to assist in times of difficulty. In these times, it is rare to find such a facility under one roof, and that needs to be recognised. It should not be given up easily. Some people would say that that type of capability should be the norm. I was glad to read—I will return to this—that the Transport Committee at Westminster is considering a radical rethink of the matter. As has been mentioned, the Clyde coastguard manages Ministry of Defence traffic, including nuclear submarines. It also deals with significant cargo traffic at the Clydeport container terminal and manages the more than 30 cruise liners that arrive in Greenock every year, which each carry in excess of 1,500 passengers. The Clyde coastguard also covers ferry routes as far south as Arran and as far north as Mull, with estimated annual passenger numbers of 4 million to 5 million. The potential for human, environmental and political disaster is obvious. I hope that some of the political disaster can be avoided. It is timely to welcome David MacBrayne’s submission to the consultation. As Stuart McMillan also recognised, the last piece of work of the late David Cairns MP was supportive of the coastguard station. I hope that submissions such as those from David MacBrayne and David Cairns have influenced the Transport Committee, which came out with its condemnation yesterday. I hope that those submissions were of assistance in its deliberations. The fact that current coastguard personnel were prevented from participating in the so-called consultation makes it even more important that those submissions were received. There is no doubt that the Transport Committee at Westminster shares our concerns. The chairman, Louise Ellman, said that there is little support for the proposals and that the committee has no confidence that they would allow the coastguard service to perform as well as, or more effectively than, it performs now. She said that any future reorganisation of the service should be based on 24-hour centres rather than on stations that open only during daylight hours. She also stated: “We accept there is a need for some modernisation, but the government’s proposals for the future of the coastguard service are seriously flawed.” We agree. The Parliament agrees. There is a lot of U-turning going on just now. Let us hope that that continues and that the UK Government U-turns on its daft and dangerous proposals for the coastguard stations around Scotland.

The motion, the amendments and the debate are characterised by common themes: a shared ambition to create a sustainable future; a determination to secure the maximum return on our investment and our resources; and a sense of expectancy—indeed, excitement—at what can be achieved to grow our economy and create the sustainable jobs of the future, to the benefit of all communities in Scotland. No one can doubt Scotland’s massive renewables potential in offshore wind and tidal resources or the positive impact that that industry could have on the Scottish economy by increasing our energy supply; providing speedy access to significant investment; and creating tens of thousands of jobs—as the minister confirmed—in constructing the turbines, barges and jackets that we need and in maintaining the operational infrastructure. It is necessary to realise that potential, but competition is fierce throughout Europe and, indeed, within the UK. That is our ambition, but we must realise that ambition. At this point, I should apologise in advance because, in the previous session of Parliament, some of my colleagues heard my girns and complaints about Inverclyde’s position in that new market. However, that is my job and, with a new minister in place, I will not miss the opportunity to make the case. In the face of the difficult competition that I mentioned, we worked to bring about the national renewables infrastructure plan, which was commissioned by the Scottish energy advisory board. The group was chaired by the First Minister, no less. The work was heavily influenced by Highlands and Islands Enterprise and supported by Scottish Enterprise. The report’s task was to identify sites in Scotland that offered the greatest opportunities for development for use as construction sites. A matrix and weighting were applied to a number of sites in the process of selection for investment, but it is significant that little weighting was given to population. Is it really sensible, sustainable and cost effective to recreate the labour camps that we had with the offshore industry, which involved massive shifts of population and skills from the central belt? People travelled the length of Scotland, created such camps, left them and came back again. Why was no weighting given to population and skills capacity? Is it really competitive to spend £20 million or £30 million to bring some sites to the market when we can achieve that objective for around £5 million with a site such as Inchgreen dry dock in Greenock? We must also recognise that the matrix included a 25 per cent weighting for proximity and geography. That is surprising. Things have moved on and there are sites up and running on the east coast of Scotland. They are competing in the market and doing work for the west coast of Ireland, so there is no competitive disadvantage. I wonder why that 25 per cent weighting was added to the matrix. Those points are not insignificant for my area and constituency, because they lost out very narrowly indeed to those that made the list of preferred sites. The Clyde area, with its population, skills base, deepwater docks and infrastructure, stands to lose out given that it did not make the list. It is difficult to understand why, when the country came together to ensure that the UK Ministry of Defence contract resulted in jobs for the shipyards on the Clyde, a misguided plan proceeded that will diminish the opportunity that those Clyde facilities will have to take part in the renewables manufacturing industry in the future. The significant potential of the renewables industry is surely an opportunity for the whole of Scotland. I hope that the Scottish Government will re-examine the matrix and weighting that were applied for the national renewables infrastructure plan to ensure that access to those significant opportunities is not hindered in any way. In conclusion, I ask the minister to accept that we need to spread the gain, wealth potential and opportunity across Scotland. We must look again at the national renewables infrastructure plan to ensure that we are promoting effectively and aggressively the best of our physical resources and skills so that we can bring those green jobs to Scotland.

I am interested in Hunterston—we built a power station not far from my constituency. Eleven sites have been identified, of which Hunterston is one. There is a total requirement of £223 million; Hunterston alone requires £65 million. The sites need to be up and running by 2013-14, so is Mr Gibson not concerned that we are running out of time for Hunterston? Does he not agree that the minister will need to reconsider the renewables infrastructure plan?

Just last week, the First Minister delivered his promise of no public service compulsory redundancies, while his new minister for broken promises, Alex Neil, was announcing such redundancies for CalMac Ferries workers on the existing vehicle route between Gourock and Dunoon. Will the cabinet secretary explain why CalMac workers are not covered by the First Minister’s promise to the public sector of no compulsory redundancies?

I heard and welcome the cabinet secretary’s answer that he would try to extend the policy of no compulsory redundancies throughout the public sector. Will he take this opportunity to make it clear that whatever the outcome of the tendering process and eventual decision on the Gourock to Dunoon ferry route, it will not result in a single compulsory redundancy? If he gave us that assurance, it would be good news for the 66 employees who face an uncertain time between now and the final decision in June.

I am pleased to be taking part in the stage 3 debate on the Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Bill. This is the latest piece of legislation and action by the Parliament and others in response to the difficulties and failures in the 2007 local government and Scottish Parliament elections. Today’s debate is in complete contrast to the type of debate that we had after the 2007 election. In my constituency, 1,100 people were denied the vote and, in some polling stations, the proportion of spoilt papers was in excess of 10 per cent. It might be useful to remind ourselves about some of that debate and the recommendations and actions that flowed from that time. The Gould report has been mentioned, and the Local Government and Communities Committee’s report of 2008 made recommendations and comments about a range of areas around the Scottish Parliament and local government elections. Many of the issues that gave us concern at that time have been mentioned this morning, such as e-counting, adjudication of ballot papers, the administration and co-ordination of elections in Scotland, and the absence of a parliamentary committee with clear responsibility or a scrutiny role. Many of those issues have been addressed and committees of Parliament will have a scrutiny role in the future. I hope that that role will be used to the full in the evaluation of the 2011 elections and the referendum that we face in a few weeks. We addressed the issue of wider engagement in elections. In a good example of the Government of the day working with a committee of the Parliament, we held a major seminar in the chamber to address the challenges of voter turnout and registration. Of course, we passed legislation to decouple the local government and Scottish Parliament elections. Also, deadlines for nominations for all elections were brought forward and are now set out in election law. Further changes—I hope that they are for the good—are expected in the Scotland Bill. Like other members, I believe that the bill is another step in the right direction. It seeks to put in statute much of the good work that the electoral management board has under way on a non-statutory basis. In a recent evidence session, the Local Government and Communities Committee was given a flavour of that. We heard about the introduction of an annual publication of standards for returning officers, which is now in place. That will ensure good standards across Scotland. One consequence of the bill that will be passed today is that that will be extended to local government. In its regular planning meetings, the electoral management board has agreed specific preparations and planning arrangements for the May elections. Counting officers and returning officers have submitted risk registers to the chief counting officer. Members will be pleased to know that none of that work indicates a level of risk that should worry us. Working together, parties such as the Electoral Commission and the Government have overseen the serious addressing and testing of the design guidance for voter material and the production of verification and count protocols for people to follow. All that should give help and advice irrespective of where it is needed in Scotland. We also have adjudication booklets and codes of practice on postal voting. Overall, the detailed level of planning and action in the bill gives hope for the future. It should address any lack of confidence in the general population about the election process in Scotland. Before we get carried away with all that, I should mention the significant planning challenges that still remain. The UK referendum and the Scottish Parliament elections have different franchises and different rules on what should be counted, and how. That will impact on where the ballot can be counted. There is also the issue of postal voters receiving not one ballot paper on which to mark yes or no or to tick a box, but various coloured ballot papers and a whole range of information. We can only do our best to try to reassure people that they will be guided and supported through the process. I hope that we will be able to achieve that. As I mentioned, the nature of the count will be affected. In recent evidence, the Local Government and Communities Committee was told that some declarations could be made between five and six o’clock in the morning. That made me wonder what the chamber wants by way of an overnight count. When declarations may not be made until five or six o’clock in the morning, is an overnight count still worth it? We may not be able to do anything about that now, having got to this stage. The various ballot papers have to be sorted out before the count on the Scottish Parliament elections can start. That is a significant challenge. We may have an increased number of postal votes. That is not necessarily a bad thing. However, as the Local Government and Communities Committee heard in evidence, personal identifiers are an issue that impacts on the elderly in particular. At the last UK elections, more than 8,000 mainly elderly people in Scotland did not even have their ballot papers opened, perhaps because they got the day that they signed the form mixed up with their date of birth and put their date of birth in the wrong box. There are other significant challenges, such as the impact of the Easter holidays and the royal wedding. However, I look forward to voting for the bill as yet another step in ensuring that we address the mistakes of the past, restore confidence in our elections and give voters, candidates and agents as good an election as possible.

I thank everyone who signed the motion to celebrate this event and everyone who has stayed behind for the debate. In a week when people all over the world have celebrated international women’s day, I welcome Helen Monaghan—the leader of the Lee jeans sit-in—and Catherine Robertson and Margaret Wallace, who have travelled through from Greenock for today’s debate, giving us this opportunity to recognise the 30th anniversary of the Lee jeans sit-in. The VF Corporation, a multinational, was attracted to produce Lee jeans in Greenock with the help of a Government grant, on the basis that it had to stay for a fixed period. That period had come to an end, and it was the company’s intention to move to Newtownards in Northern Ireland to take advantage of a similar grant that would be available there. The management confirmed the closure of the factory to the workforce on 5 February 1981. The response from those workers was swift and direct—barricading themselves into the factory and preventing stock and machinery worth around £1 million from leaving. That response was completely understandable, given the background of the time. Scotland’s unemployment rate was 13 per cent. In Strathclyde region, it was 17 per cent and, in some areas of Greenock and Port Glasgow, it was as high as 25 per cent. The women had witnessed the effect of that on their communities and families—their fathers, their brothers and their husbands. Many of the women were the sole earners in their households. They were not working for pin money. The women’s first task, of course, was to inform those families that they would not be home that night—no easy task before the advent of mobile phones. Indeed, it would lead to many difficult discussions. At the recent celebration, one of the women, Marie, told me about her call to her young husband to inform him that she would not be home because she was sitting in. He was incredulous; he had just got home from his work and demanded that she get home as well. However, she was equally determined to stay. “Who’s gaunae make my tea?” he asked. She would not be moved and spoke to her father, a trade unionist and Labour man, who intervened on her behalf. Her husband had to get used to making his own tea while Marie, with others, would go on to make Scottish labour history. I am told that that first evening was exciting and fun. There were songs and stories and 240 fish suppers washed down with Irn Bru. David Whitton, who was an industrial correspondent at the time and who visited the factory regularly—he would have loved to be here, but he has a family celebration to attend this afternoon—claimed that he bought the fish suppers. Many people claim that they did that—I even think that we claimed it for a while. It is fair to say that the women did not expect to be there for seven nights, never mind seven months. News spread quickly. It was the talk of the shipyards the next morning. I had known Helen Monaghan for a considerable time, attending the shop steward courses at the local college, and I and other colleagues went to the factory that morning with some money and messages of support. I can still recall speaking to Helen through those meshed windows that could not open properly. All the faces at the door made me feel like I was visiting prisoners. I can also remember one of the first public meetings—a Clyde shop stewards meeting in Port Glasgow—at which we heard Stan McNee’s rallying cry that we would “not let these Yanks take the jeans off our women”. The remark proved very popular, given the traditional rivalry between the local young males and the United States navy personnel who were also based in the area, and we collected a lot of support as a result. I also recall Helen Monaghan speaking at one of these traditional town hall mass meetings—other members will know what I am talking about. Confronted with a room filled from floor to gallery with all these shipyard bears, she choked with emotion during her speech and, of course, many heads went down. Noses were blown and handkerchiefs were common; there was not a dry eye in the house. When she finished her speech, the audience rose as one and supported the women in their industrial dispute for the duration of the fight. Back at the factory, with its more female occupation, there did not have to be any warnings about bevvying or vandalism. Cleaning and cooking rotas were implemented; the place was spotless. Moreover, maintenance continued to be carried out on the factory machinery, because people fully expected to be working on it. There were even babies in the factory, because some of the women had to take children there. Theatre groups performed for them; indeed, our own Sarah Boyack celebrated her birthday at the factory in a red revue performance. Helen Monaghan tells me that, during the difficult times when people started to drift away and morale inevitably began to dip, those performances greatly lifted the women who remained. Of course, as with all families, there was some tension among the women. Margaret Wallace and Catherine Robertson were young and full of energy. They could not do enough and were demanding to do more; to put it bluntly, they were doing Helen Monaghan’s head in. An ideal opportunity came along in the shape of invitations to speak to a range of wild—perhaps that is a Freudian slip—and wonderful groups that had shown an interest in what they were doing, and they toured the country. Catherine and Margaret were sent away to tell their story and to raise support and much-needed finance. The money was distributed on the basis of the needs of families, not individuals, which is interesting and was a new approach. That released some tension until Margaret and Catherine returned with their various reports. The final straw was when Margaret returned. As she describes, her appearance had changed dramatically over the couple of months. She had been transformed into a person with a cropped haircut, whose favourite colour was black and whose favourite footwear was a pair of Doc Martens. She reported meeting Vanessa Redgrave, who had suggested that armed insurrection was the only reasonable way of gaining success for the working classes. Helen quickly changed tack, and Margaret was redeployed to collect money from shipyards and pitheads, just in case her energy and enthusiasm led to a civil war. That straightforward, honest and committed approach to saving jobs confounded and surprised many, and it certainly shocked VF Corporation and the local management, who had abandoned those involved early on. The trade union officials of those involved were bemused and confused by their single-minded determination and refusal to compromise, and the women certainly surprised the wider trade union movement, which was demoralised by the loss of militant car workers at Chrysler, red Clydesiders joining the dole, and shipyards closing. We witnessed the closure of steel plants and, of course, the mighty National Union of Mineworkers was on its knees and under attack. In many ways, the people involved in the sit-in gave as much to the labour and trade union movement as they received. They provided a spark of light in a very dark time. Many shared a great sense of achievement with the victory in August 1981. Those people were an inspiration in their leadership under Helen Monaghan. Many who clearly remember the events and many who are MSPs today have told me that they were inspired by those actions. While we celebrate the victory this year, I would like to think that the Scottish Parliament was brought about by the resistance of those involved and the resistance of those who fought and did not get victory. This year, we should use the example of their commitment and determination to fight for the right to work and to remind ourselves that the Parliament was set up to ensure that we protect the Scottish people from uncaring Governments that believe that unemployment is a price worth paying. I look forward to the film of what happened, and suggest that Peter Mullan or even Ken Loach could make a great film. If Dagenham women can do it, our women can do it. I also look forward to the 40th anniversary of the sit-in and to having a pleasant lunch with Helen, Margaret and Catherine after the debate.

2. To ask the Scottish Government how it is supporting enterprise agencies in attracting businesses and jobs to Inverclyde. (S3O-13144)

The minister will know that regeneration of a community is about people—about building quality homes for them to live in; creating jobs for them to work at; having schools and colleges that will educate them and allow them to gain additional skills; and, of course, providing the quality services that they require. Given that all those matters face severe spending reductions, what work has the Scottish Government done to measure the impact that the cuts will have on communities such as Inverclyde, which are less resilient to them? If the Scottish Government cannot protect us from Tory cuts, does the minister at least understand and take account of the cuts’ disproportionate impact on communities such as Inverclyde? The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has recognised that and previously assured me that he would take account of it.

Get on your bike.

My apologies, Presiding Officer. I thought that Frank McAveety wanted to get past me. The debate has got off to a depressing start. At least Alex Johnstone did not claim to be a friend of the miners—how could he? The debate has not changed in relation to how fast and deep the budget cuts are and how high unemployment will travel. I come from Inverclyde and represent that area, where we know all about de-industrialisation. Mass unemployment ensues, taking work out of a working community. That destroys that community, leading to deprivation, poverty, health problems, increased crime and drugs. Then comes depopulation, which puts pressure on services and schools. How do we fill our schools? How do we run our hospitals and maintain our maternity services? All of that becomes a massive challenge. Of course, de-industrialisation changed the political environment, too, in many areas and certainly in mine. In the Scottish Parliament, we—in coalition with other parties—at least recognised some of those challenges and were able to save our maternity hospitals. The initial challenge was to try to replace sunset industries with sunrise industries and big jobs with big jobs. However, full-time employment was replaced by part-time employment and good pay with low pay. Casualisation also ensued. All of that was made possible by a Conservative Government. Another Conservative Government is at it again. The discussion document is important in some ways to the next stage—I will come back to that. It is important that we learn the lessons about how to support our communities and find out what works and what does not work. We have a model that we believe works. The Scottish Parliament supported us in setting up the urban regeneration company. We recognised the need to bring together the private and public sectors and to drive forward our ambition for our community. The community became involved in that response. We also recognised that it was not simply about replacing jobs. We realised that there was a massive job to do in reclaiming land and clearing brownfield sites. The land needed to be decontaminated—it had been poisoned by the industrial chemicals that had been used over years and years. We needed to build houses in the public sector and the private sector and agreed a housing stock transfer. We also agreed to build a new school to tackle attainment. All of that was opposed by Alex Neil and his party—

No it is not. I am prepared to take an intervention from the minister.

That makes my case completely. The minister opposed housing stock transfer and if we had listened to him, Stuart McMillan and others, people would now be living in even poorer housing. If we had listened to Alex Neil on schools, we would not have the new schools that we have right now. That is the reality. The minister has proved my case. We also recognised that our college was at the heart of our community. Our college could address the skills deficit that we had. We know that regeneration is a people business. We needed to get people involved and move them on. My only regret is that the “Building a Sustainable Future” discussion document came too late. It is a smokescreen in relation to what is happing now. It was produced after the budget—a budget that has cut by in excess of 60 per cent the funding for our urban regeneration company, which had such ambitious plans to modernise my area. My college is in crisis. It faces massive budget cuts and 90 of its people face redundancy. All of that puts pressure on the young people in my area. Every pound that we cut shoves up youth unemployment. Another cut from this Government is the unfair budget settlement for our local council, but the Government refuses to recognise that, despite assurances from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, that he would take into account the needs of communities that are less resilient to cuts. If there is a community anywhere in Scotland that is less resilient than mine in that regard, I do not know where it is. Our council needs a fair settlement and our college needs to be funded appropriately. What has the Scottish Government done other than cut the budgets of a community that is less resilient? That is even before the cuts in public sector employment come. We are overdependent on the public sector in Scotland. That is not because everybody wants to work in the public sector but because we have lost massive amounts of our manufacturing industry. When we got the Scottish Parliament, we expected that it would work for communities such as mine. It did for a period, but it is no longer working for those communities. When Labour tackles the Tories on the cuts that they are making in Scotland, we expect the minister’s support. We do not expect him to stab us in the back by cutting college and local government budgets and increasing unemployment.

Does the member agree that a cut in the URC budget in excess of 60 per cent is outrageous and will damage our ambition for Inverclyde?

Seventy-one.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

It would be interesting if the cabinet secretary could provide more detail on the reinstatement of 50 per cent of the regeneration budget and how that will impact on the River Clyde urban regeneration company.

2. To ask the Scottish Government how it is supporting the provision of further education. (S3O-12884)

James Watt College, which is based in Greenock, is facing a shortfall of up to £5.7 million in its annual budget, which is jeopardising more than 100 jobs and putting a question mark over the availability and quality of student provision at a time of high demand. Does the minister recognise that every pound that is taken from the further education budget leads to an increase in youth unemployment, damages our skills agenda and—as the colleges are important employers in communities such as Inverclyde—increases overall levels of unemployment? Can she confirm that all those consequences were taken into account before the FE budgets were cut?

I apologise to you, Presiding Officer, the minister and my colleagues for being slightly late. I had to be present at a meeting with a local colleague who faces a difficult situation, but I accept that there is no excuse for being late. As convener of the Local Government and Communities Committee, I am pleased to take part in this debate on a bill that is designed to improve and benefit the administration of local government elections in Scotland. I thank all those who provided written and oral evidence to the committee. I also thank our committee clerks, the Scottish Parliament information centre researchers and, of course, my fellow committee members for all their efforts during our stage 1 scrutiny of the bill. As we have heard, the bill does two main things: establishes, on a statutory basis, an electoral management board for Scotland to oversee local government elections; and extends the Electoral Commission’s remit to cover local government elections in Scotland. We already have an interim electoral management board that operates on a non-statutory basis and there was widespread support for the next step: putting the board on a statutory footing. Of course, the Scottish Parliament already has powers in relation to local government elections, but not in relation to elections to the Scottish Parliament or House of Commons or European elections. Therefore, the provisions in the bill are restricted to local authority elections. As we know, the Scotland Bill makes provision for the Scottish Parliament to have control over its own elections. Therefore, it seems logical that the electoral management board’s remit should be extended to include other elections in Scotland, as and when that is appropriate. When the minister gave evidence to the committee, he confirmed that the Scottish Government is considering the available mechanisms to extend the board’s remit once responsibility for Scottish Parliament elections is transferred. We welcome the minister’s comments in relation to those elections. We also acknowledge the UK Government’s role in bringing forward legislation to give the board a statutory role in relation to other elections. Therefore, we have called on the UK Government to consider further extensions to the board’s remit that would allow it to cover elections to the House of Commons, European Parliament elections and referenda. In addition, the wealth of electoral expertise that the board will have could be valuable in the administration of elections to institutions such as health boards and the crofting commission, and we have asked the Scottish Government to consider that. There was a great degree of consensus on the bill’s provisions, but slight disagreement arose in one area. The convener of the electoral board will be a returning officer, will be appointed by Scottish ministers and will, in turn, appoint the other eight members of the board, five of whom must be returning officers or depute returning officers. The Electoral Commission expressed some concern about having depute returning officers on the board as, in its view, they would not be legally accountable for their actions in the same way as returning officers are. However, members of the interim electoral management board and the minister rejected those concerns, on the basis that depute returning officers provide much-needed practical experience and do their work on behalf of returning officers, who are ultimately accountable to the courts. Having listened to the arguments, we agree with the approach that is taken in the bill—that depute returning officers should be eligible to be full members of the board, especially given the expertise that they will undoubtedly bring to bear. Under the bill, the convener of the board will be given a power of direction in relation to local government elections. The Electoral Commission expressed some concern that the bill did not provide for any sanctions if a returning officer failed to comply with a direction issued by the convener. Both the former and the current chair of the interim electoral management board envisaged that there would be a great deal of consultation and consensus and that there should not be any surprises. The former chair, Tom Aitchison, took the view that if a situation arose in which one direction was being issued after another, the board would have failed. However, we noted that the power was needed as a backstop against unforeseen eventualities. Effective planning should reduce the need to issue directions. We also think that compliance with a direction will be dependent on returning officers and electoral administration officers adopting a consensual approach. In our report, we recommend that the Scottish Government monitor the effectiveness of the power of direction going forward. The board will be required to produce an annual report. We agree with that provision. Finally, the bill extends the function of the Electoral Commission to cover local government elections in Scotland. Again, that is a logical step, given that those are the only elections in respect of which the commission has no formal remit. As with so much in the bill, there was agreement on that provision, which will benefit electoral administration in Scotland by promoting consistency and good practice. We also welcome the requirement for the commission to lay an annual report before Parliament. Although some of the bill’s provisions needed clarification, there was a high degree of consensus on what the legislation sets out to do. The committee is of the view that the main provisions will improve electoral administration in Scotland. We support the bill’s general principles.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

How much of the £30 million tax take will go to small businesses?

I am pleased to take part in the debate as convener of the Local Government and Communities Committee. I am experiencing a bit of déjà vu, however, as it is not long since we debated the Housing (Scotland) Bill, which contained quite a few of the provisions that are before us today. I thank all those who gave us written and oral evidence, our committee clerks, Scottish Parliament information centre researchers and my fellow committee members. The committee looked first at landlord registration. As the minister outlined, the bill expands the fit-and-proper person test that the landlord must meet. We will support that expansion, which provides focus and direction to local authorities about the issues, especially antisocial behaviour, that they must take into account when assessing someone’s registration. The bill also provides for all adverts for properties to let to include the landlord’s registration number. As the minister said, it was important that we had real discussion about the measure, if it is truly to be a means of and tool for enforcement. In the evidence that we received, there was general agreement that it was a good idea. However, as has been mentioned, a number of concerns were raised about how it would work in practice. As the minister said, one issue was that, generally, registration numbers are pretty long, so the number would probably not mean much to the public unless there was some kind of explanation. To let boards would be exempt from the requirement, apparently because it was thought that it would be impractical to have different numbers on different boards. We look forward to hearing more about all that. The alternative of having a symbol or kitemark was suggested, but we recognised that there were concerns that any symbol would not be unique and might be too easy to copy. For that reason, the committee suggested that we replicate the system that trade bodies use, under which the kitemark denotes registration but is backed up by a list of registered organisations that are given unique registration numbers. We also thought that using such a system could get round the difficulties with to let boards, so that they might not have to be exempt. The Housing (Scotland) Bill proposed increasing the fine for non-registration to £20,000. This bill proposes that the fine should be £50,000. Although we support increasing fines as a deterrent to rogue landlords, we were concerned about the lack of prosecutions, which we saw as, in effect, allowing bad landlords to continue operating outwith the system. We heard in evidence on the bill that the City of Edinburgh Council successfully prosecuted a landlord who had failed to register three of his seven properties, but that the courts imposed a fine of only £65 per property. If we compare that with the amount that it cost, according to the council, to prosecute the case, which was about £2,000 or £3,000, we find that there is hardly an incentive to deal with rogue landlords. The current level of fines is significantly lower than the current maximum, and there are a number of difficulties in pursuing prosecutions. That toxic combination left the committee doubting whether a fine could act as a deterrent whatever the level at which it is set. Our report makes it clear that there can be a proper deterrent only if courts recognise and impose the higher fines so that local authorities are more prepared to pursue cases. It is vital that the courts give sufficient weight both to landlord registration and to HMO licensing schemes. The committee has suggested that it might be worth having either a dedicated housing court or a housing tribunal. That said, we support the increase in the maximum fine as a step in the right direction. During our scrutiny of the Housing (Scotland) Bill, and again during our scrutiny of the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill that is now before us, one issue that was raised time and again was whether the landlord registration scheme was working as it should, even with the improvements that were being made. There were also concerns that enforcement was not consistent across all local authorities. I am pleased to hear that the minister will be encouraging best practice in that regard, as we know that some schemes could be more proactive. It seems that landlord representatives—the good landlords—were so disillusioned that they suggested that the registration scheme should be abolished. There was a worry about people not reregistering. We do not agree with that view, but we also do not think that the scheme is working as effectively as it should. When we scrutinised the Housing (Scotland) Bill, we said that we were not sure that the proposals in that bill were sufficient to tackle rogue landlords. We say that again with regard to the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill. We know that the Scottish Government’s private rented sector strategy group will review the current registration scheme, so we hope that the group will look at how to tackle those issues. We support the bill’s provisions on landlord registration, but we recognise that they will go only so far. Guidance that the Scottish Government will produce subsequently, and the review of the scheme, will be very important. The substantive provisions on HMO licensing that were originally in the Housing (Scotland) Bill are replicated in the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill. In our stage 1 report on the Housing (Scotland) Bill, we welcomed those provisions, as we felt that they could tackle the breaches of planning control that often result from landlords trying to maximise the letting potential of a property. We took the view that local authorities must use the tools at their disposal in housing and planning legislation to support sustainable communities and to maintain private sector housing. The committee considered the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill’s provisions to deal with overcrowding. We know that overcrowding is a significant issue in certain parts of Glasgow—there was a lot of discussion about Govanhill and about the migrant workers who live there, as the minister mentioned. Everyone who gave evidence to us agreed that overcrowding is an issue that needs to be tackled, but a number of concerns were raised about the approach that the Government was intending to take. For instance, some organisations suggested that there should be a duty to deal with anyone who is displaced as a result of their living in overcrowded conditions. It became clear to the committee that this is a very complex area: existing legislation can already be used to deal with overcrowding and local authorities already have duties to deal with homelessness in certain situations. On that basis, we support the bill’s provisions in that regard, although we have concerns about their practical application. We certainly do not want situations to arise where an overcrowding notice is served, but all that it does is to make someone homeless. That would mean solving one problem, but creating another. Neither do we want undue pressure to be put on the social rented sector, with private landlords quite happily breaching the legislation, knowing that local authorities will have to deal with the problem. We noted that the minister had given reassurances that the provisions in the bill were not intended to give rise to either of those situations, but I re-emphasise the fact that the current position is complex, and it is really not possible to predict with any certainty how many cases of homelessness there are likely to be across Scotland, and therefore whether or not there will be sufficient capacity in the private and social rented sectors to house people who have been displaced. The powers in the bill will be used at the discretion of local authorities and are likely to be used as a last resort, but there is uncertainty about how things will play out in practice and we are concerned about that. That is why we recommended that the Scottish Government consult widely on its guidance on the factors that need to be taken into account before the decision is made to issue an overcrowding notice. We also recommended that the Government monitor the number of overcrowding notices and local authorities’ reasons for issuing them. In that way we should be able to assess how effective notices are in dealing with overcrowding and what impact they have on levels of homelessness and the housing stock. We need a fully effective landlord registration scheme to ensure that we weed out rogue landlords. We are not there yet. We welcome the improvements that the bill will bring, but it is clear that more needs to be done. Overcrowding is a serious problem that needs to be addressed. We acknowledge what the bill is trying to achieve, but we are concerned about the practicalities. With those caveats, we recommend that the general principles of the bill be agreed to.

I thank Alasdair Allan for giving us this opportunity to debate this serious issue this evening. He has ably covered the issues that affect the Scottish coastline. Obviously, I will focus on the Greenock coastguard station, which is better known in the area as the navy buildings because it houses the coastguard, navy personnel and MCA examiners—a wealth of experts who are able to assist in times of difficulty. It is rare in these times to find under the one roof such an establishment of advice on stability, technical matters and safety, combined with expert, detailed local knowledge—and it should not be given up easily. Some would say that that type of facility and capability should be the norm, particularly on the Clyde, which is one of the busiest gateways to Scotland and the UK. The Clyde coastguard manages Ministry of Defence traffic, including nuclear submarines, and deals with significant cargo traffic at Clydeport container terminal. It also manages more than 30 cruise liners that arrive in Scotland every year, carrying in excess of 1,500 passengers. We must also remember, of course, that the Clyde coastguard covers ferry routes south as far as Arran and north as far as Mull, with estimated annual passenger numbers of 4 million to 5 million. The potential for human, environmental and, indeed, political disaster is obvious. As has been said, given the influence that we have over the consultation, there is something ironic about calling it a consultation; the proposal to close the base was made when the start of the consultation was announced. The First Minister confirmed that there has been an absence of consultation when he confirmed in this chamber that the Scottish Government had not been consulted on the issue. We do not know how far the consultation has gone. If the proposals go ahead, the service that is currently provided by the Clyde coastguard would be provided by Belfast, Stornoway or Liverpool. We should not be excitable in these times, but during an exchange with the First Minister during a recent question time I described the decisions as daft and dangerous. I welcome the cross-party support that the First Minister confirmed exists on this issue—its existence has been confirmed again during this debate. I hope that the minister will update us this evening on the progress that he has made with regard to his representations to ministers to ensure that we have some sort of influence on this so-called consultation. In addition, we should bring the hapless Mr Penning, the minister who is responsible for these daft and dangerous proposals, to the committees of this Parliament. The least he should do is attend a meeting of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee—or whatever committee is deemed appropriate. We should all come together to assist the efforts of the minister and the First Minister to ensure that there is some form of consultation on this matter, to give Mr Penning an opportunity to justify his daft and dangerous proposals, to enable us to question him on his proposals and, I hope, to inject some reality and common sense into the situation so that we can reverse the proposals in the interests of the coastal communities of Scotland.

As you will know, Presiding Officer, as it is a community that we share and represent, Inverclyde knows all about hard times. It knows that the consequences of Government politicians walking by on the other side of the street are high unemployment, low pay, depopulation, a higher dependence on public sector jobs, impacts on health and housing, poor educational attainment and a low skills mix. As a community, we worked with the most recent Labour-led Executive and came together to address many of those issues. We invested massively in a new school estate and teachers to address underattainment. We increased the number of people who went through the college at the heart of our community to address and improve our skills base. We voted in extremely high numbers for a housing stock transfer that released massive amounts of money, which is being used to renew existing homes and to build new ones in our area. That is very important in encouraging people to stay. With that support, we also developed a wider range of private sector housing, the price of which was more appropriate for the area. In 2007, we confirmed the future of our local hospital. We set up an urban regeneration company to attract new jobs and to open up the area. We converted our brownfield sites to attract new businesses and jobs. We did all that over that period. At this point, it should be said that, in these difficult times, we are not foolish enough to expect increasing budgets to address those issues—our community is not naive—but we do not expect to be hit disproportionately hard. In such times, hard-pressed communities should not be asked to pay a higher price than communities that are more resilient to the impacts of the cuts that are in store. I thought that the cabinet secretary accepted that the issues that confront communities that are less resilient in the face of cuts should be recognised. When I asked him about that in the chamber on 9 September, he followed up his answer with a letter to me on that very subject, but we know now that what he gave me was no more than warm words. We know that the local government allocation will hit communities that have smaller numbers and which are suffering depopulation. As a result, the schools programme will be delayed, if not worse. The cuts that will be made in the number of public sector jobs will have a disproportionate impact on communities such as mine that already have high levels of unemployment. In addition, of course, the housing budget will be cut by around 30 per cent, which will hit our ambitious local programmes for housing and new builds. Some housing associations are already considering rent increases. As we heard from Des McNulty, our local college has declared more than 90 redundancies, and the level of bursaries on offer is to go from the best in the country, recognising the profile of the community, to the worst. The college principal has asked how a total in-year funding shortfall of almost £5.7 million can be bridged. The biggest single cut in the SNP budget has been reserved for our successful urban regeneration company, Riverside Inverclyde, which faces a 70 per cent budget cut. No other budget line in the Scottish budget faces such a savage cut, which there can be no doubt goes way beyond any departmental norm and threatens current and future plans for the regeneration of our area. The cabinet secretary has left the chamber. I hope that he will read the Official Report tomorrow. That cut is a cut made in Scotland that will impact on a vulnerable community in Scotland. The Government has allowed Scottish Enterprise to renege on its commitments to URCs in Scotland, despite being barely halfway through a 10-year project. The decision has angered my community, and my local newspaper has mounted a campaign. The success of the regeneration company is being wasted. Is that truly the cabinet secretary’s idea of a reinvigorating approach to regeneration, as recommended by Sir John Arbuthnott in his Clyde valley review and emphasised by Crawford Beveridge in the independent budget review? My community still bears the scars of the previous recession. We have made considerable progress, slowly but surely, in rebuilding the damage created by the Thatcher years. The work of the urban regeneration company is an integral part of that recovery. I call on the cabinet secretary to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past, to make good on his commitments to the URCs, and to reinstate Riverside Inverclyde’s budget so that it can continue the valuable work that it is doing in my community.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities leadership. (S3O-12654)

I hope that when the cabinet secretary met COSLA last week he was able to make the strongest representation with regard to the agreement between the Scottish Government, COSLA and Scottish Enterprise on the funding of urban regeneration companies. The agreement should be honoured. The collapse of the agreement has resulted in Riverside Inverclyde, my local URC, facing a 70 per cent cut, which threatens Inverclyde’s future economic prosperity. Will the cabinet secretary intervene to ensure that Inverclyde, which he has accepted is less resilient than other areas to the current public spending cuts, receives its due share of funding? Will he ensure that Riverside Inverclyde is allowed to continue its valuable regeneration work in my constituency?

Earlier this week, I was contacted by Blairs Ltd of Greenock—a manufacturing company with a great reputation that has operated successfully in my constituency for more than a century—with the bad news that, despite the sacrifices of the workforce and the commitment of management, the economic downturn has forced it to call in the  receivers and make 100 employees redundant. There remains a very small window—possibly as little as 48 hours—in which the company can be preserved as a going concern. Alternatively, it faces being broken up, which would be an act of economic vandalism. Will the First Minister add his support for the management and workforce, who are fighting to salvage something from that grave situation? What will he do to impress upon the insolvency practitioners and the banks—in this case, the Bank of Scotland—that they need to look beyond the narrow and short-term financial considerations and face up to their wider responsibility to jobs and the local economy in these difficult times?

The First Minister will be aware that the announcement last week of the consultation to modernise the services will result in the closure of Clyde coastguard station in Greenock. The station looks after the Clyde, the busiest gateway to our shores from Europe and the UK. It manages Ministry of Defence traffic, including submarines, significant ferry routes, cargo traffic and an increasing number of cruise ships. The proposals will ensure that those services are looked after from Belfast, Stornoway or Liverpool. Will the First Minister convey in the strongest terms that the Parliament, I am sure, believes that the proposals as set out are not only daft but dangerous?

Will Robert Brown take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

There has certainly been good progress on partnership working in my constituency, with the Inverclyde initiative, which the minister will know well. There has been significant investment in that initiative, which has reduced by 50 per cent calls to the police about antisocial behaviour. However, we should not be complacent—I know that the minister is not—about there being fewer calls to the police; there are still 800 a month about antisocial behaviour. Does the minister share my concern and that of the sheriff, police and other agencies that that option is not a cheap option and that cuts in investment and the money that is available to the Inverclyde initiative will mean that the gains that we have made will be lost in future years?

This weekend will see the third anniversary of the capsizing of the Flying Phantom tugboat, which claimed the lives of two of my constituents, Stephen Humphreys and Eric Blackley, and of a third crew member, Robert Cameron, who was a constituent of my colleague Trish Godman. Three years on, the bereaved families still have no date for a fatal accident inquiry. I am sure that the First Minister will appreciate the frustration of Helen Humphreys, widow of Stephen, when she says that she believes that the system is grinding her down. Will the First Minister agree to meet the families to reassure them of the Scottish Government's support for such an inquiry, which is required by the families and to ensure that the  health and safety lessons from the tragedy are learned and acted on?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

The cabinet secretary is correct to praise those public sector workers who battled through the snow to look after our most vulnerable and elderly people in their communities last week. While warm words are welcome, does he think that it would be a more practical appreciation of that commitment and work if he was to ensure that those low-paid workers received at least the minimum wage or the £250 protection that they are currently not eligible for?

I listened carefully to the cabinet secretary’s statement and I am disappointed that low pay in  the local government sector has not been addressed. Can he really be satisfied with a situation that means that a worker who earns less than £21,000 for looking after an elderly person in a hospital setting will receive a protective payment of £250 while their equivalent who looks after an elderly person in the community setting will not? Given that a Tory-led Government in England—which we have heard much of today—will ensure that low-paid workers right across the public sector, including those in local government, will receive the £250 protective payment, why can we not expect the same of an SNP Government in Edinburgh?

I am pleased to be taking part in the debate as convener of the Local Government and Communities Committee. We were the lead committee that looked at Patricia Ferguson's bill. I thank all the witnesses who provided the committee with evidence and I express my thanks to my colleagues on the committee for their input. I also thank our hard-working clerks and researchers. I pay tribute to Patricia Ferguson for her work in bringing the bill to the Parliament. As we all know from our constituency case load, problems with property factors are on the increase, and one of the problems is that the sector remains unregulated. The subject of the disputes that can arise between factors and their clients include the lack of financial transparency, hidden commissions and the unspecified charges to which Patricia Ferguson alluded. We have all heard of the £30 replacement light bulb and other such charges. However, property factors face a  different set of problems, such as non-paying residents, absentee landlords who have little interest in their properties, and poor maintenance of common areas. Disputes can arise over relatively small matters, but they can escalate, occasionally as far as court proceedings. One of the main proposals in the bill is that property factors will have to be registered. That will put them on the same footing as landlords in both the private and social rented sectors, who are subject to a statutory registration scheme. During its stage 1 consideration of the bill, the committee acknowledged the work that the Scottish Government and a stakeholder working group are doing to consider a national voluntary accreditation scheme for property factors. The stakeholder group believes that the voluntary scheme is so far forward in its development that it should be introduced, with a statutory scheme being delayed and implemented only if the voluntary scheme is unsuccessful. The counter-argument is that, unless a statutory scheme is introduced, factors who provide a poor service, who are the least likely to register, will continue to operate and provide an inadequate service to consumers, as no sanctions or standards of service will be set for unregistered property factors. On the balance of the evidence, the committee agreed with the view that a voluntary accreditation scheme would ultimately be unsuccessful in dealing with the problem of so-called rogue factors. The committee therefore supports the introduction of a statutory framework as proposed in the bill. We heard arguments that local authorities and registered social landlords should be exempt from paying a registration fee, but we recognise that, if those groups were exempt, more of a burden would fall on the remaining property factors. We also heard in evidence that RSLs are already subject to high levels of regulation and that the provisions in the bill would just add another layer of regulation. The committee took the view that, despite the continuing efforts to address the shortcomings in factoring services, tenants who live in social housing still have problems with RSLs and local authorities that provide such services, so they should be included in the definition of "property factor" in the bill. The committee also recognised that it is important that land maintenance companies are included in the definition. Although such companies manage, own and maintain land, the bottom line is that they are also property factors and have to be included. The final sanction for property factors who continually fail to come up to scratch would be to take them off the register. However, the committee thought that that might lead to problems. Although  we recognised that such a move would be a last resort, we felt that issues arose with regard to the area where a factor was deregistered. After all, a factor might have a number of clients over a wide geographical area and might be in serious dispute with a client group in one area but not in another. In evidence to the committee, the Minister for Housing and Communities summed up the difficulty when he said: "if you deregister a local authority, which is quite possible under the bill, what happens? There is no answer."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 22 September 2010; c 3470.] Moreover, deregistration poses a number of complex legal issues with regard to maintenance companies that own the land and can be responsible for providing factoring services for woodland areas, sustainable drainage systems and other items of infrastructure. As a result, we felt that the bill had to be sufficiently clear to ensure that there were no unintended consequences, such as home owners being left without a factor or issues arising from deregistering a land-owning maintenance company. Indeed, as we know from our case load, those who do not have a factoring contract also look to us to help them to resolve some of these issues. We know that the bill gives Scottish ministers the power to set the time and date for a factor to be taken off the register. However, although we acknowledge Patricia Ferguson's argument that a date could be set that would give people enough time to make other arrangements to ensure they were not left without a factor and would allow anyone removed from the register to appeal the decision, we think that that might not be enough. As a result, we suggest that the member look at other solutions such as giving ministers the power to remove someone only when they are satisfied that transitional arrangements have been put in place. We look forward to representations being made and these issues being clarified by the member at stage 2. A code of conduct will be key to improving property factors' performance and, under the bill, ministers will be able to prepare such a code to set out the standards that are expected of the industry. That will definitely serve a useful role and help to drive up standards. However, because the code will be introduced through secondary legislation, the bill contains nothing that witnesses could comment on, and we support the requirement for ministers to consult on a code before it is laid before Parliament. The failure to resolve disputes has been one of the biggest problems between factors and their clients. The committee heard about factors not responding to letters or phone calls, unitemised  billing, unexplained charges and high insurance charges. Consumers are frustrated and feel that, unless they resort to court action, which as we know is unpredictable, very expensive and not very satisfactory, they are powerless. Property factors themselves feel similarly frustrated and, to break the cycle, the bill proposes a dispute resolution procedure through the creation of a home owner housing panel and home owner housing committee, which will be similar to the existing private rented housing panel and private rented housing committees. The minister said that he would prefer an ombudsman system to what is proposed in the bill. There is clearly a need for some kind of dispute resolution procedure. However, in the current financial climate, we have to be aware of the costs to the public purse. Because the panel will be demand led, working out how much it will cost to set up has been problematic. That said, the same can be said of the ombudsman option and we have called on both the member and the minister to provide further information on both options. Overall, we recognise that the bill's main purpose is to create a statutory framework to protect the interests of home owners contracted to property factors and agree with the member that legislation is needed for such a scheme to work. Although we have highlighted a number of areas that need further consideration or amendment, we recommend that the bill's general principles be agreed.

Council tax?

The cabinet secretary and his colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing can provide certainty in the areas for which they are responsible by saying that there will be no compulsory redundancies in the health service or among workers who are employed directly by the Scottish Government. What certainty can he give to local government workers who do not have such an assurance?

What about local authorities?

Does the member accept that the differences that have been expressed today and his vision for any future changes should be dealt with appropriately through the procedures, principles and committees of this Parliament and that such measures should not be imposed on the Parliament?

I welcome the debate as an opportunity to discuss the concern that voters in Scotland have not been adequately consulted on holding the Scottish Parliament elections and the AV referendum on the same day in 2011, or on holding the UK elections and Scottish Parliament elections on the same day in 2015. As there is no convention for a committee convener to be allocated time in such a debate, I ask for the indulgence of my colleagues on the Labour Party back benches, because I intend to speak from a convener's point of view rather than take a party position. As members are aware, following the debacle in 2007, the Local Government and Communities Committee carried out an inquiry into the elections and made many recommendations. Subsequently, we were the lead committee for the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill, which decoupled the local government and Scottish Parliament elections. Only this week, we began scrutiny of the Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Bill, which picks up on some of our recommendations. Those who were at the committee earlier this week heard the Electoral Commission in Scotland speak about the challenges that it recognises that the combined referendum and elections and the combined Westminster and Scottish Parliament elections will present. They also heard from the interim electoral management board for Scotland about the concerns that returning officers have raised in respect of those matters, which have still not been resolved. The committee worked closely with the Scottish Government in holding a voter turnout seminar in the Parliament in June this year. Also, as recently as 30 September, it held a meeting with the UK Parliament Scottish Affairs Committee to discuss common ground and share the work that both Parliaments have done on the issue. Although, as we have heard in the debate, there were differences of opinion, emphasis and concern about the risks, there was also consensus among the committee members who met the Scottish Affairs Committee that holding the AV referendum on the same day as the Scottish Parliament elections raised a number serious concerns and gave rise to serious reservations. In July, on the basis that the Secretary of State for Scotland wanted to work with those who expressed an interest in the matter, we wrote to the Presiding Officer, expressing our interest. On 7 October, we wrote to the Secretary of State for Scotland and the Deputy Prime Minister, Nick Clegg, on the issue, outlining our involvement in these matters and expressing an interest in being  contacted and involved. To the Deputy Prime Minister's shame, he has not responded to the committee, despite the press reports that we read and the fact that ministers are dealing with Scottish MPs, Scottish Government ministers and party leaders on the matter. The Parliament needs to be brought back into the discussions; the fact that we have not been involved is not very satisfactory. Nevertheless, I hope that members agree that the committee has carried out a significant body of work that will help to inform our choices as we move forward on the issue. Regardless of the impact on our elections, the decision to proceed with a referendum on a fixed-term UK Parliament was disrespectful not only of our practice and procedures, but of the principles of openness and transparency that we have in the Parliament. I know that the Parliament can do better. We know that we can make informed choices, as we have done, and learn lessons. The committee knows that it can work across the parties and with the Scottish Government. Parliament surely recognises that there must be an opportunity for scrutiny of those who have created this situation. There must surely be scrutiny of those who support the decision, and there must be scrutiny of those who will have responsibility for running the election, because they know about the practical differences that we heard about earlier this week—the practicalities of the postal ballot, the different registers, the three ballot boxes and the reconfiguration of polling places that will be necessary. Those are practical issues that the Parliament needs to understand before we come to a view. Finally, there must surely be an opportunity for individuals and organisations that have long taken an interest in the matter to be heard. I therefore look forward to the minister carrying out what he announced in his statement when he said that proposals from the UK Government would be considered jointly with others in the Parliament. I expect the Scottish Government to continue to work with the committee to bring before the Parliament a report that will allow us to take a majority, considered view in our response to the UK Government and decide how we want to proceed in the best interests not of the Parliament and the parties, but of the electorate of Scotland.

Tell that to the unemployed.

In his discussions with COSLA on budget setting, has the cabinet secretary taken into account the full consequences of the UK comprehensive spending review, which will cost Inverclyde Council £1 million a year?

Will the minister take an intervention?

If we had the money, would the minister seriously spend £65 million on the development of Hunterston? What do we need to do to ensure that the west coast cluster is viable?

No one can doubt our massive renewables potential in Scotland in offshore wind and tidal resources and the positive impact that it could have on the Scottish economy by increasing our energy supply and creating tens of thousands of sustainable jobs in constructing turbines, building barges and jackets, and maintaining the operational infrastructure. Speedy access to significant investment in that potential is necessary. Competition is fierce throughout Europe and, indeed, within the UK. We welcome the fact that the UK Government is going ahead with the Labour plan to create a  green investment bank, which Alistair Darling announced in the 2010 budget. However, there is, of course, disappointment about the announcement that it will not be in place until 2013, with the understandable risk that the vital development funding will be delayed for several years. If we take a positive—some would say naive—view that matters will be resolved, the question is how well prepared we are in Scotland to move quickly and wisely on agreed priorities. The national renewables infrastructure plan was commissioned by the Scottish energy advisory board, chaired by the First Minister, Alex Salmond. That work was heavily influenced by Highlands and Islands Enterprise and supported by Scottish Enterprise. The report's task was to identify sites in Scotland that offer the greatest opportunities for development for use as construction sites. A matrix and weighting were applied to a number of sites in the selection process for investment. It is important that little weighting was given to population, skills, capability or the cost of bringing a site to the market. Given the context of today's debate, that is surprising, to say the least. It is significant that there was a 25 per cent weighting for proximity and geography. That is a little odd, as the east coast site that is up and running is engaged in delivering contracts for the west coast of Ireland on a commercial basis. There are no barriers to competing in that market. Of course, the consequences of that matrix and decision-making process were predictable. The Clyde area, with its population, skill base, deep-water docks and infrastructure, will lose out on the opportunity even to be considered on an equal basis to gain a foothold in the emerging renewables industry and the significant benefits that that would have in an area with higher-than-average unemployment.

Very briefly, because there is not much time.

I will come on to that issue, on which I have some specific questions for the minister, to which I hope that he will respond. Who would have believed that while the country was coming together to ensure that Ministry of Defence contracts from the UK Government resulted in jobs in the shipyards of the Clyde, the Scottish Government was proceeding with plans that would exclude the Clyde from participating in the renewables jobs of the future? The significant  potential of the renewables industry is an opportunity for the whole of Scotland, and the Government must ensure that access to that opportunity is not hindered unfairly or weighted against. Does the minister recognise that although proximity may be a factor, it is not as significant a factor as the infrastructure plan's application of a 25 per cent weighting—to the detriment of the Clyde—would suggest? What will be the implications of this week's sad news from the Machrihanish site, which has suffered another failure, despite receiving significant funding from the Scottish Government, for the west coast cluster? In his intervention, the minister mentioned investment at Hunterston. Given the tight financial situation, is it not overly ambitious to propose a plan that would require £65 million to develop? The proposal is not viable. Will the minister review the national RIP?

Will he ensure that that happens before the RIP is confirmed in the national planning framework?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will ensure that effective action is taken to address the recurring flooding problems in the Inverclyde area. (S3O-11507)

The Scottish Government's contribution to the Inverclyde flood action plan for 2010-11 is just £60,000, compared with the £500,000 that Inverclyde Council has allocated from its own reserves. Although there is an IOU for more funding—whatever that means, in these times—from 2012 onwards, a conservative estimate is that the cost of dealing with Inverclyde flooding would be nearer £10 million. Given that SEPA has acknowledged that special recognition should be given to coastal communities such as Inverclyde, what progress has been made in ensuring that increased and appropriate funding is made available to the Inverclyde area and others?

He has got the car and the salary for it.

I have listened with interest to what the cabinet secretary has had to say. How will the Scottish Government look after areas such as mine to ensure that they are not disproportionately affected by all this? Such areas have high dependency on public sector jobs and traditionally have had higher levels of unemployment and lower levels of pay than the rest of Scotland. How will my community be protected from the general approach to this economic crisis?

I speak for those of us in this Parliament and in the gallery who understand the need to address knife crime. We propose a mandatory sentence not as an alternative to a long-term strategy, but as an essential part of an approach that will address Scotland's knife culture. I say to Sandra White that the tough approach that we propose does not exclude the early prevention work that the cabinet secretary outlined, which has been piloted in my community with some success. However, I think, as other people do, that it is never acceptable to carry and use a knife to intimidate, wound or kill. Carrying a knife is a serious offence and the message should be clear: carry a knife and go to jail. I welcome the campaigners who are in the gallery, including Margo Hagen, mother of Darren; Lexi Lyall, mother of William; Kelly McGee, sister of Paul; Georgette Neil, wife of Malcolm; and, of course, John Muir, father of Damian. John Muir has campaigned, doggedly, effectively and with dignity against the evils of Scotland's knife culture, making his case for a mandatory sentence for knife crime. In the spirit of President Obama, when he was asked whether we can achieve political change from the ground up, he replied, "Yes, we can." Through his petition, he has ensured that the Parliament has had one of its most important debates. The petition led to a knife-crime summit,  and John Muir's arguments won the support of the Justice Committee during the passage of the bill. With the support of members of all parties, we hope to defeat the Government's amendment 3.  This is a significant test for our democracy and for the Parliament, the very purpose of which was to bring forward Scottish solutions to Scottish problems. The Parliament claims to be closer to the Scottish people and to understand their lives. It should be open and accessible. More important, it should be accountable to the people whom it serves. It would be a mistake for the Scottish National Party Government and its supporters in the Liberal Democrats to regard John Muir simply as a bereaved father speaking out only for his family's loss. He also speaks for his neighbours in Inverclyde, the west of Scotland and the more than 30,000 people throughout Scotland who supported the petition for action on knife crime. He has given voice to communities throughout Scotland that demand action. John Muir has won the popular argument against the Government, which has so far refused to listen and which, by its actions, would put more knife criminals on our streets. It is a complacent Government, with complacent MSPs who have lost the argument with a longsuffering public, who fear that the perceived rights of a criminal minority are more important than those of the innocent majority. We have an opportunity to change that perception, to listen and to act on the public's concerns. The success of today's proceedings will be measured not in the quality of the debate or how many column inches it generates: we will be judged by whether we effect change that responds to the innocent majority. That will be the democratic test. I hope that we will not let that majority down and that people power will defeat party power. I hope that, by defeating the amendment in the cabinet secretary's name, we will make a difference and answer the people's call.

To ask the Scottish Government how it will ensure that front-line health workers are protected from violence in the workplace. (S3O-11059)

I welcome the cabinet secretary's response and concur with her view that it is a very serious problem that needs to be dealt with. While I welcome the measures to which she referred, I am concerned that, out of the 65 incidents at Inverclyde royal hospital last year, just 25 resulted in a court appearance, and there were only 17 convictions. Does she agree that those depressing facts send out the wrong message to those who see health workers as a soft target? Will she discuss this unacceptable situation with her colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to ensure that those who abuse and use violence against our nurses and doctors will, indeed, face the full consequences of their actions before our courts?

As convener of the Local Government and Communities Committee, I am pleased to present the key conclusions from our stage 1 report on the Housing (Scotland) Bill. On the committee's behalf, I thank all those who gave evidence to us. In particular, I thank the minister's officials for responding to our numerous requests for additional information. I also thank my fellow committee members for their hard work in considering the bill. Last but not least, I express my gratitude for the support that was provided by the committee's clerks and researchers. The Housing (Scotland) Bill proposes to introduce another layer of housing legislation in Scotland. The bill includes a range of new provisions and amends a number of previous acts, but it seems that the Parliament will need to consider yet further housing legislation, as the minister has made a commitment to introduce another housing bill later in the session. The committee believes that it would have been preferable to have consolidated many of the provisions in the Housing (Scotland) Bill with those that will appear in the proposed private sector housing bill. We would have preferred to consider the changes to existing legislation in their totality. In our view, that would have been a far simpler approach than the one that the Scottish Government has pursued. The committee acknowledges that the Government carried out an extensive and inclusive consultation with stakeholders in preparing the Housing (Scotland) Bill. However, the committee is concerned that there was no evidence of direct engagement with tenants other than through those stakeholders. We hope that the Scottish housing regulator will do better in taking up the challenge of consulting with tenants directly, because we believe that it is crucial that the views of tenants, not just of their representative bodies, are taken into account in determining social housing priorities. In its stage 1 report, the committee decided to focus its consideration on four key issues: the modernisation of social housing regulation, the reforms to the right to buy, the amendment of legislation on private sector housing, and issues relating to the licensing of houses in multiple occupation and to the protection of unauthorised tenants. Whereas my committee colleagues will  cover specific aspects of the bill in their speeches this afternoon, I will outline the committee's key conclusions and recommendations. The bill's proposals on the modernisation of social housing regulation were broadly welcomed by the witnesses who gave evidence. The committee supports the provisions that will establish the Scottish housing regulator and confer on the SHR its objective and functions. The committee concurs that a single regulator will provide the simplest and most effective means of ensuring a consistent approach to the regulation of all social landlords and the services that they provide to tenants. Furthermore, the committee recognises that the inclusion of the objective for the regulator to safeguard and promote the interests of persons who are or who may become homeless will support efforts to tackle homelessness. The committee also considers that the role that housing associations can play in wider community regeneration is important and should be recognised by the Scottish housing regulator in the implementation of its objective. The evidence that the committee heard on the Scottish social housing charter demonstrated widespread support for the charter among stakeholders. The provisions seem to satisfy the demands for flexibility in balancing national outcomes with—this is an important point—local needs. The charter will also provide a means of raising standards in social housing. However, the committee calls for as much direct consultation of tenants as possible in the preparation of the charter. The second area that the committee focused on was the reforms to the right to buy. The committee noted that "the Scottish Government has ensured that those tenants with an existing right to buy retain that right" but, as the minister noted, the bill will end the right to buy for new tenants who enter the social rented sector, reform the pressured area designation and end the right to buy for new-supply social housing. In general, those three proposals were welcomed in evidence to the committee, although there were some differences of opinion. Some stakeholders called for more measures to ensure the retention of housing stock in the social rented sector, while others expressed concern about the effect of loss of receipts from sales. The Scottish Government has taken into account situations in which tenants could be disadvantaged by the reforms and has included exemptions to protect them. There was overwhelming evidence from a variety of organisations testifying to the complexity of the legislation on the right to buy. The committee concurred with those organisations  that, if enacted, the bill would further complicate the position, so it was of the view that "it will be particularly important to communicate the right to buy provisions clearly to tenants so that they have an accurate understanding of their entitlement to right to buy." The third area that the committee considered—the amendment of legislation on HMO licensing and the extent to which it would address the problem of rogue landlords and the flaunting of licensing requirements—turned out to be one of the most challenging. The committee took evidence in the knowledge that additional provisions were likely to be introduced in subsequent legislation but without knowing the exact nature of those provisions. It was established that the success of the register requirement has been patchy, with more proactive local authorities achieving high registration rates. Particularly notable is the fact that not a single landlord has been prosecuted for failing to register since the relevant legislation was enacted. The lack of prosecutions has had the effect of allowing bad landlords to continue to operate outwith the system, which has meant that protection for the most vulnerable tenants has been limited. It appears that, as it is currently framed, the bill will not address that issue. The committee was of the view that increasing to £20,000 the penalty for failing to register might act as a further deterrent to landlords who do not register, but it felt that unless a greater incentive was provided for local authorities to pursue a prosecution, that provision would not have the desired effect. We believe that the requirement for landlords to register needs to be promoted and that additional methods should be used to identify unregistered landlords. Those methods could include sharing data and requiring letting agents to check landlord registration and to provide information on the identity of a landlord to a local authority. When it considered the proposals on houses in multiple occupation, the committee came to the conclusion that the legislation on HMOs was complicated and dislocated, which we believed clouded its original purpose and hindered the capacity of local authorities to deal with the problems with HMOs in their areas. The committee welcomed the new provisions in the bill as a means of further protecting groups such as migrant workers and felt that the provisions could tackle the breaches of planning control that often result from landlords trying to maximise the letting potential of a property. We took the view that local authorities must use the tools at their disposal in housing and planning legislation to support sustainable communities and maintain private sector housing.  The final area that the committee considered was that of the protection of unauthorised tenancies, which was rendered difficult by the fact that the committee had to report on the bill at stage 1 before the repossessions group had completed its work and reported. Nevertheless, the committee concluded that it was important to strengthen and clarify the legal position of tenants in relation to repossessions when there is an unauthorised tenancy. I note that the repossessions group's report was published last week and the minister covered the issue in response to the committee's stage 1 report. The committee raises a number of significant issues in its report, and I am sure that my committee colleagues will provide more details about some of them during their contributions to the debate. With the caveats that I have mentioned, the committee supports the general principles of the bill and recommends to the Parliament that they be approved.

What representations have the minister, the Government or the First Minister made to the current UK Government with regard to that terrible decision?

Will the member give way?

I will take the hint, Presiding Officer, and press on immediately. This debate is obviously timely as we get into the economic decline and slump, and as lots of tough decisions have to be made by politicians, as we have heard. I represent a community that has some experience of joblessness and poverty, which is still with us from the last recession—it has lasted decades. It is important to remember, when we are making tough decisions, that unemployment and poverty are costs too, and they can be measured looking back over 20 years. We should not just look at deficits and everything else; it is important to take poverty into account. We need to learn some lessons from the mistakes that were made many years ago and which have left us with communities that are severely damaged. There are high levels of unemployment, and poverty not just in terms of income but, as other members have said, of ambition, education and health. The minister was right to say that, in these difficult times, we need to  maximise our effort and focus our attention on helping those who are least able to help themselves. The failures of the banks should not be borne on the shoulders of the poor. We cannot allow that to happen. Governments need to be judged by their actions and not just their words, although at this time their words and actions are both worrying enough. We have heard lots of talk of job cuts in the public sector, with all the costs that they will mean, and at the same time talk of cutting benefits, too. That happened all those years ago, and it is happening again. Already we have seen the end of the future jobs fund, which has given 400 young people in my constituency the opportunity to experience work for the first time. It is gone. The Secretary of State for Scotland told us today that it is not sustainable, but what is not sustainable is long-term unemployment, youth unemployment and all the chaos that comes from that. To be fair, attempts to address the tax system and make it fairer, as mentioned by Jeremy Purvis and under the long-held view of the Liberal Democrats, would help to break down the barriers for people to get into work. That is eagerly supported by the other party in the Government: the Conservatives, who are not progressive. The reason why they are so enthusiastic—

Just a second—let me make the point. The reason why the Conservatives are so supportive may be that they recognise that middle-income earners will benefit the most. We must watch out for that when we criticise the Scottish Government for its mistakes, such as freezing the council tax, which Jeremy Purvis is right to say does not benefit the poor. In difficult times, we should also look at policies such as free bus fares for 60-year-olds who are going to work in Edinburgh and Glasgow while the part-time female worker on the minimum wage pays £12 to £15 a week to go to work. That is not fair and should not happen. We cannot sustain free prescriptions for me while cancer patients go without. That is what is not sustainable in difficult times. We have a test that will define us as politicians, political parties and a Parliament in these hard times: the decisions that we make over the coming weeks. They are what are important. As we have heard today, people want to work. I support enthusiastically the right to work and the work ethic, and whatever we do with the benefits system must be used to support the people who want to work and to support the work ethic.  However, people should not be driven from unemployment and compelled to work if they are terrified and have been imprisoned in unemployment. Some people do not know how to cope with a job and are not educated enough to get up in the morning to go to work. They fear for the family's income and perhaps see work as a threat to that. However, they want to work, and we must give them routes to that. I have some questions for the minister on that. Governments should not campaign on the living wage, which is also important to support the work ethic, and other issues; Governments should act. We need action not just from the Government but across Governments. On 5 May, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing said that she wanted as a matter of urgency to arrange for the Scottish Government to speak to the new Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to ensure that we could get flexibility in the system that would enable us to tackle the barriers to work and employment. Perhaps Mr Neil can tell us what progress was made at that meeting, if it has taken place. I see that I am running out of time. I urge the minister to act on equal pay, which is a poverty issue. It concerns working women who are living in poverty. We have had three inquiries in this Parliament to tackle the issue of equal pay, but we have failed to do it and have blamed others for not doing it. It is time to act, and I hope that the Scottish Government will act—

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Government how successful the one-year job guarantee scheme has been in finding positions for newly qualified midwives. (S3O-10592)

From my previous questions and correspondence the cabinet secretary will know about my concerns about health boards that have not activated the one-year guarantee scheme. As a result, increasing numbers of newly qualified midwives are seeking positions outwith Scotland. That raises concerns about the balance of the workforce in future years. With last week's news that more than 600 nursing staff are now facing redundancy, can she assure my constituents that the actions by the health board will have no impact on the short-term or long-term  future of the community midwife unit at Inverclyde royal hospital?

I am pleased to open this debate on behalf of the Local Government and Communities Committee. The situation facing local government was described by Professor Alan Alexander, one of our witnesses at a round-table event, as the "perfect storm." We have increasing demand for the services that councils provide, an aging population demanding better social care, higher demand for homelessness and other welfare support services, increased pension contributions and equal pay settlements. If that were not bad enough, it seems that even the weather is against councils, as they have just come through the worst winter that we have seen in many years and have had to endure significant flooding problems in parts of the country. That is set against a situation in which local government is unable to raise council tax and has had little or no increase in funding centrally, with council tax becoming more difficult to collect in a recession and the income raised from building warrants being on a downward spiral. Against that backdrop, in June last year we announced our inquiry to ensure that there was a wider understanding of and debate on the financial pressures on local government. We began taking evidence for the inquiry in September 2009 and published our report in January of this year. I thank everyone who gave evidence to our inquiry, all the members of the committee and our clerks and researchers for their hard work, patience and support. During the inquiry, there was a question about whether problems had arisen as a result of the recession or whether the recession had just exaggerated existing financial pressures that should have been addressed. Some of our other work, such as our inquiry into the debacle that is equal pay, suggests that some problems are of the councils' own making. However, whatever the basis for the current situation, it is clear that different choices will have to be made and that there will be no quick fix.  We recently wrote to all 32 local authorities to find out what the up-to-date position is with their finances. The 27 responses that we received showed that the situation is pretty bad at the moment and likely to get worse over the next few years. Our inquiry report anticipated that, so we looked at how those financial challenges could be addressed. I think that everybody realises that the scale of the financial issues is such that they cannot be addressed merely by looking for efficiency savings. However, finding efficiency savings is important, and authorities should constantly strive to be more efficient and provide value for money. Local authorities and trade unions told the committee that a lot of inefficiency had already been driven out of the system. However, some other witnesses, including Audit Scotland, were more sceptical, with some believing that the necessary scale of efficiencies could be achieved only with greater regulation. The committee nonetheless concluded that the way forward was to undertake more work on benchmarking to improve performance and efficiency. That is now being progressed by the Scottish Government and the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers—we welcome movement in that area. The other huge issue relating to efficiency savings is shared services. Just before we concluded our inquiry, Sir John Arbuthnott published his report on joint working and shared services in the Clyde valley, and there was certainly a lot of food for thought in that report. There was concern that local authorities had not done enough of that kind of work in the past and that decisions were being taken now only in response to the financial crisis rather than because of any kind of long-term change in the management process. In his report, Sir John Arbuthnott said that local authorities "cannot meet this challenge with short term solutions, such as year on year efficiency savings or 'salami slicing' budgets. The Councils and their public and private sector partners need to take a more strategic long term view." However, witnesses told us of tensions that can arise when services are shared or centralised. For example, a national scheme to drive efficiencies in procurement might involve a cost to the local economy. The Arbuthnott report also highlighted a range of supports that the Scottish Government could provide. One suggestion was that the Scottish Government might introduce secondary legislation to smooth the way for interauthority shared services. The Government's response to our report did not offer a view on that proposal, but it confirmed that work is on-going to see what further  could be done. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will take the opportunity today to outline some of that work. Public services cannot be delivered without staff, but when budgets are tight, questions are inevitably asked about whether big enough savings can be made without impacting on pay and jobs. Of course, none of that is easy. It is never easy for politicians to cut the wages of their voters or to threaten them with the sack. In local authorities, the big issue is that staffing accounts for about 50 per cent of total budgets, so how we achieve savings is a very pertinent question. From the local authority responses that we received, it is clear that many authorities are looking to shed jobs to balance their books. In the main, they are trying to avoid going down the route of compulsory redundancies and are trying to manage any job losses by way of turnover and not filling vacancies or by voluntary redundancies. However, several authorities indicated that the scale of future budget deficits is likely to mean that compulsory redundancies cannot be ruled out. The committee fully appreciates that such decisions are difficult. Like freezing pay, reducing staff numbers might seem an attractive option to achieve savings, but we also appreciate that it is not a good idea to cut capacity to the extent that it will be difficult to deliver services in the future. Like all the other decisions that local authorities need to make, such decisions should be made with a strategic long-term view rather than as part of a short-term, knee-jerk reaction, which could have a detrimental impact in the future.

We did not look at those very detailed discussions, but we believe that it is important that local authorities deal with the issue not just as a response to a financial crisis but as a totality in which they work alongside others. Using redundancy to achieve savings might deal with one problem by reducing the workforce, but it can lead to increased costs. In fact, one council said in its latest response to us that it would not achieve a new saving for up to two years because of the need to make redundancy payments. That, too, needs to be taken into account. Making public sector workers redundant is a very expensive process. Another issue that councils need to consider is whether they should charge for services. A number of councils already charge for services,  but there is no uniform charging policy across the country. Although we can see that councils are perhaps being pushed in that direction, we agreed with the Arbuthnott report's recommendation that councils should work together to introduce consistency "where this does not cut across local priorities, to make this more easily understood by citizens and to avoid a 'postcode lottery' for fees and charges". The responses that we have received from councils suggest that existing charges are increasing by 2 to 3 per cent and that a number of councils have introduced, or are thinking about introducing, new charges. As I have said, we wanted to look at how local authorities could deal with a looming budget crisis. As our report outlines, there are various ways in which councils can make—and are making—savings, but in the round-table discussion Professor Alexander highlighted the significant issue of the lack of flexibility that is available to local authorities. He said that when the recession bites, they will have to make economies where they can rather than where they would choose to. Many in the third sector would claim that that is happening already and that they are paying the price. That would be considered a short-term decision. The committee is acutely aware that the choices on services that local authorities make now will have a significant impact on the people of Scotland, and that we will all have to live with those consequences. As Professor Richard Kerley said: "until we know what we want local government to do, we cannot know what measure of money it needs to collect in order to do that."—[ Official Report, Local Government and Communities Committee , 1 September 2009; c 2207.]

Right. There is no evidence that local authorities or the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities are having that debate. Do we want local government or local administration? Do we want oversight or regulation, shared services or stealth charges? The debate needs to include the communities that councils serve. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Local Government and Communities Committee's 2nd report 2010 (Session 3): Report on Local Government Finance Inquiry (SP Paper 377).

A press release from Lorraine Dick, senior press officer for NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, this week stated that there is clearly an issue: "the hospice is actively pursuing new sources of funding to help us continue the much appreciated transport service." There has been a cut. I look to the minister and the cabinet secretary to ensure that we continue to provide that voluntary transport service, for which the funding has been cut.

As has already been said, we can share a great deal of pride in the achievements of the NHS and its staff in Scotland. They have created a system that has produced results for people with serious conditions such as heart disease, stroke and cancer. As a result of our work early in the life of the Parliament, when we focused on such  areas, there are people in my constituency who have lived longer and whose quality of life has been improved. We introduced targets and we drove up standards so that unacceptable waiting times for surgery and treatment would no longer be commonplace—as has been referred to by the cabinet secretary and Michael Matheson. I agree with them. However, although the complaints at our surgeries have changed, the case load has not. I completely agree that those changes in complaints have concerned the quality of service, particularly for the elderly. There are still areas where we have not achieved what we would have liked to achieve—in vitro fertilisation treatment, for instance. People who cannot pay still wait for two years or more for IVF, and that needs to be addressed. Reductions in waiting times are seen as an achievement, but however successful and popular they are, they have come at a price. Hospital wards and staff are geared up for the production line. I do not treat that in a negative way, as it is very efficient when it runs smoothly and it ensures that people enjoy a positive and speedy experience. However, when we push people through the system, the consequence sometimes is that we push the caring out of the system. I had my own experience recently as a day patient requiring surgery. I was in in the morning and out in the evening, and I had a good and positive experience at Inverclyde royal hospital. If people can walk in and walk out, the experience is great. However, I also have personal and casework experience of what happens to elderly and frail people who require extra treatment. A receiving ward in an acute hospital is not a good place for those people. They have extra demands, which in my experience and from my case load I know are not being addressed. While we celebrate the achievements and recognise the progress that we have made on waiting times, we need to have a balance. I share the cabinet secretary's enthusiasm to deliver a patient-centred approach in our health service. I believe that it is possible to take the benefits of the targets system that we introduced and marry it with an approach to care and support that all patients require. Whether that is possible in the current climate is another question. Whether we like it or not, the strategy comes against a backdrop of falling investment, services being axed and hundreds of staff facing cuts. In today's debate, we have heard several examples of the cuts that health boards have been forced to make. More than 1,250 jobs have gone in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, and I am fearful of what that will mean in Greenock and  Inverclyde. We also know, as was mentioned earlier, about recruitment issues, which are particularly important in respect of continuity of care. Nurses and midwives are leaving the country to get their first jobs while, as Christine Grahame mentioned, existing staff in the service work longer hours and overtime. Any of the health board reports will identify that massive problem. None of that bodes well, and it undermines our shared ambition of delivering a world-leading health service. It is easy to say that we will deliver the type of health service that we all hope for, in which quality of care is premium, but it is much more difficult to put it into action. To demonstrate that, I will cite the example of the Ardgowan hospice in my constituency, which for nearly 30 years has provided an excellent transport service for patients who require cancer treatment outwith the area. As members will appreciate, it is more than just a pick-up and drop-off service. It spares people who are in a weakened condition an awkward journey, it spares them the inconvenience of waiting around before and after what can be a very arduous treatment, and it offers some much-required comfort after what is sometimes a harrowing experience. I have spoken to volunteer drivers and heard of the bond that they develop with patients during these difficult, and now shared, experiences. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, in its 2010 "Palliative Care Health Needs Assessment", stated that patients "found this to be a very welcome support that reduced the added stress that the ambulance transport brought to an already stressful experience." However, when budgets were reviewed at the health board, it was decided that it could no longer fund the service. It would seem that, from an annual budget of £2.6 billion, the health board is unable to find the £35,000 that is required to support the transport service. Is that an example of quality being considered over cost? Is it a decision that is likely to inspire confidence? Is it responsive to what, in the terms of the cabinet secretary's motion, users of the health service "want, need and deserve"?

I have not. I hope that it will tell me that I have wasted my time this afternoon, and that a cheque for £35,000 is on its way to those volunteers, to allow them to carry out the job that they have done for 30 years. If the letter contains anything less than that, the minister will be getting another letter. If we are serious about putting quality into the health service, we cannot allow decisions like that to stand. I urge the cabinet  secretary and the minister to ensure that the money is made available to ensure that the voluntary drivers at Ardgowan are given the support that they need. That would be a perfect way to demonstrate the Government's commitment to preserving quality in the health service.

Has the Health and Sport Committee expressed any concern about the cutting of the information technology budget, given that IT assists the health service in meeting the demands on it?

Does Patrick Harvie regret that the SNP whips prevented someone with a great record on this issue from participating in the debate? John Wilson has been involved in the campaign for a living wage for many years. Does Patrick Harvie agree that it is a disgrace that the SNP whips prevented that man from speaking in this debate?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

The minister is feart.

Feart!

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what investment it will make available to proceed with stage 2 of the "National Renewables Infrastructure Plan". (S3O-10088)

I share the minister's enthusiasm for what is an emerging and exciting industry and I agree that it is necessary to support it through investment. He will know that we have a site in Greenock that meets all the requirements of the "National Renewables Infrastructure Plan", with land available, sufficient lengths of quayside, high loading clearance, sufficient depth of water and one of the biggest working dry docks in Europe. That site is ready to go with little investment required, so the minister will imagine the dismay and horror when we discovered that it had been left off the list of preferred sites in the plan. Does the minister agree that we require scrutiny of the findings in the plan? Will he give an assurance that on-going discussions will be held with the Inverclyde renewables alliance to ensure that we are not excluded from future investment opportunities in renewables manufacturing, particularly if market interest is shown?

I fully accept that. I made it clear that I was making a plea for the situation that urban communities face to be addressed. When will the Scottish Government respond to the Competition Commission's recommendation? Does the Scottish Government intend to progress it through planning legislation rather than competition legislation?

The impact of fuel prices cannot be overestimated and the disproportionate impact on remote and rural areas has been acknowledged in the debate. Liam McArthur acknowledged that impact well. Although it is predictable that, in a pre-election period, politicians who are not in power would seek to gain political advantage on the issue, there is no evidence to suggest that if any of those parties was in power, the situation would be radically improved any time soon. The proposition that fuel duty is the cause of the problem and its solution is opportunistic and fundamentally dishonest. It conveniently ignores the uncertainty of currency fluctuations, crude oil costs, refining costs and distribution and marketing costs. If there is one certainty, it is that fuel is not more expensive in Shetland, Orkney or the Western Isles because of fuel duty, as the duty is the same right across the board.

No, I cannot. Perhaps the minister will put the answer in SPICe if he knows it, but I cannot. The idea that distribution costs do not come into the equation is wrong. I am surprised that a transport minister would make such a frivolous intervention. There is no doubt that people living in Shetland, Orkney or the Western Isles suffer a greater challenge when fuel prices peak. Not only the UK Government, the Scottish Government and EU institutions but the parties in this Parliament need to come together. We are all at one in recognising that, as an elected Parliament, we have a responsibility to come together and offer solutions rather than score points on the issue if we are to make progress on it in the longer term. My purpose in taking part in the debate is of course to point out that the rising costs of fuel and the differentials in price in urban Scotland are also a bone of contention, not least in Inverclyde in my constituency, where we consistently pay above average to subsidise lower prices in other areas. Lack of competition is the issue there. That  problem is recognised by the Competition Commission, which undertook a two-year inquiry into the situation and recommended a competition test, which aims to prevent one retailer gaining a dominant position with larger stores in a local area to the detriment of consumers. That recommendation was made to the Scottish Government six months ago and there has been no indication of progress or of a statement from the Government since then. There is an opportunity for the Government to show that it is serious about the rising costs of fuel by using its powers under planning legislation to enable the creation of local markets that would benefit consumers and, I hope, produce a level playing field that does not currently exist. To concede the possibility that the matter be dealt with under competition law—which, as we all know, is a reserved matter and, therefore, would be dealt with by the UK Government—would be a strange decision for an SNP Government. I hope that the minister will be able to address some of the situation in his closing speech. I challenge the Scottish Government to begin formal consultation on the recommendation as soon as possible with a view to introducing a competition test under planning legislation. To do anything less would be to miss an opportunity to challenge the power of the large supermarkets. It is time for the SNP Government to do its bit to support hard-pressed motorists who are being ripped off at the petrol pumps.

Does the cabinet secretary accept that the future of midwife-led services at Inverclyde Royal hospital and throughout Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board depends on accurate workforce planning? Does she share my concern that newly qualified midwives are being forced to leave the country to find their first position? Is she disappointed that health boards are turning their backs on the Scottish Government's job guarantee scheme and that, to date, only nine newly qualified midwives throughout Scotland benefit from the scheme?

Does the cabinet secretary recognise, as the committee does and as Michael McMahon said, that there is an issue about the current warden service? In effect, local authorities are providing a 9-to-5 service. We heard in evidence that, outwith those hours and at weekends, responsibility for the control of stray dogs is transferred to the police, with an associated cost. What discussions have taken place with the police authorities? Does the cabinet secretary recognise that there is an issue about the need to transfer responsibilities and about the budgetary issues that arise from that?

I apologise, Presiding Officer, for arriving late in the chamber. I am getting confused in my old age. I noted down three different times for the debate—2.45 pm, 3.00 pm and whenever I was to arrive. Please accept my apologies. No offence was intended. I am pleased to be taking part in this debate as convener of the lead committee that considered the bill. I pay tribute to Christine Grahame for bringing forward the legislation and to Alex Neil for his work on the bill before he was elevated to ministerial office. I also thank all the witnesses who provided the committee with evidence, particularly the dog wardens who gave good and practical evidence on their daily and weekly involvement in dealing with dogs that are out of control. I think that all committee members were impressed with the evidence. I am also grateful to my colleagues on the committee for their input and to our clerks and researchers, who were as hard working as ever. In the time that is available to me, I intend to focus on just a few of the key issues on which the committee reported. The bill seeks to address the underlying reasons why dogs become out of control and dangerous. I am no expert on dogs. That said, all politicians have experience of dogs—including dangerous dogs—from delivering leaflets and campaigning. From the evidence of the experts, it is clear that a dog becomes dangerous; it is not born that way. As Christine Grahame said, the bill is about prevention. It seeks to influence the behaviour of the dog owner in order to improve the behaviour of the dog. We all can conjure up images of people  who use dogs almost as offensive weapons. In that regard, the committee supports the introduction of a dog control notice regime. The notices have become affectionately known in the media as dog antisocial behaviour orders—or dog ASBOs—a description that is perhaps not entirely wide of the mark. The committee welcomes the fact that the focus in the bill is on deed and not breed. That is unlike much of the current dog legislation, where the focus is the other way round or, if I might be indulged for a moment, Presiding Officer, where the tail appears to wag the dog—boom, boom. There were some concerns in evidence about the definition in the bill of a dog that is out of control and the use of terms such as giving rise to "reasonable ... alarm" and "apprehensiveness". We felt that such language was imprecise and could lead to confusion in interpretation, particularly for those who are charged with determining whether a dog is actually out of control. It is important that there is clarity in that regard. The committee welcomes the bill's intention to address a deficiency in the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 so that if a dog attacks someone in the home in which it is kept, the owner will no longer be immune from prosecution. I am sure that all members have seen and read about the devastating consequences of attacks by dogs in the home, especially where young children were involved. If the bill goes some way towards preventing such attacks, it will be worth while. I turn to the issue of cost. Given the poverty of information regarding the number of dangerous dogs in Scotland, the committee and Christine Grahame acknowledged that there is a degree of uncertainty about the financial assumptions that have been made in the financial memorandum. The Scottish Government also acknowledged that the estimates "may be on the low side". Local authorities expressed concern to us about the bill's assumption that no additional costs to them would arise from the legislation.

The member is correct. However, councils operate at different levels; some have no dog wardens at this time. If the bill is passed, there will be an expectation, at least, that they should operate to a minimum required standard, which will incur costs. As some councils have said, they may have to employ additional staff to do justice to the bill. Councils also thought  that there was the potential for additional costs to fall to them as a result of any transfer of responsibilities from the police, who, as members know, deal with many stray dogs at weekends and so on. The committee welcomed the Scottish Government's confirmation that it is seeking to engage with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to discuss the matter. The committee reported on a number of other issues, such as corroboration of evidence and access to private property to serve a notice, that I do not have time to cover today. My final point concerns the power under the bill to establish a Scottish dog control database. The Scottish Government does not support that proposal, and the committee is not convinced of its merits, especially given the likelihood that only a small number of notices will be issued. However, the committee is attracted by the proposal that a register of disqualified owners be established, to enable information to be shared among local authorities, the police and others. The Scottish Government has indicated some support for that suggestion, and we have recommended that it be explored further. This is a good bill with good intentions. It has a lot to commend it, and I hope that it will make a difference, if enacted. The committee therefore recommends that the general principles of the bill be agreed to.

Will the member take an intervention?

Joe FitzPatrick has spoken—he should sit down.

The Local Government and Communities Committee had, as the minister mentioned, a limited amount of time in which to consider the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill. We held some fairly hefty evidence sessions and additional committee meetings, for which I thank the hard-working clerks and the Scottish Parliament information centre team, who did all the heavy lifting in that respect, and my committee colleagues. I also thank those who submitted written evidence—we received a lot of it—and those who came along to the meetings to give oral evidence. All the evidence showed us that, in football parlance, this is a bill of two halves. Part 1, which is concerned with helping home owners who are at risk of having their homes repossessed, commanded support for its general principles. However, part 2, which deals with bankruptcy, threw up a lot of disagreements and was far more problematic. One of the big issues that the committee considered was whether the right balance had been struck between the need for sufficient consultation and the need to take action quickly. We are acutely aware of the current economic situation, and we know that there have been 48,000 repossessions in the UK in 2009. Although that figure is much lower than the original and more pessimistic estimate of 75,000, it nonetheless represents an increase of 20 per cent on the number of repossessions in 2008. On balance, we think that the case was made for part 1, which deals with repossessions, to be implemented quickly. However, things were very different with regard to part 2, which introduces proposals on bankruptcy that were not specifically recommended by the debt action forum. We heard very different views about the operation of the forum, with regard to whether proceedings were to be kept confidential, and whether people were aware of what would be in the bill and what would be subject to further consultation. We do not think that part 2 strikes the right balance, and we believe that the consultation on it was unsatisfactory. For a number of people, having their home repossessed is a very real threat, so it is important to ensure that repossession is a measure of last resort. The committee welcomes the measures that are proposed in part 1, and we have made a number of recommendations on specific proposals. The first is on the proposal that when someone voluntarily gives up their property and hands their keys in, they have to sign an affidavit to certify that they do not occupy the property and  neither does anyone else. There were two different views on that. There were concerns that, apart from being overly bureaucratic, the affidavit process would prove costly for people who are already saddled with debt. We think that, overall, there are advantages in having a formal process, but it seems to be counterproductive to introduce a system that is so bureaucratic that it is not used. We ask the Scottish Government to think again about that issue, and to lodge amendments at stage 2 if that is appropriate. The bill outlines what it refers to as pre-action requirements, which creditors have to satisfy before they consider repossession. There is already a pre-action protocol in England and Wales, which, as its name suggests, is a protocol rather than something that is set out in legislation. Again, there were slightly different views on whether it was better to have that in legislation than in a protocol, and on how the protocol had worked in England and Wales. On balance, the committee supports the principle of enshrining those pre-action requirements in legislation to give them more force. The bill will effectively allow someone to recall a decree, and restart court proceedings and present their case. However, there can be only one application, and it can be made only if the person did not participate in the original proceedings. We realise that we cannot have a situation in which an infinite number of people can restart proceedings. However, the committee believes that the bill should be amended to allow a second application if the court is satisfied that the application is being made for a different reason. We welcome the proposal to allow lay representation in repossession cases, but we also seek a lot of reassurance in that area. A number of organisations will be allowed to act as lay representatives, including those in the advice sector. We are concerned about the bill's impact on the advice sector and whether the sector has the necessary resources and capacity to deal with what might be a lot of extra work and increased expectations. On funding, £3 million was made available for legal advice and representation, but that was more than a year ago and the money is already funding 16 projects. We do not know whether there will be enough funding to meet the extra demand under the bill. That is why we have asked the Scottish Government to outline how it will support the delivery of the bill's provisions and to report back to us on an on-going basis. I turn to the aspects of the bill that caused the committee the most concern—the various proposals on bankruptcy. The first proposal is to create a new route into bankruptcy called the certificate for sequestration. There was support for  that, albeit with some dissenting voices, but what has caused the most consternation is the proposal that the Accountant in Bankruptcy will automatically become the trustee in such cases. That was not recommended by the debt action forum. We received a huge number of submissions from insolvency practitioners who objected to that role for the AIB. The committee questioned whether the AIB will have enough resources and expertise to carry out that new role. That is why we have asked the Scottish Government to provide further information on the work that is likely to be involved for the AIB and how that compares with what it does now. We have also asked the Government to give us the basis for its assumptions on the number and grade of additional staff who will be required. The other major issue with part 2 is the way in which family homes are treated in protected trust deeds. We heard the minister's comments on that earlier, so I can miss out the crash course in bankruptcy law. However, it is important to say that, if someone has a protected trust deed, creditors are prevented from taking court action against them and must accept the payment that is made under the arrangement. However, a trust deed can become protected only if the whole of the debtor's estate apart from items such as essential household goods is transferred to the trustee, and that includes the person's house. The bill allows the trustee discretion to exempt the family home from the protected trust deed. At present, there is no such discretion. A lot of criticism has been levelled at that provision. Much of it stems from differences of opinion about what the bill is intended to implement. Again, that shows the unsatisfactory nature of the consultation. If there had been proper consultation, those differences of opinion might not have arisen. Concerns were raised that the provision could be subject to abuse—for example, someone might buy an expensive property in the knowledge that it could be exempted and the equity in the house could not be touched. The Minister for Community Safety said that the intention was that family homes would be exempted in cases where there was limited equity, although, as we have heard again today, no limit is set out in the bill. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland suggested that that there should be a cap on the amount of equity. The minister thought that there were a number of difficulties with that, although he said that he did not have a closed mind on the matter. A number of other concerns were raised about the exemption of the family home. For example, the Law Society of Scotland said that that could upset the balance of insolvency law, because the family home will be exempted under a protected trust deed but not in the case of bankruptcy. That  will be the subject of further consultation. We state in our report that, regardless of the validity of the arguments for and against the provision, we are concerned that there has been such disagreement, and we believe that it arose because the consultation was unsatisfactory. The lack of consultation came up again in connection with the bill's proposal to stop advertising bankruptcies and trust deeds in the Edinburgh Gazette , but we have heard what the minister has to say on that issue. As he knows, the Edinburgh Gazette has disputed the figures in the Government's financial memorandum on the costs of advertising in the journal. We recommend that urgent discussions take place to sort out the matter. We are also concerned that the AIB-run register of insolvencies might not be able to provide all the necessary information by the time the bill is implemented. As a result, we recommend that the Scottish Government provide further information on the precise work that will be undertaken on the register and, crucially, the timescales for that work. If this has been a bill of two halves, an own goal has been scored in the second half. Part 2 contains significant areas of disagreement, although I should point out the consensus on exempting homes with limited equity from trust deeds. The advice sector strongly supports the new certificated route into bankruptcy—

Thank you for showing me that mercy, Presiding Officer.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to ensure effective action is taken to address the recurring flooding problems in the Inverclyde area. (S3O-8793)

I am confident that the cabinet secretary will want to congratulate Inverclyde Council, which is already hard at work with partners in its flood management action group. In his previous answer, and in correspondence to members, the cabinet secretary referred to the £42 million capital allocation for flood prevention measures. Inverclyde Council's conservative estimate is that it requires £10 million—a figure that is 10 times what it might expect as its share of the fund. Does the cabinet secretary agree that special recognition—which SEPA recognises—is required to address the significant problems of coastal communities, such as those in my constituency of Inverclyde, if we are to improve the situation for home owners and businesses?

They want to do it again.

The recent report by the children's reporter identifies 144 deaths in the past six years. Does the minister agree that that is a shocking figure that deserves our concern and should be investigated so that we can put the situation right?

I welcome the opportunity to participate in the debate and discuss the motion. Members are right to highlight the progress that has been made, but we must recognise that the report by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education notes several concerns. The report says that 25 per cent of initial inspections identified serious weaknesses in services to protect children. It highlights the fact that more needs to be done to ensure that all families and staff who have contact with children are clear about their requirement to share relevant information quickly and clearly when there are concerns about a child's welfare. Neither the motion nor the minister mentioned the inconvenient report on child referrals that the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration published about two weeks ago. That report makes horrific reading and should have set alarm bells ringing in the ears of us all, including the Government. While we give out praise today, it might be worth while to clear the air of any complacency. The SCRA's report reveals that, despite a fall in the number of children who are referred to the SCRA, the number of referrals is still more than 47,000—more than 5 per cent of Scotland's child population. That is the good news in the report; the bad news is that more children under the age of two have had to be placed on supervision orders and emergency measures and that the number of children in such high-risk situations that emergency powers have been needed to prevent them from coming to harm is growing. The report rightly points out that that trend is against the policy and practice of early intervention, which was designed to prevent and reduce the need for compulsory measures to protect children. Indeed, research confirms that early identification and intervention do not have the desired impact and might well reflect the fact  that more young children are actually at increasing risk.

Yes, but I ask the minister to be quick. I do not have as much time as he has.

We live in hope but at this point we cannot ignore the SCRA's hard, hard messages. The SCRA report also highlights specific issues about the power of child protection services to get access to children whose parents are unwilling to engage with them. The matter has already been raised in evidence with the Parliament's Health and Sport Committee, and I, too, have raised it with the minister in this chamber. It certainly does not need an inquiry; it needs the minister and his colleagues to do as much as possible to ensure that social workers get access to children when they need it. We cannot allow this situation to continue or allow parents who are unwilling to deal with the services to become barriers to the protection of children. We have to put the children first. As far as getting it right for every child is concerned, the fact is that the police are the main source of referrals, accounting for 83 per cent, while the number of referrals from social work and the health service is falling. It might be some comfort if they were only single referrals, but they are repeat referrals. These things are happening again and again. At what point do we stop putting children back into such circumstances? The SCRA report also highlights failures in permanency planning when the child is removed from the home for their own protection. In one sample, the report found that only 4 per cent of referrals of children under two had any form of permanency planning with a view to removing them from the home. However, 12 per cent of those children had brothers and sisters for whom permanency planning was already under way. The report's most damning revelation is that, in the past six years, 144 children who have been referred to the reporter have died. Of the 75 children under the age of 15 who died, 30—or 40 per cent—of them did not even reach their second birthday. Of those 30 children, two were subject to supervision requirements at the time of death and 15 had open referrals. The background factors will of course come as no surprise—parental substance misuse, domestic violence, drug withdrawal symptoms at birth and so on—but, tragically, the report admits that the number of  children who died while under referral might have been greater, because no one can bring the facts and figures together and establish the causes and dates of death for those children. It is a pity that the new Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has had to go somewhere else and has not been able to follow the whole debate, because in his new role he has a job to do. For those 144 children—and indeed for the future of all our children—he needs to institute an inquiry to find out the exact circumstances in which they lived and died to ensure that we fully understand how to prevent another 144 from dying over the next six years.

To ask the Scottish Government when the NHS Aroma cafe concept will be fully evaluated. (S3O-8709)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the uncertainty for hard-working volunteers has gone on for far too long? When I spoke to them this week, they said that they had had no such update as outlined by the cabinet secretary. Does she accept that Inverclyde royal hospital visitors and staff neither need nor want an Aroma cafe? What they want is the valuable service that is provided by the League of Hospital Friends to be confirmed soon and for the long term?

In the short time available, I intend to focus on the many concerns that we have in Inverclyde,  which is a community whose experience has not always been a happy one. In recent years, the sad deaths of Damian Muir and Darren Pyper, who were killed by knives, shocked a community that had become sick of the endless cycle of violence. We have worked as a community to try to break that cycle and to bring our experiences and influence to the Parliament. We have welcomed the changes over recent years whereby sentencing powers have been increased, although we have been disappointed that those powers have not been used to the full. Over the years, we have engaged with a wide range of groups and initiatives. We have met the violence reduction unit. We have joined with the medics against violence. We have supported the Inverclyde initiative in its aim of educating young people about the consequences of violence. We have rallied and marched with the friends and fellow pupils of tragic schoolboy Darren Pyper to create awareness of the dangers of knives. We raised a petition with John Muir, Damian's father, and presented it to the Parliament to engage with the democratic process. We held a summit in the Parliament and another in our town hall—organised by the local paper, the Greenock Telegraph —to give voice to the community's concerns. In the time since, John Muir has tirelessly campaigned across Scotland. His campaign has struck a chord everywhere that it has gone. Having engaged in that parliamentary process, we saw the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill as an opportunity to introduce the tougher sentences and to fund the interventionist measures that people wanted. Today, they will have heard that their calls for tougher sentences are to be ignored in the bill and that funding for preventive measures are not in place. They will have heard that these violent people will be less likely to go to jail and their communities and neighbourhoods will not be safer as a result. To hear their concerns dismissed will greatly disappoint them. To hear the cabinet secretary describe short-term prison sentences as respite care will give no confidence to my community. Rhoda Grant and David McLetchie outlined the detrimental impact that could result from the bill's measures on domestic violence. A look at last week's report by the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration shows that nine children under the age of two—they were babies—died in recent years in incidents in which domestic violence and aggression were background factors. That is much more than just a debating point. Such an additional significant risk to the lives of our women and children must be measured against a proposal that the cabinet secretary hopes—only hopes—will reduce reoffending.  I believe that the bill is an opportunity for this Parliament of the Scottish people, which was set up to bring solutions to Scottish problems, to send a clear message to people who carry and use knives. My community does not have to look far for experiences in which knives have caused misery and heartbreak, as has happened across Scotland. Just a fortnight ago, we were told of an appalling murder whereby a young man, who was a visitor to this country, with a pregnant wife at home in India, was randomly murdered in the street. We heard of the sickening racial motive, but it is important to remember that the presence of a knife in that situation escalated that from a nasty confrontation to a vicious murder. The people of my community—and people all over Scotland who supported John Muir's campaign—have made it clear that they think that people who carry knives should go to jail. They have made it clear that they think that violent criminals should go to jail. The strong argument for mandatory minimum sentences for those who carry and use knives is a democratic one. Instead of dismissing their arguments, ignoring their experiences and writing off their demands as populist rants, it is time that this Parliament and this Government listened to people and acted on their concerns. Although I will support the principles of the bill at stage 1 today, I will not hesitate to vote against the bill at stage 3 if it does not address the concerns of my community.

It is your budget.

You are responsible.

To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to improve the school estate for pupils with additional support needs. (S3O-8522)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her answer, which anticipated my supplementary question. She is aware that Inverclyde Council has spent a significant amount of money on the school estate. It would be a terrible tragedy if special needs children lost out on new schools. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary confirmed that the council's proposal is being properly considered. When will she meet council representatives to ensure that there is quick progress on the proposal?

Like Ian McKee, I declare an interest. None of us is getting any younger, and we all have parents who are getting older. Just when we think we are escaping the responsibilities of child care, we sometimes meet the reality of the increased responsibility of elderly care. I am sure that there are many members with personal experience of care services represented in the chamber today. Inevitably, there will also be plenty of personal experience of failures in those services when we have needed them. Members encounter a steady stream of problems and issues that are brought to them by constituents. Inverclyde, in my constituency, has suffered from a decline in population but will experience 16 per cent growth by 2031 in the number of people who are over 65. In such a community, elderly people are dependent for care on other elderly people, who will soon get to a stage at which they themselves need to access care. By 2031 it could cost £3.5 billion—more than treble the current level of spend—to provide the health and social care services for older people in Scotland that we currently provide. The minister talked about that, and we can all agree that it is an issue. There will be varying degrees of need, as Ian McKee pointed out—I look forward to taking him for a long walk off a short plank at Leith waterfront some time—but the issue will not go away. It will grow, and we will be presented with a huge challenge—and I repeat, "we". Of course there will be arguments about our big brother in London and where we can get £30 million to plug a gap, but the overall responsibility is ours. We are talking about our parents and our older people, in our communities. Rather than row about all that, we should concentrate on things that we can affect. Free personal care is rightly viewed as one of the Parliament's achievements. The minister will remember working on the issue in health committees in previous parliamentary sessions. Our focus was pretty narrow at the outset—it was  on the cost to families of residential care—but now, after all those years, we are starting to think about the 69,000 people who receive care at home. Many of those people cannot get out of the house to go for a swim. Sometimes they are forced to leave not just their family home but their community to get the appropriate care, because the Parliament has not connected up with local government and all the agencies to provide the services, aids and adaptations that would enable them to stay at home. Such matters are our responsibility and no one else's, and we should consider them, rather than fight over who should be paying for what and dropping problems on other people's budgets, as we all do. It sometimes seems that the health service and local government get involved not to consider people's needs but to argue about whose budget a service will come out of. Similar issues arise in the debate on child protection. All sorts of people are responsible for child protection, but until we get someone in the Cabinet who has their hands on significant budget streams we will never pull everything together. We need to realise that if we are to protect the health service, as we are doing, there will be consequential cuts in the local government budget and every last penny will be squeezed out of services. Care workers who deliver services will face greater demands and workloads and will have less time, less training and fewer opportunities to develop skills. The people who ultimately suffer will be the older people who need the services. I understand that the balance between value and quality is difficult to strike, but there are issues that we need to confront. Evidence that the Local Government and Communities Committee heard showed that there is sometimes no correlation between what is paid out and the quality of the outcome. The "Panorama" programme, which has been mentioned many times, was shocking. Secret cameras uncovered serious neglect as overworked and low-paid carers struggled to provide standards of care that we could be proud of. Leaving aside the question of whether it is appropriate to care for an elderly man while using a mobile phone, the programme raised serious questions about how we procure care services. Until that point, such services were procured by a reverse e-auction, going to the cheapest price, like Bid TV for cheap jewellery—that was how we procured our services for the elderly.

Those issues are our responsibility. The questions of regulation and  inspection are our responsibilities. They do not necessarily come with a big price tag but we must recognise them as big issues. That is why we wanted this Parliament—so that we could accept such responsibilities. We cannot dodge them. There are major issues that need to be addressed quickly.

During the past couple of days it has been indicated that £500 million is available to local authorities in England. How much will be available to local authorities in Scotland?

I welcome the opportunity to open this debate for the Local Government and Communities Committee. However, I regret the fact that we must have such a debate, because it means that equal pay still has not been fully sorted out in local government and that cases for a large number of workers, especially low-paid female workers, remain unresolved. Councils and unions made an agreement on single status way back in 1999. It is now 2009, but issues have still not been resolved. I do not intend to go through the various delays in implementation of single status—the Finance Committee's report on the issue in session 2 dealt with that issue well. However, if implementation of single status had not been delayed, we might not be where we are today. The current position is quite concerning. At the time of our inquiry, around 35,000 equal pay cases were lodged with tribunals, with no resolution in sight. We wanted to assess fully the current situation and, crucially, to look at potential solutions. I thank everyone who gave us oral and written evidence. Thanks are also due to the clerks, the Scottish Parliament information centre and all committee members who worked on the issue. Our report sets out the background to the current situation, helpfully explains the different types of equal pay claims that might be lodged and makes a number of recommendations that we hope will bring some kind of resolution. Essentially, single status was supposed to be implemented in all local authorities to harmonise terms and conditions and to eradicate discrimination. At the time of our inquiry—10 years down the line—26 of the 32 local authorities had implemented it.  Equal pay claims can arise for a number of reasons. There may be work rated as equivalent claims, where jobs have already been rated the same. That was the case for manual workers in local authorities, where an evaluation was carried out in 1987 but workers continued to attract different earnings, mainly through the payment of bonuses. Work of equal value claims may arise because an authority has not implemented equal pay or, where it has, because individuals claim that equal pay has not been implemented properly. There may also be claims as a result of recent court judgments, about which I will say more later. Throughout our inquiry, everyone kept telling us how complex the situation is. We realise that the issues can be complex, but we know that local authorities have not only an obligation but a duty to ensure that there is equal pay for work of equal value. We need to find a way through the problems. The situation has become even more complex because of the legal rulings and case law that have developed. That is not surprising, given the time that it has taken to implement single status. It became clear to us that it is likely that, of the thousands of cases that have been lodged, a fair number could be considered strong cases. In some of them, the main issue is not whether discrimination occurred but the level of compensation that was offered. Our view on strong cases is the same as that of Philip Barr, the human resources director for the City of Edinburgh Council, who said: "It is a no-brainer for most councils: we cannot win these cases in court."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 18 March 2009; c 1815.] Councillor Michael Cook of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities said: "it seems to me only common sense that if the cases are persuasive and have strong merit the local authorities will be under pressure to look at settling them."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 22 April 2009; c 1915.] For all of those fine words, cases are not being settled. To be clear, the committee is not asking local authorities to settle cases that they think have no validity, but surely it serves no one well for strong cases not to be settled. The problem is that no one seems to be prepared to make the first move and that there is no agreement on how to take things forward. Regrettably, this has become a very litigious situation—unions are taking cases against local authorities and no-win, no-fee lawyers are taking cases against unions and local authorities. While all of that is going on, low-paid workers are being denied justice and compensation. Justice delayed is justice denied.  That is why the committee recommended that all parties—local authorities, unions and lawyers—should be brought together to reach an agreement on how to deal with cases in the system that are considered to be strong. They need to be brought together by someone, and we believe that that someone should be the Scottish Government. We are not suggesting that the Scottish Government should look to impose any kind of settlement; we are simply saying that it should facilitate a meeting. Our recommendation echoes the call by the Finance Committee in session 2 for all parties to enter into discussions, facilitated by the Scottish Executive, to sort out the implementation of single status in all local authorities. The deputy convener of the Finance Committee at that time is now the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. We were disappointed that, in response to our recommendation, he did not offer to facilitate a meeting, saying instead: "The Scottish Government has encouraged COSLA to find a solution to this point and will continue to encourage COSLA to resolve issues ... quickly". However, I was pleased that in his response Councillor Michael Cook of COSLA said: "I will undertake ... to write to all councils suggesting that if there are claims which are particularly meritorious, then early consideration should be given to reaching a settlement." It continues to concern us that, if the nettle is not grasped now, we will make no progress and will find ourselves in the same position months, if not years, down the line. In the intervening period, there could be another set of court judgments or case law, with the result that, as soon as one set of problems is resolved, another arises, adding to the already extensive costs. One case has become known as the Bainbridge judgment. Following an evaluation, pay protection was found to favour male employees—another complication—and was considered discriminatory. Although the Bainbridge judgment is not a blanket ruling, and each pay protection scheme should be considered on its merits, it is clear that it will be difficult for local authorities to prove that such schemes are not discriminatory. The judgment could give rise to further claims and costs. Although not all authorities believe that it will, the committee wants to stop the situation becoming more complicated. That is why we have recommended that, if it has not already done so, COSLA should publish comprehensive guidance and advice to local authorities on the implications of the judgment. We are also asking COSLA to consider putting together a framework agreement, with a payment matrix, and to agree that with the trade unions, to deal with any cases arising from the Bainbridge  ruling. We suggest a payment matrix because we do not want to get into the situation that we are in at moment of cases being taken because the compensation that has been offered is not sufficient. To ensure that there is agreement on the matrix, we say that compensation levels should more accurately reflect the individual's loss, which may not have been the case in the past. Of course, all of that costs money. We are all aware that there is a major squeeze on public sector spending. However, although we are in tough times, we must remember that many local authority workers have been discriminated against and should be paid compensation. That is why we have recommended that, in the all-party discussions that we have said should take place, consideration should be given to staged payments. That would make it possible to set compensation at a level that is acceptable to individuals and their representatives but in a way that allows authorities to spread payments over a certain time period. The Scottish Government can also help with funding for equal pay by allowing local authorities to capitalise their assets. In other words, authorities should be allowed to treat new expenditure as capital and not revenue and so fund that expenditure through borrowing or capital receipts. We were pleased to hear that the Scottish Government has begun discussions with COSLA to put in place a capitalisation scheme in Scotland. We ask the Government to produce a timetable for establishing the scheme as soon as possible. In its response to our report, the Government confirmed that a scheme outline had been agreed and that it would be discussed shortly with HM Treasury, which has to give its approval. Perhaps the cabinet secretary can update us on those discussions. We take encouragement from the news over the past couple of days that additional money will be made available in England and Wales through such a mechanism to address the issue. With all the emphasis on claims for back pay for past discrimination, we must not lose sight of the fact that we have to ensure that we have robust, non-discriminatory pay schemes going into the future. Alex McLuckie of the GMB summed that up neatly when he said: "Equal pay is about setting the future rate. Believe it or not, that could be more advantageous to female workers than the back money. If someone has 20 or 30 years to work, they will benefit from the higher rate for 20 or 30 years."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 11 March 2009; c 1782.] It is disappointing that there is still disagreement over whether the councils that have implemented single status have eliminated discrimination. The unions assert that discrimination still exists, but  COSLA does not accept the point. As a committee, we will not try to arbitrate on the issue, but we hope that our recommendations go some way to resolving it. We recommended that COSLA should introduce, in conjunction with the unions, an agreed and independent assessment system for new pay and grading arrangements. We further said that Audit Scotland could check whether that had been done as part of its best-value audits. We also recommended that, if local authorities were not already doing so, they should carry out annual equal pay audits. Finally, we recommended that the Government should have discussions with COSLA on the issue of regular reviews and equality proofing. We welcome the Government's response that it is "happy to work with local government to improve and advance equality". That said, I would welcome some detail from the cabinet secretary on what that will mean in practice in relation to equal pay. This was a deeply frustrating inquiry for the committee to undertake—frustrating because everyone seemed be say, "We recognise that there are issues to be sorted out. We are willing to sort them out," but the issues have not been sorted out. Our committee is the third committee of the Parliament to have looked at the issue of equal pay. If it was frustrating for us, we can only imagine what it is like for the workers who have not yet been properly compensated. Have workers not been compensated because they are low-paid women workers? In our evidence taking, we heard stories of compensation offers—they could also be called bribes—being dangled in front of low-paid workers just before Christmas, a time when the prospect of a reduced offer may appear better than no offer at all. We heard about low-paid women who had been in the system for nearly six years. Our recommendations give a way forward. I hope that all parties take them on board. As a committee, we want to continue to monitor whether progress has been made. We will do so. All the unresolved issues create a huge amount of uncertainty in what are already uncertain times. We need to resolve past discrimination, but we also need to ensure that discrimination does not happen again. As our report says: "That will give the greatest certainty." I am happy to move the motion on behalf of the Local Government and Communities Committee. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Local Government and Communities Committee's 12th Report 2009 (Session 3): Equal Pay in Local Government (SP Paper 292).

It is only correct that we recognise the progress that has been made following the "Hidden Harm" report, but that progress must be  measured against the scale of the problem. Much more still needs to be done if we are to be confident that children are no longer subjected to the abuse that Brandon Muir suffered in his short and troubled life. That is why I support the call for an inquiry. Certainly, more work needs to be done to provide a greater understanding of the options available for such children, the risks that are accepted on their behalf and the lack of capacity in kinship and foster care. Our ambitions and our priorities for such children should be set by this Parliament, not simply managed by hard-pressed front-line staff. If anyone has any doubt about how hard that job is, they need only read the Official Report of the Health and Sport Committee of 25 March 2009, when a range of health visitors, headteachers, general practitioners and social workers gave powerful and damning evidence on the frustrations and obstacles that they face every day. They spoke about children who are "never in the same house two nights running" and about "families in which the mother and gran are addicts, and it is the great-gran, who is in her late 70s, who is looking after young children" without adequate support. They described a drug withdrawal process that "can take five or 10 years", and they said that "health visitors have really big case loads ... so ... they are really reliant on parents to make contact if any problems arise."—[ Official Report, Health and Sport Committee , 25 March 2009; c 1715, 1723, 1705.] Children's services were also described as "haphazard", and mention was made of social workers being refused access to vulnerable children. All of that is on the parliamentary record for members' attention. Although I accept that more work needs to be done through an inquiry to establish some areas, I am impatient for action. I believe that there are things that we can do straight away to mitigate the impact of drugs on vulnerable children. What needs to be done? We need to meet the basic requirements that were set out in the "Hidden Harm" report. We need to accept that there are risks for children associated with living with an addicted parent; we need to identify and assess the level of risk; and we need to ensure that those children's needs are met. It is not good enough that we cannot identify all the children in question. Finding them and assessing them must be our starting point. If a care plan is good enough for the addicted parent, it is surely good enough for the child of an addicted parent.  It must be accepted that children who live with parental addiction are at risk—they might be at varying degrees of risk, but they are at risk all the same. Part of the process must involve assessment of parental capability. We must ensure that social workers and children's care services have sufficient powers to get access to those children when their parents refuse to engage with care services. The significant support that we provide to those adults, such as child benefit, housing benefit and the medical support that we offer through the methadone programme, needs to be set out in a contract so that they understand why we are giving them that support and, crucially, what we expect of them in return in terms of behaviour, parental responsibility and a commitment to progress towards a drug-free lifestyle. Lastly, the contract must point out the consequences of failure, which could affect their continued receipt of support and could include the possibility of their children having to be taken into care. If drugs cannot be taken out of the home, we need to take children out of the home. That is the reality. The sad fact is that, if Brandon Muir had not died, he would still be living in that house of horrors, experiencing all the abuse and neglect that marked his troubled young life. Thousands of other children are surviving what Brandon was put through. They will grow up with the legacy of those traumatic experiences and, sadly, will often repeat the mistakes of their parents. We must act: we must continue to do more and do better to end that miserable cycle. If we do not, more children will face the misery that Brandon and others suffered.

I worked in the shipbuilding industry during its difficult decline, was made redundant and served a period of unemployment. I now represent a community that is well aware of the consequences of losing a major employer, or a number of major employers, and knows all the pain of being overdependent on large employers in shipbuilding, engineering, electronics and, now, the service industry. I also worked for a number of years as a trade union organiser in the whisky industry. That was a decade or more ago now, when we were dealing with the problems of overcapacity and overproduction. At that time, we had great bragging rights about who got the best wages—Chivas, Johnnie Walker, Hiram Walker or Cutty Sark at Drumchapel. We believed that we were in an internal market, but of course we were not; we were competing with those companies' bottling plants in the Philippines and elsewhere in the world. When Diageo took over, it won the argument and the J&B plant in Dumbarton in which I  organised closed down with a loss of about 400 jobs. Given my experience, I have every sympathy with the people in Kilmarnock, because I know at first hand the challenges that they face individually and as a community. Over the years, if I have learned anything it is that change is inevitable. Whether we live in an independent Scotland or a Scotland that is part of the UK, under any Government change is inevitable. We as politicians have to recognise—as I did when a trade union official and as an individual in the past—that our role is not necessarily to prevent change but to manage and facilitate it over a period of time to ensure that the least damage possible is done to workers and their communities. I do not blame MSPs and MPs for fighting their corner for their constituents. Willie Coffey has done well, as have Des Browne and others. They are elected to articulate the anger and frustration that their communities feel. I do not blame the First Minister for being angry with Diageo for its poor communication. I do not blame them, because I have been there and done that. However, I am concerned about the damage that might have been done to the relationship with one of Scotland's most significant employers. That needs to be addressed. I am concerned about the message that is sent to other employers, which might be dissuaded from engaging with the Government and its agencies on what they need to do to change to equip them for the future, as a result of the negativity surrounding the Diageo decision. After all, we all recognise that it is not a popularity contest. It is not a competition to see who cares most about the workers who are affected. Those people deserve better than that. Honesty is hard, and there will be no cheers at the end of this process for doing the right thing. The very least that the workers deserve now is honesty. For the past few months, we have all collectively tried to hold the waters back, but, in the end, the reality defeated the rhetoric. Now we have to face facts and learn lessons from that experience. That means being honest about what a Government—any Government—can achieve and what we can deliver politically. We need a clear and consistent approach that we can apply anywhere, every time a company or a sector faces challenges, no matter whether it is big or small, urban or rural. We need to establish confidence in that approach, with a clear policy that encourages companies to come to us early, not at the point of crisis, after a decision has been made. We need to understand and respect the needs of companies to grow, survive and be competitive, as well as to meet their social responsibilities. Instead of becoming sidetracked with what we cannot deliver for people who are losing their jobs, we need a process that  is committed to what we can deliver. That means adequately funding and resourcing partnership action for continuing employment and supporting people, not to save people's jobs but to get them their next one. I am sorry to mention it again, minister, but at HEROtsc—a contact centre in Greenock that shed more than 150 jobs earlier this year—I was concerned about the level of support that was provided to the employees who lost their jobs. It is not clear whether additional resources were assigned to that situation or whether the intervention was successful. With the prospect of significant change facing 700 workers at T-Mobile, I repeat my call to the Government to engage with the call centre industry before it is, once again, too late. Despite my reservations, I believe that the PACE approach is a good one. However, we will get out of it only what we put into it. It must be not only a response mechanism but a delivery mechanism. Employers, businesses and communities need reassurance that there will be support, that similar or better jobs will be provided, and that communities will be protected from the impact of difficult decisions. How we reacted in the past few weeks was how we reacted 20 years ago to mass unemployment.

I am sure that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice is well aware that his decision with respect to Mr al-Megrahi has, sadly, resulted in widespread criticism and the threat of boycott. The situation could seriously deteriorate if a planned visit by the Scottish Government to the middle east to seek investment funds for public projects in Scotland goes ahead. Does he agree that such a visit would not be well understood or appropriate at the current time and that it should be ruled out to avoid further damage to Scotland's reputation?

Does the cabinet secretary not accept that my criticism of the failure of the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism to act has been acknowledged by the Government, given that the responsibility for certain matters has been transferred to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth and that the First Minister is meeting T-Mobile today? Does she not acknowledge, however grudgingly, that that is progress?

More than 40 years ago, I walked through the gates of the Cartsdyke shipyard and met the head foreman, Mr Alan Swindells. He was a wee character, but he had enormous power. Little did we know what changes lay ahead. A job for life? I think not. As the representative of a community that for many years now has been subject to significant and on-going change, from ships on the Clyde to banks on the Clyde and from building ships to microchips, I understand the need for change. I know only too well that nothing stands still and know how important it is to educate individuals and equip them with skills and to support businesses through such change. As a worker, as a trade union official and as a member of this Parliament, I also know how important politicians and politics can be in that process. In my various roles over the past 30 years, I have dealt with secretaries of state and ministers of all parties, including Mrs Thatcher in her den in Downing Street. As a result, I am not starry-eyed about the influence that politicians can have, either positive or negative. [ Interruption. ] I think that that was a negative influence.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The person who constructed my lectern obviously did not serve his time in the Cartsdyke shipyard. I have seen shipbuilding move to the far east and the electronics industry move to eastern Europe, and I know that we cannot compete with sweated labour from abroad. However, I understand that change needs to be managed and that we need to retool and reskill people through education and training to build the workforce of the future. In order to do that, we need to be prepared to get involved and to act early. In our small country, we should be aware of the changes that are happening and manage them not for the here and now but for the next five, 10 or 20 years. In that respect—and to bring a note of disappointment into the debate—I wonder how we can be confident that this Government and its ministers are prepared to act. For example, in February, Telecom Service Centres Ltd, one of Scotland's biggest contact centres, announced hundreds of redundancies in Greenock as a result of T-Mobile offshoring work to the Philippines. When I wrote to the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism to warn him of the threat not just to those jobs but to the whole industry, I did so not as an act of political posturing—after all, I knew that the agencies were already in place to support some of the workers—but because I recognised the early signs of an industry that was facing real challenges. The answer that I received was, at best, complacent in its attempt to assure me that everything in the garden was rosy, and it was not until a couple of months later when the same company announced the loss of hundreds of jobs in Falkirk that Mr Mather's officials made the call. In his letter to me, the minister defended his position by name-checking his work with the Customer Contact Association. However, even a cursory glance at the association's website reveals various references to challenges such as the squeeze on costs and offshoring trends. Fully three months later almost to the day, after more redundancies and the closure of the Greenock contact centre, the First Minister will today respond by meeting T-Mobile. Let us all hope that he can seal the deal and secure guarantees that will minimise the job losses among the TSC workers.

The minister, the workers at TSC and I know that there was no call to TSC until  the eve of the additional job losses in Falkirk, despite representations from TSC and from me. For many of those workers, it is too late—they will lose their jobs. However, my concern is that the situation is not simply a local difficulty, but the beginning of a trend that will impact significantly in my constituency, where contact centres at T-Mobile, the Royal Bank of Scotland and IBM contribute to the economy and provide thousands of jobs. Those are high-skilled jobs that need multilingual, information technology and financial advice skills. The issue is no small matter for the Scottish economy, in which more than 60,000 people are employed in 300 contact centres that offer 26 different languages. If Inverclyde and Scotland are to continue to benefit from those jobs, the Government needs to engage proactively at times of crisis, but also, more important, before crises are confirmed. The Government needs to bring the industry together, understand the challenges that it faces, and work with it to ensure that Scotland and Inverclyde remain good places to do business.

The Local Government and Communities Committee and the minister agree that we need to use imagination to maximise voter turnout. Has he applied his imagination to how he can work with the committee to examine what happens in other countries, which might have better systems to engage young people, for example? What other examples can he share with us? How does he see the Government and the committee working on the issue in the coming weeks and months?

As the convener of the lead committee on  the bill, I am pleased to be taking part in the debate. I thank all those who gave us written and oral evidence and I thank the clerks, the Scottish Parliament information centre researchers and my colleagues on the committee. Whether to decouple the local government and Scottish Parliament elections, and the debacle of the 2007 elections, are issues that the committee has considered in great detail. Ron Gould produced a comprehensive report and, following its publication, we conducted our own inquiry into the issues, on which we reported to Parliament in June 2008. Among our many recommendations, we endorsed the view that the Scottish Parliament and local government elections should be decoupled. It was clear from the evidence that we took that, although there have been differing views over the years, there is now broad agreement that the elections should be separated. However, some concerns were raised with us, which we have highlighted in our report. The first of those is about turnout, which is an issue that we also considered as part of our inquiry into the 2007 elections. People were concerned that if the local government elections were held separately, turnout would fall. However, we recognise that the issue of turnout is broader than just the decoupling of elections. In evidence, Dave Watson from Unison said: "All of us—civic society, politicians, political parties and local authorities—need to focus on the reasons for the low turnout by doing much more work to make people want to turn out in local elections."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 25 March 2009; c 1884.] We welcome the indication from the Minister for Parliamentary Business that he would be happy to engage with the committee on that, and we look forward to working with the Scottish Government on the issue. I hope to hear—today or soon—how we can take that work forward. Our report shows that we are concerned about voter registration. Of course, that is a reserved issue, so we are calling on the Scottish Government to continue to work with the UK Government to increase levels of registration. As we are all painfully aware, there was a lot of voter confusion during the 2007 elections. In our inquiry into those elections, we pointed out that the high level of rejected ballots in the Scottish Parliament election should not eclipse the high level of rejected ballots in the local government elections. It is clear that there needs to be further information about how the STV system works. Ron Gould said in his report: "In essence, the local government elections are not simply about ensuring a reasonable number of voters show  up at the polls on polling day. More important is that they engage with the campaign in a meaningful manner and make a knowledgeable decision on their ballot paper." There is a consensus that there needs to be an information campaign to raise awareness about the importance of local government elections and to educate people on the method of voting. We have asked the Scottish Government to consider the role that the Electoral Commission can play in any information campaign, given that it does not have a statutory role in relation to local government elections in Scotland. Given the need for a good information campaign, it is also important that there is sufficient funding. Tom Aitchison, the chief executive of and returning officer for the City of Edinburgh Council, told the committee that he remembered being allocated somewhere in the region of £15,000 to promote public awareness in 2007, which does not seem sufficient funding for a city the size of Edinburgh. He told us that he would "strongly support any move towards making more resources available generally for election management in Scotland and specifically for public awareness to encourage people to vote and so get a better turnout."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 25 March 2009; c 1865-66.] Given how vital public information campaigns will be in helping people to engage with the process and educating them about the STV system, the committee has recommended that there should be a meaningful discussion with local authorities over the funding that would be required, and that that funding should be reflected in the next Scottish Government spending review. Funding is also an issue when it comes to e-counting. After 2007, the word "e-counting" should send a shudder through most of us in the Parliament. However, we need e-counting for local government elections because of the counting method that is used for STV elections. Again, that raises the issue of costs. The Association of Electoral Administrators was concerned about that, given that the Scotland Office will not be contributing as it did in 2007. William Pollock from the association said: "It is likely that the costs would increase because the economies of scale that are achieved with a combined election would not be achieved with decoupling. Under the current arrangement, the costs will fall on the local authority if the matter is not addressed."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 25 March 2009; c 1868-69.] The minister told the committee that a cost cannot be put on an e-counting system yet because the Scottish Government has to go through a competitive tendering process. As with the other costs of the bill, it is not clear how much  local government will have to find on its own and what money it will get from central Government.

I ask the minister to respond when he sums up. Sorry—I am pressed for time. The costs of the bill have been a general concern for the committee throughout its scrutiny of the bill. The committee expects that the Scottish Government will provide information on how the costs will be split between the Government and local authorities as soon as possible. The other main provision in the bill is to allow voting information down to polling-station level to be published. I am sure that we all agree that it will be helpful to us to have information such as the number of preferences cast and the votes transferred between candidates at each stage. Equally, I am sure that we all agree with the minister that a secret ballot is fundamental to democracy and that any changes must protect that fundamental right. We agree with the minister that this is a balancing act that we have to get right. The Electoral Commission appears to agree that using a threshold of 200 votes will help to protect a voter's anonymity. As we say in our report, it is clear that the proposal in the bill to publish voter information at polling-station level is welcome, provided that adequate measures are put in place to ensure the secrecy of the ballot. I have spoken about the potential costs of public information campaigns and the e-counting system, and I return to the issue of costs. I thank the Finance Committee for its report to us on the financial memorandum to the bill. We raised a number of issues arising from that report with the minister. The main issue is the uncertainty over what the split of costs will be between central and local government. Although the minister has promised to nail down the costs for e-counting as soon as possible, and to try to pre-commit that money before the next spending review, we have not received the same commitment for other costs. We are aware of concerns about the need for all of this to be adequately funded, and we have recommended that the Scottish Government should take account of those concerns in determining local government funding requirements for the next spending review. I have spoken about the concerns that we have highlighted in our report. We have made a number of recommendations, particularly with regard to the important area of funding. I hope that the Scottish Government will address that issue. However, as I have said, there is broad agreement with the aims of the bill. The committee  recommends that Parliament should agree to the general principles of the bill.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her statement and for keeping me up to date personally with developments. I echo the thanks that have been extended to NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and to Inverclyde Council's education services. I am sure that the cabinet secretary would agree that special praise should go to Mrs Lind, the head teacher of Ravenscraig primary school; Mrs Allan, the school secretary; and Julie Douglas for her performance and confident leadership. That has given a great deal of confidence and reassurance to parents and it has been recognised by them. Given that we now have a case involving a teenager, what discussions has the cabinet secretary had with the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning on further school closures in the secondary sector and on the possible impact on exams? Will she make it clear that appropriate transfer of antivirals has taken place in recognition of the developing situation in the Inverclyde area?

It was recently announced that additional capacity had been provided at NHS 24 to provide information and advice through a helpline, and the cabinet secretary outlined in her statement the organisation's developing role. Given that NHS 24 has those responsibilities, which are in addition to its work of dealing with a significant number of daily calls, what steps has the civil contingencies committee taken to ensure that an overflow capacity can be created if the situation escalates? I point out that, in my constituency of Greenock, we have a telecommunications centre that has the appropriate skills and technology and that could be up and running at very short notice if required.

I will be brief. I welcome Alex Neil to his new position. Like Ross Finnie and many others, I have noticed his change in style, but he has maintained his cheeky smile. However, even that cannot hide the grim reality of the failures of the Government's housing policy. Today, we have received figures from the NHBC that show that the combined number of private and social sector homes that have been started is down 67 per cent; the combined number of new homes that have been completed is down 54 per cent; and the number of homes under construction is down 20 per cent. Obviously, that makes  meeting the target of 10,000 new rented homes a year, which Shelter has said we need, a daunting task. I want to pick up on a couple of points to do with homelessness. The minister said that homelessness is a continuing and significant challenge. I do not know whether he stopped short of making a commitment on that, but "straining every sinew" does not guarantee that we will meet the targets. Some 9,500 people are in temporary accommodation, of course. The flip-flop on the HAG subsidies cannot be flicked away. Such flip-flopping has tainted the minister's predecessors and has left housing associations receiving £6,000 less for every new home that they build. The situation is difficult for them, and it will result in the Government failing people of all backgrounds and ages. The Government is failing young people who want their first home, older people who want to stay in their home but not be prisoners in it, and families who are living in overcrowded and unsuitable homes. Sadly, we know that the situation could have been different. Tenants in Inverclyde had the good sense to vote for housing stock transfer and now enjoy growth, investment, new houses and modernisation. That process also empowered communities and made tenants stakeholders in their neighbourhood. Those tenants had the confidence to take matters into their own hands and they achieved that result and significant investment despite the best efforts of the minister and his colleagues, who fought tooth and nail to oppose the measures. We simply need to look at the situation of our neighbours in Renfrewshire and Lanarkshire to know what our fate would have been if we had not had the good sense to vote for housing stock transfer. I hope that, in the minister's summing-up speech, he will have the good grace to acknowledge and confirm the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing's statement to the Local Government and Communities Committee that finance for housing from the UK Government will be spent on housing. I ask the minister to confirm that that money will be available.

First Minister, I was delighted to hear you say that the Government would get behind this company, but could you start by ensuring that your minister, Jim Mather—

Sorry. Could you make sure—[ Laughter. ] Could you make sure, First Minister—

Could he make sure—[ Applause. ] Thank you for that, Presiding Officer; I was not expecting to be called. Could the First Minister ensure that his minister Jim Mather takes action for the TSC workers in Greenock and Falkirk? Mr Mather has known about the situation for a number of weeks—indeed, months—and I have been very disappointed by his complacent response. This important issue concerns not only TSC workers but the whole of Scotland's call-centre sector, so I hope that action will be taken.

To ask the Scottish Government how it intends to roll out the NHS Aroma cafe concept. (S3O-6625)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her answer and I have noted her public comments. I accept that the Aroma cafe concept that she has endorsed has some merit, but I hope that she accepts that a one-size-fits-all approach is not appropriate and that Aroma cafes should not displace hard-working charities and volunteers, such as the league of friends at Inverclyde royal hospital. The cabinet secretary is aware that the chairman of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, Andrew Robertson, is to visit the tea bar at Inverclyde royal hospital in the coming days, after  5,000 people signed a petition in support of the volunteers who run it. Will she ensure that Mr Robertson takes with him a message of gratitude for their efforts, an apology for the shabby way in which they have been treated over the past few weeks and, most important, an assurance that they will be allowed to continue their good work for the hospital and the wider community for a very long time to come?

To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth last met the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to discuss the impact of the equal pay settlement on local authorities. (S3O-6538)

On 18 March at the Local Government and Communities Committee, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing agreed with the view of Glyn Hawker of Unison that equal pay is about taking women out of poverty. The cabinet secretary said that she would raise the issue with her colleagues in cabinet. What discussions has the finance secretary had with his colleagues? What influence does he have to ensure that we break the logjam that is denying justice to some of the lowest-paid female workers in Scotland?

As the Audit Scotland report confirms, there are limited data on the number of children who are affected by parental substance misuse, and I take it from his statement that the minister recognises the need to do better in that area. When can we expect work to begin on confirming the number of children who live with a parent with an addiction in order to establish a risk? In evidence to the Health and Sport Committee last week, Ruth Stark, a senior social worker, said that there was a real problem in accessing children who live in this situation. Graeme Rizza put things more strongly. He said: "We need to be more robust about our access to children with non-engaging parents".—[ Official Report , Health and Sport Committee , 25 March 2009; c 1714.] What can the minister do now to ensure that we identify those children and that, when we do so, we gain access to them and put in place the services that they urgently require?

To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to protect children who live with a parent with a drug addiction. (S3O-6402)

I am more interested in action than in publications and meetings. In a written question in 2007, I asked the minister how many children were living with a parent with a drug addiction. He estimated the number to be between 10,000 and 20,000. When asked the same question two weeks ago by my colleague Karen Whitefield, he gave the same unsatisfactory answer. What has he been doing over the past two years to identify and meet the needs of those children? On a day when Audit Scotland confirms that billions are being spent on adults with an addiction, is it not time that he got a share of that budget to tackle the real issues for the real victims of abuse?

To ask the Scottish Government what  measures it intends to take to expand apprenticeship opportunities. (S3O-6217)

I hope that the cabinet secretary will meet Michael Levack, chief executive of the Scottish Building Federation, and note his support for the proposal that every Scottish Government contract should be required to recruit apprenticeships. Does that proposal have the support of the cabinet secretary or the Scottish Government?

I welcome the bill. More important, it will be welcomed by my constituents in Greenock and Inverclyde who have been diagnosed with pleural plaques and who have had their rights to compensation temporarily denied. Those rights will correctly be restored today. The disease, with all its aspects, will be properly acknowledged. Once again, the Parliament, with cross-party support, has come down on the side of the victims of asbestos-related disease. More than most, the campaigners I met today, who are in the public gallery, will well understand that this country has an adversarial system of  justice, in which the ill and the dying have been victimised time and time again. We have heard from Des McNulty how that has happened. There have been delays and blanket denials at a terminal point in many people's lives. Their very existence—and where they worked, who they worked for and what ship they worked on—was denied. They were nothing in the system. Today, we hear that some of that injustice is being addressed. As Nigel Don said, in a stage 3 debate, we often repeat what others have said, and, as members have said, I am pleased that the Scottish Parliament has a proud record in this area. Back in 2000, I hosted one of the Parliament's first members' business debates on mesothelioma, with the support of 45 back benchers. We have hung together on the issue for a long time. I have been aware of the blight of asbestos throughout my time as an MSP and in my life before entering the Scottish Parliament. As many do only too well, I understand the difficulties and the humiliations that victims have sometimes had to endure at the hands of the courts in trying to obtain the justice that they were well due. Over the years, several members have distinguished themselves on the issue. I am happy to recognise the contribution of politicians from all parties. As has been said, the late Margaret Ewing campaigned on the issue here and in Westminster. I also recognise the contributions of Robert Brown, Stewart Stevenson, Pauline McNeill, as the Justice 1 Committee's convener, Hugh Henry, in his ministerial role and—of course—Des McNulty, whose record I contend is second to none. I regret that, unless the Conservatives change their minds, we have lost Bill Aitken along the way. He is another member whom I would like to have commended today. I consider the costs and the price that is paid to be much more than a line on a balance sheet; they include the cost to health, the impact on communities and on families, the ultimate price that too many have paid and the indignity that people have suffered. Like others, I ask the Conservatives to ask themselves again about costs and price and to move beyond the balance sheet. The Justice Committee's work should—rightly—be praised. We might have lost Bill Aitken along the way, but I am pleased that the parliamentary campaign has new recruits, such as Bill Kidd and Stuart McMillan, who have continued the Parliament's tradition. Bill Butler's work is also to be recognised. The progress that has been achieved could not have been accomplished without the efforts of victims—I was reminded of that today when I met  campaigners. Despite terminal illness, victims have fought the good fight literally until their last breath. In the debate in 2000, I paid tribute to Owen Lilly—a Clydebank man who showed true Clydeside spirit. He participated in a film that shocked many by showing the horrors of mesothelioma and brought home the plight of victims to a wider audience. Joe Baird, my old friend and the chairman of the shop stewards in Scott Lithgow, fell victim to asbestos. Despite his problems, he retained his dignity, his humanity and his campaigning spirit throughout that difficult time. Despite their illness, people such as Jim McAleese have provided support for the Inverclyde support group for many years. Of course, for those who have lost relatives to this awful disease, the fight continues. The families refuse to give up the fight for what is rightly theirs—the right and just campaign. They have been ably supported by campaign groups such as Clydeside Action on Asbestos and Clydebank Asbestos Group, by friends in the trade union movement—in the GMB and Unite—and by lawyers such as Frank Maguire of Thompsons Solicitors, who have all played a major part in bringing about the bill. All parties can—rightly—be proud of the Parliament's record on the issue. We have consistently highlighted the insurance industry's dirty tactics and its attempts to spin out cases to avoid or reduce its liability. The bill marks another milestone for the Parliament, which, as Bill Kidd said, is connected to its communities and knows where they stand. However, it is the external influences—the unions, lawyers, pressure groups and victims—that have given the Parliament another opportunity to do what is right. I urge all parliamentarians to pass the bill, to ensure victory today, which will belong to all the campaigners for this just cause.

I am pleased to open today's debate. This is the first time that a proposed national planning framework has been subject to scrutiny by the Parliament and its committees. The Local Government and Communities Committee welcomes the opportunity that it has had to debate a significant document and to contribute to the process. I thank the committee clerks and Scottish Parliament information centre researchers for the help that they have given to the committee. I also thank the other two committees that have contributed to the debate through their reports—the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee and the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee—and all those who made written submissions or gave oral evidence. The Local Government and Communities Committee recognises that the proposed national planning framework is an evolving document and will be subject to further scrutiny and monitoring through continuing dialogue between the committee and the Scottish Government. It is clear from our report that the committee is generally positive about NPF 2, but we believe that lessons can be learned for the future. The first lesson relates to accessibility. We know that planning is a complex subject, and we welcome the efforts that the Scottish Government has made to make the document more user friendly and accessible, but it appears that even experts have found it difficult to wade through. For example, Bob Stewart of the Scottish Society of Directors of Planning said: "it is not an easy read, even for a professional with some 42 years' experience. It will be refined as we go through the process, and as we do so it would be helpful if it was improved and simplified."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 14 January 2009; c 1551.] Planning is an extremely important subject. In order to be as accessible as possible to as many people as possible, future NPF documents should use clear, jargon-free language to ensure that the  public are well informed about the key issues and feel able to engage in the consultation process. Although I am sure that the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change had his tongue firmly in his cheek when he described the document to the committee as "a rattling good read", he did say that he would be happy to consider comments about language and presentation and to learn from them. We also believe that there are lessons to be learned on the consultation process. We acknowledge the Scottish Government's efforts to engage with stakeholders and the general public through an extensive consultation programme, but community groups that responded to the committee's consultation raised concerns about the level of consultation locally. As some of the impacts of NPF 2 are likely to be felt most at that level, it is vital that local communities are engaged in the consultation process. We therefore recommend that the Scottish Government consider ways of further improving the consultation process so that local communities can be more effectively engaged in the future. We suggest that local authorities could have a role to play in maximising awareness at a local level, and we encourage the Government to look at that possibility. One of the more contentious aspects of NPF 2 is the list of projects that are to be designated as national developments. The committee's focus was primarily on process issues, not on the merits or otherwise of the national developments—other committees have considered them—and we have commented on the consultation. A number of concerns were raised in evidence about the lack of consultation on the revised list of national developments. In particular, people were not clear about how the list was developed and revised and why some projects had been included and others had not. That complaint was not limited to local community groups; again, I quote Bob Stewart of the Scottish Society of Directors of Planning: "local authorities and others made a considerable number of suggestions about alternative national projects. The process of sifting those projects has not been transparent and it is not clear how we arrived at the projects that are listed in the NPF."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 14 January 2009; c 1547.]

No. I will plough on because I have limited time; I am sure that Patrick Harvie will get another opportunity. We know that the Scottish Government carried out a strategic environmental assessment of all the national developments and that there was consultation on that assessment, but we do not  think that it was clear to the wider public that that was an opportunity to comment on the revised list of national developments. We therefore believe that there should have been a separate consultation on the revised list. We also think that the Scottish Government should have been clearer about why suggestions for national developments were accepted or rejected and that individuals whose suggestions were rejected should have been properly debriefed. My final point on the process is to reinforce the committee's plea for more notice to be given of the laying of the next NPF so that committees can properly plan a programme of scrutiny and engagement. Sixty days is extremely tight, and the more notice that we are given, the better. Turning to the substantive issues in the document itself, we focused on the flexibility of the framework, its impact on the planning system and the funding, timetabling and delivery of national developments. Given the current economic climate, we believe that it is essential that the framework is flexible enough to respond to ever-changing circumstances, and we welcome the Government's assurance that the document is not a fixed blueprint. The construction industry in particular has been badly hit by the current economic situation. The committee heard evidence from the industry that it is crying out for infrastructure projects to be brought forward to stimulate the industry and the economy and to help keep capacity. Michael Levack of the Scottish Building Federation told us: "we are losing capacity in a serious way—by the day. It is very difficult to predict what the next six months or year will hold. I am always surprised when people speculate that there will be some recovery in the economy during 2009. Personally, without wishing to wear the black hat and sound a note of doom and gloom, I think that it will be 2011 before we see any improvement in the situation. That is why we are constantly calling for some infrastructure projects to be brought forward, to allow us to retain capacity in the industry."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 14 January 2009; c 1540.] The Scottish Government said to us in evidence that it will bring forward construction projects in which it has control over the timetable, and it cited the Forth crossing and strategic rail enhancements as two examples. The committee believes that, given the current economic situation, the Scottish Government should consider opportunities to bring forward projects that are publicly funded. We recognise that some projects are either wholly or partly funded by the private sector, and for that reason we also recommend that the Scottish Government engage with the private sector to consider the opportunities of bringing forward further projects. The issue is an important one for many people, and we would welcome  reassurances from the Government that it will pursue those discussions. The Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006 requires ministers to set out in the framework a statement of need for any development that it designates as a national development. Although that does not automatically remove the need for planning permission or other consents to be obtained for a development, it means that a planning authority cannot reject an application for a national development that is listed in NPF 2 on the ground of need. Parliament needs to be clear about the significance of NPF 2 in that regard. The committee believes that the Government needs to provide further clarity on the funding and delivery of national developments to ensure that they are not simply aspirational but firm commitments to build. I have mentioned the effect of the economic climate on the construction industry. If no clarity is given on the timetabling of the national developments and associated infrastructure, the Government will simply add to the uncertainty and leave the industry and others unable to plan ahead and make projections. There will also be an effect on local communities: people need to know when a national development is likely to come on stream locally. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee expressed concern about the delivery and funding of the national developments. The Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change also said that "The framework does not represent ... a single penny of public funding".—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 21 January 2009; c 1579.] On that basis, the committee struggled to see how the national developments in the NPF, which is essentially a planning document, link to the Scottish Government's future expenditure proposals. We seek clarity from ministers on the funding of national developments in relation to those expenditure plans: we have agreed to take further evidence from the Government on that, but some clarity today would be very welcome.

I became convinced of the need for action on disabled persons parking places after a conversation with a constituent of mine, a young woman who is a full-time carer for her elderly mother. She described to me in graphic terms the amount of time, energy, physical effort and planning that was involved in taking her mother on her weekly outing to the local supermarket, and she told me of the anger and frustration that she felt when she was denied a parking space there by an inconsiderate able-bodied person. For someone with an impairment, that is not simply an inconvenience. Only a carer can truly know how difficult and undignified it is to manoeuvre someone into a wheelchair in a standard car-parking space. Even the most mundane but important task, such as going to the shops, the  post office, the GP or the hospital, can be a real challenge. Evidence that was presented to the Local Government and Communities Committee confirmed the scale of the problem. One in five disabled parking bays is used by drivers without a blue badge. More than a third of our car parks have no accessible bays free for disabled people because of the level of abuse. Some 85 per cent of disabled spaces are not enforceable in law. A survey in Dumfries and Galloway found that 50 per cent of bays in hospital car parks were taken by drivers who did not have a disabled badge. Amidst the gloom, there are notable exceptions, as we have heard. Asda, which gave good evidence to the committee, is leading the way with an enforcement scheme that has increased the availability of disabled parking spaces at its stores by 60 per cent. That evidence gave us an insight into what the bill can achieve. Sadly, others stores have not followed Asda's example. It pains me to say it, but a scant inspection this week of supermarket car parks in my constituency that are not part of the Asda chain—whose inspection officer is in the public gallery today—found many disabled car parking spaces that were occupied by people who were not displaying a blue badge, apparently fearless of challenge. We accept that there will be an implementation stage, as the minister said, but I suggest that, once the bill is passed, stores that do not already reach the Asda mark should not hang around much longer. They should listen to the message and act to achieve what Asda has already achieved. For too long, disabled people have had to rely on other drivers not to take reserved parking spaces out of courtesy and consideration. The committee heard evidence that, sadly, when disabled people complain to drivers who abuse disabled spaces, the complainers can receive abuse and even threats of violence. Therefore, as has been said today and in evidence to the committee, the age of relying on politeness has ended and the age of enforcement has come. That is welcome and long overdue. Although the bill will in due course change the quality of life of many Scots, it is worth mentioning that the benefits may be wider than the mobility benefits for disabled people. Evidence to the committee confirmed that people who break rules in one part of their lives are likely to break rules in other illegal ways. Research shows that those who are careless and thoughtless enough to take up disabled parking bays are more likely to have a criminal record, and that 50 per cent of them have a history of traffic violations. One in 10 cars that are found abusing disabled parking spaces is in an illegal condition. The top criminologist Sylvia Chenery of University College London's Jill Dando  institute of crime science supports the bill and says that a crackdown on the abuse of disabled parking spaces could nail some of our most wanted criminals. She has reminded us that the Yorkshire ripper was caught because he had a dodgy licence plate. Perhaps the minister can discuss that issue with his colleagues. Enforcement of disabled parking spaces might be an efficient way in which to target active criminals and offenders, as well as illegal vehicles. Today is a day to celebrate all the efforts of disability campaigners over many years, including those involved in the eye-catching campaigns such as the space invaders and baywatch campaigns. A lot of work has gone on for a long time. My committee colleagues will take pleasure in the passage of the bill. Those campaigners have had their concerns listened to and, more important, acted on. There is no doubt that the change will improve the lives of many Scots. The campaigners are also to be congratulated on recognising that, in Jackie Baillie, they found a politician who shared their concerns and their determination to change things for the better. As has been acknowledged today, she is a politician with all the necessary skills to ensure the safe passage of the bill without amendment, with the support of the Government and, I hope, with the unanimous support of the Parliament. That is a commendation of her work and effort. We are all sad that she is not here to share today's events.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary assure us that need will be paramount in any review? Need should certainly be placed above geography.

Yesterday, the Local Government and Communities Committee heard that there are also capacity problems in Scottish Water, which has a significant role to play in addressing the flooding issues that plague my constituency. Will the cabinet secretary discuss with Scottish Water both the short-term and the long-term capacity problems that it faces?

Does the cabinet secretary agree with Michael Levack of the Scottish Building Federation, who said this morning that "maintaining our skills base alone will not address the longer term need for a decision on the funding of infrastructure projects. I would like to see the Scottish Futures Trust up and running and investors being brought on board to provide the necessary funds. Until that time ... ministers should make use of available funding models such as PPP"? Does she agree that we need to bring forward the work, not just maintain the skills?

The minister might not be aware that, this morning, the chief executive of the Scottish Building Federation gave the Local Government and Communities Committee the shocking news that the industry's intake of apprentices this year will be down by 700 and that hundreds of apprentices face redundancy. Irrespective of the budget process—although perhaps through it—can we be assured that the Government will intervene in this matter?

To ask the Scottish Government what action is being taken to meet the increasing demand for money advice and advocacy services. (S3O-5191)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his answer and welcome the fact that additional funding from consequentials will be made available; I am sure that he will agree that it is certainly required. On a visit to my local money advice centre, I found that, year on year, the number of inquiries is up by 100 per cent, the amount of mortgage debt is up by 104 per cent and the number of people who present with debt on secured loans and who are therefore likely to face repossession is up by 371 per cent. How will the cabinet secretary guarantee that my constituency will get its fair share of the money available to meet the need for money advice?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Given that this morning there was no ministerial support for the nonsense that was spoken in defence of the kinship care policy, is it in order for ministers to enter the chamber at the end of the debate and make sedentary comments when they have not taken part in the debate?

Sorry, Presiding Officer. It is not that I dropped off during that last contribution. The Parliament welcomed the minister's announcement last December, in that at least the statement recognised, in a small way, that too many of our children in this small country can no longer safely stay at home with their parents. It recognised that they need to be rescued from dire circumstances, which are driven in the majority of cases by parental drug misuse. It recognised that we need to increase the number of places of safety for those children—places that do not exist in sufficient numbers.  The Parliament also welcomed the proposals that sought to recognise properly the work of foster carers and, for the first time, the important role of kinship carers. We gave that support not without question. The minister will recall that I shared the concerns of NCH—now called Action for Children—that, if adequate resources were not provided, we would not be able to deliver. Like others, I asked some specific questions. How much money would be available? How many carers would benefit? Would the allowance be available in all local authorities? I suggested that those questions needed to be answered if we were to avoid a cruel deception being played out on kinship carers. We regrettably have our answer today. The minister is in some difficulty, which was reflected in his speech. He has to ask himself whether he has done everything possible to ensure that those children stay within the wider family, as he said he would in his press release on the day of the announcement last year. As stated in The Herald , the announcement was of a Scottish first—a national allowance scheme for kinship carers, costing the Scottish Government up to £20 million a year. The story  went on to say that kinships carers who took on the parent/guardian role would be given the same status as foster carers across Scotland, and the minister proudly stated that the new programme was a joint commitment by the Scottish Government and COSLA. I presume that the media were briefed by the Scottish Government's spin doctors—spin that is now described as myth in the COSLA briefing that was sent to all MSPs yesterday. COSLA can now—a year later—answer the questions that we asked on the day of the announcement. Its briefing helpfully outlines a number of questions and answers. First, "Does the commitment apply to all children who are looked after by friends and family? The answer is no. Secondly: "How much will kinship carers get?" The answer is: "This will vary across Local Authorities". In response to the third question, which is "What is the timescale?" the answer is, "over the period 2008-11", and not—the minister will note—April 2008. Finally, "Is there an issue with benefits?" The answer is yes. Is that a surprise? Despite all the ministers, all the officials at the back of the  chamber and all the brains in COSLA, we are told that not one of them was aware last year that there may be a problem. I think not—the spin needs to stop. The facts are that the First Minister said that the money was available and that the Minister for Children and Early Years said that he would deliver. The Parliament supported the minister in that goal, and it is time to deliver—no ifs, no buts. There is a wider point. If the Scottish Government cannot deliver on its stated policy of increasing the number of places for children at risk, how can we have any confidence in its programme of action to improve the identification of children at risk? How can we believe that the Government will be able to build on the capacity of services for children at risk, strengthen the management of immediate risk and develop an evidence base if it cannot deliver for the minority of children—the tip of the iceberg—who have been identified as being at risk? How can we be confident that the Government can or will do any better for the 60,000 children under 16 who have a parent with a drug problem or the estimated—the Government does not even know the exact figure—10,000 to 20,000 children who live with a drug-using parent? Who knows where the remaining 40,000 are? Finally, we need to establish who is in charge. To my knowledge, at least four cabinet secretaries—none of whom is present in the chamber—and three ministers have responsibility for kinship care. An important point is that not one of them is accountable to the Parliament for the issue—safety in numbers, indeed. Only when one of those cabinet secretaries with influence in the Government and over the budget is prepared to step forward to accept that responsibility and accountability will we know that the Scottish Government is serious about the protection of children. Until then, we will continue to be disappointed, just as we are today.

To ask the Scottish Government how it is preparing for winter pressures on the national health service. (S3O-5091)

I note the comments that were made earlier this week about planning for the festive season. The pressures have already begun. On an icy day in my constituency this week, accident and emergency admissions to Inverclyde royal hospital shot up by 70 per cent. I am therefore concerned that plans should not cover only the festive season. Will the cabinet secretary explain why, despite the Scottish Government's undertaking in March to achieve and maintain a level of zero blocked beds, we now have almost 100 blocked beds? That is creating substantial delays in our most vulnerable patients being discharged.

I suppose that today's divisions on the issues of fairness and what will replace the hated council tax are only to be expected. We have also heard the Scottish Government's analysis from Joe FitzPatrick, which shows that the division exists in the country too. The consultation showed that groups that make up the working-age population are less supportive of local income tax than groups of older people. Only 10 of the 86 organisations that submitted views supported local income tax. Less than half said that it would be better for the economy, and less than half of the individuals who responded said that the proposed rate was correct. My question is: how would those people know? How are they able to compare the local income tax system with a range of systems? How can individuals know how fair an income tax would be unless they know what they would be asked to pay? We still do not know that. We do not know whether the exemptions for students and the armed forces would go or stay. We do know whether people would be taxed on the current year's earnings or on the previous year's earnings. Would it be considered fair for people in Greenock to pay 6p in the pound while people in Eastwood paid 4p in the pound? The business community would willingly agree that a cut in the business rate was fair, but we know that the impact of cuts on communities and the quality of services would not be considered fair. How would the principle of comparable service levels be maintained if there were different levels of taxation across the country?

The division in the chamber is about replacing that system. There is broad agreement that the current system needs to be amended or replaced, and we are discussing how we test the fairness of different systems. If we have only one option—local income tax—rather than a range of options, how can we make that judgment? We are in a deep economic crisis, with unemployment expected to increase in Edinburgh. What would local income tax bring to local government finance in Edinburgh if the tax base collapsed? Why are we still waiting? As Joe FitzPatrick said, it is 21 months since the policy was launched. The Chartered Institute of Public  Finance and Accountancy, a leading professional accountancy body for public service, has asked why we are still waiting for the promised detailed route map towards a local income tax. Critical issues have still not been answered, including the loss of the financial autonomy and accountability of local authorities and their democratically elected members—no small matter—and the £750 million annual shortfall. That professional body's strong recommendation was that the Scottish Government needs to be clearer on the detail. I agree. Only then will we be in a position to pass judgment on any new tax to replace the hated council tax.

The Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill was introduced by Jackie Baillie MSP on Monday 2 June 2008. The Local Government and Communities Committee was confirmed as the lead committee in consideration of the bill at stage 1 by vote of the Parliament on Wednesday 11 June 2008. In all, 28 individuals and organisations responded to the committee's call for written evidence. The committee took oral evidence on the bill from witnesses at meetings in September and October 2008. Extracts from the Official Reports of the meetings and the associated written submissions are before members today in the committee's report. On behalf of the committee, I thank all those who willingly gave their time to give evidence and to participate in the process. I hope that I will be allowed to make a particular reference to the committee clerk, Martin Verity, who has prepared his last stage 1 report, as he will retire later this year. I am sure that all members wish him a happy and long retirement. [ Applause. ] The evidence that we received showed that approximately 4.5 per cent of the Scottish population hold a blue badge parking permit, which translates into 230,000 people. As has been mentioned and I am sure will be mentioned again, the baywatch campaign in its most recent survey found that one in five parking bays is being used by drivers without a blue badge. That figure has remained depressingly constant over the years. The same survey found that more than a third of car parks have no accessible bays free for disabled shoppers because of the level of abuse. In evidence to the committee, Alex Thorburn of the Dumfries and Galloway access panel reported that his surveys of the local hospital car park regularly found that 50 per cent of accessible bays were taken up by non-badge holders. On one occasion, the figure rose to 75 per cent. For someone with an impairment, the situation is more than an irritant and inconvenience; it represents a significant obstacle to undertaking the most mundane but important tasks, such as going to the shops, visiting the post office or attending the hospital. The need to act is outlined clearly in the evidence that the committee received. Jackie Baillie mentioned the written evidence from Leonard Cheshire Disability, which illustrated the organisation's full support for the bill. It stated: "For too long disabled people have had to rely on the courtesy and consideration of other drivers not to 'take' their reserved parking spaces, but we have all heard and seen news stories which depict the hostility other drivers now show each other when it comes to gaining a parking space."  We also heard from Jackie Baillie about that. The submission concluded: "Therefore the age of just relying on politeness has ended and the age of enforcement has come." The committee, while noting that the blue badge scheme is a United Kingdom scheme and is not within the scope of the bill, nevertheless believes that a wider approach to the issue of disabled persons' parking is required and that abuse of the blue badge scheme should be tackled. That may have further benefits in tackling crime generally. The evidence that was presented to the committee confirmed that people who break the rules in one part of their life are likely to break rules in other illegal ways. Research shows that those who are careless and thoughtless enough to take up a disabled parking bay are more likely to have a criminal record and that about 50 per cent of them have a history of traffic violations. Of the cars found abusing disabled spaces, one in 10 were in an illegal condition, whether through defective tyres or outdated road tax. That being the case, enforcement of disabled parking spaces may be an efficient and cost-effective way of targeting active offenders and illegal vehicles. Consequently, the committee calls on the Scottish Government to consider how the results of the Department for Transport's review of the operation of the scheme in England can best inform policy in Scotland. One key proposal of the bill regarding on-street disabled persons' parking places that resulted in significant responses in evidence and subsequent debate is the requirement for each local authority to conduct a one-off audit of existing disabled parking spaces within 12 months of the act coming into force. There was wide variation in the estimated scale of the task and the possible resources required, perhaps reflecting the diversity of the local authorities that gave responses. While taking into account the difficulties that local authorities have in conducting an audit of their existing advisory disabled persons' parking bays, the committee agrees that a year after the act comes into force would normally be a reasonable length of time in which to have completed that exercise. The committee is also of the view that where exceptional circumstances prevent such an exercise being completed in time, the minister should be able to approve an extension. The bill would require local authorities to seek to negotiate enforceable parking arrangements with owners of private car parks to which the public have access. It is the committee's view that the procedures for such negotiations should not result in an undue burden on those involved. The committee believes that working in partnership could bring benefits to those companies and have a significant effect on reducing the abuse of  disabled parking bays. The evidence that we heard from Asda, mentioned earlier by Jackie Baillie, gave an insight into what can be achieved. It would be fair to say that Asda is leading the way on that front with an enforcement scheme that has increased the availability of disabled parking spaces by 60 per cent. It has achieved that by introducing part-time parking attendants who can ask motorists to move on from disabled bays if they are not eligible to use them.

I am sure that it is a commendable scheme and I have relatives who have benefited from disabled parking there. However, we did not take evidence from Braehead; we took it from Asda. I do not mean to exclude or offend anybody, but I mentioned Asda because it is in our committee report. Although Asda takes a softly-softly approach, if people persist in offending behaviour, the wardens have the ability to issue a £60 penalty to motorists who do not comply. Just like at Braehead, Asda shares the income from penalties with local charities. There are lessons in expense to be learned. Asda claims that the scheme costs £500 per store per year. More important, rather than being viewed by a nuisance by customers, the enforcement schemes have received a 93 per cent customer endorsement rating. I see no reason why other supermarket chains are not following Asda's example. What are they waiting for? The committee accepts the Finance Committee's view that more accurate costs could have been provided for the bill. We also endorse that committee's view that the overall estimate of £1.7 million for promoting and implementing orders throughout Scotland is subject to significant doubt. The committee heard evidence about a wide range of costs associated with the implementation of the bill's provisions. Dundee City Council reported that it could convert 1,000 advisory bays into enforceable ones at a cost of £196,000, while South Lanarkshire, with just 100 more bays than Dundee, believed that conversion would cost £1 million. Glasgow City Council, which has 4,500 advisory bays, thinks that it will cost it £2.1 million. The committee agrees with the member in charge of the bill that some of the higher estimates of the work and associated costs might be avoided by adopting best practice. Only a thorough examination of the probable cost of implementing  the bill across local authorities could give an accurate picture. If the bill is passed, the committee expects that the Scottish Government will, in conjunction with COSLA, negotiate the costs of implementing the bill's provisions in a way that does not place an undue burden on local authorities. On the basis of the report before Parliament, the committee recommends that the general principles of the bill be approved.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it intends to review the 2 per cent efficiency savings target set for local government. (S3O-4895)

During a committee evidence-taking session, the cabinet secretary informed me that he expected the number of people who are employed in the public sector to be reduced over the funding period. At a time of rising unemployment, his Government's stated policy is to do all that it can to maximise jobs in the Scottish economy. What action has he taken to ensure that job losses are prevented in the public sector?

To ask the First Minister what action is being taken to address violent knife culture. (S3F-1214)

I, too, look forward to seeing the medics against violence initiative at work in my constituency. I am confident that sharing real-life experiences from the front line will have a positive effect over time. However, the toll is growing here and now. Every year, around 1,000 patients attend Glasgow dental hospital alone as a result of knife-related facial injuries. The most common way of committing murder in Scotland is with a sharp instrument or knife—indeed, such crimes are up 59 per cent since 2006, and the use of such a method of killing is three times greater than the use of any other method of killing. Therefore, it is clear that measures to tackle knife crime have not had the desired effect. Will the Deputy First Minister assure us that she supports the campaign to ensure that violent criminals who are found in possession of a knife face an automatic jail sentence?

I, too, welcome today's ministerial statement. I was interested to learn of the cabinet secretary's support for universal measures at UK level, despite her introduction of means tests and targeting here in Scotland. Will she confirm what savings will accrue to the Scottish Government as a result of excluding from the free central heating programme those pensioners who are not in receipt of pension credit? Finally, in these difficult times, how does she justify asking pensioners on a fixed income to pay for the investment that she announced today?

Does the member not agree that the cuts being made by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, which amount to £42 million this year and £72 million next year, will have a devastating effect on front-line services? Will he join me in making representations to the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing for a review of the situation?

It can be difficult to say anything that is new—even more so on occasions, such as today, when there is agreement among members on what should be done—but I wanted to take part in the debate. It is appropriate to thank the committee and others for all the work that has been done on behalf of people in my community who will directly benefit from the bill. We again have the opportunity to stand on the side of asbestos victims. The sad fact, which the committee recognised, is that former heavy industrial communities, such as my own in Greenock and Inverclyde, have suffered badly. They are all too familiar with the injustice that victims and their families have had to face in seeking the compensation that they deserve. Members, including Richard Baker, have acknowledged the role and achievements of the Parliament. Since its establishment, we have  challenged the inequities one by one. We have highlighted the insurance industry's delaying tactics and its attempts to spin out cases to avoid or reduce liability, which would happen if the person in question were to die before settlement. We have exposed the use of the blanket denials that, for example, forced victims to prove that the QE2 was built at the John Brown yard at Clydebank. The change in court rules has seen the fast-tracking of cases that are brought by those who are terminally ill. As Bill Butler said, a new act will make it easier for mesolothemia victims and their families to be compensated properly. Another step in that direction will be taken if the general principles of the bill are agreed at decision time. If we go on to pass the bill, we will ensure that pleural plaques sufferers can pursue claims for damages. We need to remember that the chamber can do that only with the support of Clydeside Action on Asbestos and our friends in the trade unions. We also need to remember Frank Maguire—who has not been mentioned in the debate and who will be embarrassed to be mentioned now—for all his work and the support that he has given members across the parties in tackling the issue and making things easier for those involved. I stress the word "easier"; although we have made it less difficult for people to get compensation, we should remember that it is still not easy for them to do that. On Monday, I made a statement—over the telephone, but I will sign it off later—to the legal representatives of a family in my constituency, one of whom is an ex-foreman with whom I worked. The statement established where he worked, for whom and with whom, all of which are requirements if a claim is to be progressed. Last week, I worked on a case with an old friend, Joe McLaughlin; he is now an elderly man, but was formerly a full-time official in my area. A family had contacted me because they had had great difficulty in establishing a family member's work record. As these old pairt people do, Joe had kept records from 50 years ago. A phone call to my friend resulted in the branch contributions from 50 years ago—it was a delightful and satisfying moment. I could not wait to tell the family. As I said, it is difficult to say anything new. I am delighted that we are making progress. We are discussing a measure that is not only historic in nature, as Gil Paterson alluded; people out there today are still being affected. It is worth noting for the record the hidden killer campaign that the Health and Safety Executive has mounted in recent weeks. The HSE is reminding us that asbestos continues to be a major problem—it is a hidden killer that takes the lives of 20 people a  week. More people die of asbestos-related disease in the UK than die in road accidents. The campaign reminds us that, despite the fact that asbestos has been banned for a considerable time, people such as joiners and electricians are still being exposed to it. The HSE reckons that there are still 500,000 non-domestic buildings that contain asbestos. People out there continue to work in difficult circumstances. In addition to working on behalf of the victims of the past, parliamentarians have a role to play—with our friends in the trade unions and campaigners—in highlighting the dangers of the present. People are still in danger of being exposed to asbestos, but if we get things right, we will avoid compensation claims and wrangles over the law. I appreciate being able to speak in the debate. I thank the committee for all its work.

I welcome the report's honesty in confirming the significant waste of talent that occurs and in recognising that teacher unemployment will continue for some considerable time. In my constituency, 120 newly qualified teachers recently applied for just seven jobs—that is the situation in one of the smallest authorities in Scotland. Such shocking figures—

Such shocking figures would dissuade anybody from having an unrealistic expectation of employment, as outlined in recommendation 11. Given that the supply lists, not permanent employment, will be the future for many, will the cabinet secretary go further than the working group's recommendation that newly qualified teachers rather than retired teachers should be used if possible, and issue clear guidance that retired teachers be used only in very exceptional circumstances? Moreover, will she use the opportunity provided by the report to introduce the right of newly qualified teachers on supply lists to gain access to the teacher training that they require to maintain and enhance their skills?

To ask the Scottish Government what efforts are being made to shorten police response times to non-emergency calls. (S3O-4618)

The cabinet secretary knows of the public's lack of confidence in and scepticism about the call management system because of the delays in responses, which can occasionally occur days after a problem was reported. I welcome what he said about information being brought together. Does the cabinet secretary believe that the annual publication of national statistics on the time that the police take to attend all incidents—not just emergencies—would provide clarity and improve performance throughout forces?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to ensure that private housing sector modernisation is delivered effectively. (S3O-4516)

Does the minister acknowledge that, despite the availability of grant support to home owners, an issue remains with regard to people who are unable to take advantage of the grant programme, especially in poorer areas? The issue affects the elderly in particular. Does he have in mind any measures that may address it?

Can the member explain where his speech refers to the Gould report and the committee report that we are considering this morning? When will he get to our report?

Does the member think that it was remiss of the committee—albeit that I suggested it—that we did not seek to broaden the remit of our inquiry to look at Scottish Parliament elections? If we had done that, we could have brought Westminster officials and ministers before the Parliament. Does he agree that we were prevented from doing that because we did not widen our remit?

Let me start by thanking the committee members, the clerks, the officers and the Scottish Parliament information centre for all their hard work and patience in putting together this report, which has allowed us to have this debate today. Although there will be many differing views and personal experiences of the problems that marred the 2007 elections, it is clearly in everyone's interests that we do our best to avoid a repeat of the failures. As members know, local government elections have been held simultaneously with the Scottish Parliament election since 1999. However, at the election last year, there were two significant changes: the single transferable vote system and electronic counting were both used for the first time. Having watched the events from close quarters, members will need no reminding of the problems that occurred that night. At an early stage, it became apparent that there was a high number of spoiled ballots—higher than normal—and that there were problems with the electronic counting machines. In some cases, the problems extended the count into the following day. In the Lothians count, they even led to suspension. In the two previous local government elections that were tied to the Scottish parliamentary elections, the number of rejected ballot papers accounted for 0.77 per cent and 0.59 per cent of the overall votes cast. In 2007, the number was as high as 1.85 per cent. The rate of rejected ballots varied from 1.11 per cent in East Dunbartonshire to 2.77 per cent in West Dunbartonshire. The number of rejected ballot papers in the local government elections was considerably smaller than the numbers involved in the parliamentary election, in which the rate of rejection was as high  as 4.07 per cent, but that should not be allowed to detract from the fact that the level of rejected ballot papers in the council elections was unacceptably high. In light of the controversy that arose from the high level of rejected ballots, the Electoral Commission engaged Ron Gould, an international expert, to conduct an independent review. The resulting report was published in October last year and the Local Government and Communities Committee agreed to study its recommendations. The Scottish Affairs Committee of the House of Commons conducted its own inquiry into the Scottish parliamentary elections, and a report was published in May 2008. Even though the remit of the Local Government and Communities Committee extended only to the local government elections, many of our findings will inevitably be relevant to the Scottish parliamentary election. We took oral evidence from Ron Gould in a videoconference; from the Electoral Commission; and from the Minister for Parliamentary Business, Bruce Crawford, and his officials. DRS Data Services—the company that provided the electronic equipment for counting ballot papers—did not accept an invitation to appear, much to our disappointment. However, the company did supply written information. We published our report in June of this year. In the report, we examined all the areas covered by the Gould report that were relevant to local government, and we made a series of recommendations. The minister responded to our report in August, and I would like to thank him for the positive way in which he received the committee's recommendations. One of the main areas covered in the Gould report was the need for a unified structure for managing elections in Scotland. Gould recommended the establishment of a chief returning officer, and he recommended that the returning officer function at local level should be professionalised. The committee agreed that a chief returning officer post for Scotland should be established to secure a co-ordinated and unified approach to elections held in Scotland. I am pleased that the minister responded positively to that recommendation, and I look forward to seeing the results of the Scottish Government's consultations on how things might be done. A successful model for the approach is already well established in Northern Ireland, where Westminster retains full legislative responsibility. The model enjoys the confidence of the voters and the political parties, and the committee feels that it would be worth further investigation. There appears to be general consensus across the Parliament on the proposal that future local  government elections should be decoupled from the Scottish Parliament election, so that they are not held on the same day. I want to make it clear that that would not guarantee that the problems experienced in May 2007 would not be repeated. However, the committee agreed that there would be organisational and administrative benefits as a consequence of less complex arrangements being required. Furthermore, decoupling the elections would enable attention to be focused more effectively on local issues. However, the committee was conscious that there is concern about the level of turnout if elections are decoupled. There needs to be effective consultation and engagement with the electorate, effective research and more effective public information campaigns if the danger of lower turnout is to be avoided. The training of information officers should be more consistent and rigorous, and should include equalities awareness training. If elections are to be decoupled, the committee recommends that the date of the next local elections should be determined by extending the current local government term, and the next, to five years each. Thereafter, local elections would revert to a four-year cycle. Much has been said about the design of the Scottish Parliament ballot paper and the impact that it may have had on the level of spoiled papers. However, the high level of rejected ballots in the parliamentary election should not eclipse the high level of rejected ballots in the local government elections. The committee noted with concern that approximately 30,000 fewer people voted in the 2007 local government elections than in the Scottish parliamentary election, despite the elections being held simultaneously. The committee had some concern that the lower level of rejected ballots in the local elections, compared with the Scottish Parliament elections, may have been due, in part, to voters believing that they had only one vote and so marking their local election ballot papers with an X or with a 1. Those papers will have been counted as valid, but it may be that some voters did not realise that they were able to vote for more than one candidate. Although it may not be possible to conduct research into whether that in fact happened in 2007, it remains a possibility that the wishes of some voters were not translated into correctly completed ballots. That reinforces the case for effective information campaigns. The committee welcomes the Scottish Government's intention to examine the various options for ballot paper design and to consult on the options. The committee wishes to stress the importance of effective testing of the options for  ballot paper design, and wishes to be kept informed of progress on the research. The committee recommends that those consulted on ballot paper design should include disability rights organisations. It is essential that the ballot paper design leads to a ballot paper that is easy to complete and is a fair reflection of the views of all voters. Voter registration is also an issue. Although it was not covered in evidence to our inquiry, registration is also a reflection of engagement in the political process. There is a need for effective campaigning to increase electoral registration. During the course of its inquiry, the committee welcomed research studies that had been conducted into rejected ballots for the parliamentary election. The studies explored the relationship between the level of rejected ballots and both social disadvantage and ballot paper design. I welcome the commitment given by the Minister for Parliamentary Business that the Scottish Government intends to introduce legislation that will allow post-election data to be released at polling station level for local elections. That will make it easier for variations of turnout by area to be examined more closely for local government elections. Committee members' experience of participating as candidates in the 2007 elections was that the organisation of postal votes was inconsistent, even within constituencies, and that the support provided by information officers was variable. The committee noted in its report that the Joseph Rowntree Foundation has raised concerns in its research that greater use of postal voting may make United Kingdom elections vulnerable to fraud. There is also the risk that systems of electoral administration may have reached breaking point as a result of pressures imposed in recent years. Nevertheless, the committee acknowledged the value of the postal vote in allowing many more people to vote than would otherwise be the case. The committee recommends that the Scottish Government explores the greater use of postal voting as a means of improving voter participation, while bearing in mind the need to protect the integrity of the ballot. I welcome the Scottish Government's circulation of draft secondary legislation, which is intended to give effect to more secure postal ballots by means such as the introduction of personal identifiers. It is important that equalities considerations are taken into account as part of the process. Accurate counting of votes is, of course, of paramount importance. That must be taken into account in any consideration of whether overnight counting should take place. Nevertheless, the  committee's preference was that the overnight count should be retained for local elections, if at all possible. Members may agree that there was variation in the display of spoiled ballot papers on the night of the 2007 elections. If electronic counting is to be used in future local government elections, the committee considered that there should be agreed national standards on the display of spoiled ballot papers on screens at the count. I have referred to equalities issues a number of times during my speech and the matter was a central theme of the committee's inquiry. The committee recommends that the elections steering group includes representation from equalities agencies and organisations in its membership. The committee also recommends that the Scottish Government considers whether further research is needed on promoting equalities within the electoral process. My key message is that the voters themselves should be at the heart of our electoral system. In 2007, we got it wrong because the complex ballots and time-saving counting methods were there to make things easier for those of us involved in the political process, not necessarily for the voters. We must remember that elections are not the plaything of politicians. Ron Gould has said on the record that voters were treated as an afterthought. Let us not make that mistake again. After all, what is the point of an electoral system if not to help as many voters as possible to exercise their democratic right? Everything else is secondary. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Local Government and Communities Committee's 8th Report, 2008 (Session 3): Elections 2007 (SP Paper 120).

Would any guidelines from the sentencing council change the current position regarding a mandatory custodial sentence for carrying a gun?

Does the minister agree with Scottish Water that external flooding, which he will know is flooding in and around the boundary of someone's property, is a major issue? It is a recurring problem in my own constituency; there have been more than 4,000 reports of it occurring since 2003, including the regular flooding of Inverkip Main Street and homes in Branchton and Braeside. Can the minister assure us that he will work with Scottish Water to ensure that investment is in place to deal with the problem, which is causing recurring damage and distress to residents throughout Inverclyde?

Six days before Christmas last year, a tragic loss of life occurred on the Clyde when a tug named the Flying Phantom capsized, resulting in the deaths of two of my constituents, Stephen Humphreys and Eric Blackley, and a third man, Robert Cameron. The First Minister will know that the Marine Accident Investigation Branch listed a catalogue of failures in its report this week and it is clear that  the families of the crewmen who died believe strongly that further matters need to be addressed. The First Minister will appreciate, as I do, that the issues raised are both reserved and devolved. Does he agree that such constitutional matters should not prevent us from getting to the truth of the tragic events of 19 December? Does the First Minister also believe that the joint Stockline inquiry is a good example of both Governments being prepared to work together, with the support and trust of the families, to seek the truth?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate, and I have enjoyed the speeches so far. We owe some gratitude to the Public Petitions Committee for securing the debate. In many ways, the debate is just one strand of a wider debate on the future and evolution of the health service. We would all agree that the principle of free health care for all at the point of need is sound. At times, though, our health service can be bureaucratic to the point of being uncaring, as was highlighted by the circumstances of the Public Petitions Committee report. At the NHS's heart, however, are good people who deliver a good service to those who need it.  That said, we all need to accept that our health system is far from perfect. Our shared ambition of equality is not always delivered: we know that many people are already excluded from receiving appropriate services—the services that we would want them to receive—because of their social circumstances. We know that people who are disadvantaged die younger, and are less likely to go to a GP and will receive less time when they do. They are less likely to be referred to a consultant early and, as a consequence, are more likely to suffer. In my constituency of Greenock and Inverclyde a person can live 11 years longer than someone who lives three miles away. As politicians and Governments, perhaps we should seek in our manifestos to equality-proof our health policies. We should ask whether cuts in health spending make people's situations better or worse and we should ask whether the mechanism for distributing finance to health boards really focuses on need. We should also ask whether a flat rate for efficiency savings hits urban areas disproportionately because such areas already have significant problems. We should ask—I admit to having been guilty of this—whether our focus on bricks and mortar, and on new hospitals and old hospitals, prevents us from shifting investment to areas in which it might help people to live longer and better lives. Does reducing the cost of prescriptions really help the poor? Does greater access to general practitioners in the evenings or at weekends make it more likely or less likely that people with multiple problems or complex problems will get sufficient time with their doctors, or does it simply fuel an unrealistic expectation of the service?

It is a question of priorities. When we are spending money, and when our ambition is to put equality at the heart of service delivery, hard decisions have to be made. I do not believe that we are doing enough to end inequality. I know that Ian McKee has some sympathy with that argument. Inequality exists, and some people are caught in a poverty health trap. However, as we have heard, other people are taking more responsibility for their own health and are taking things into their own hands. They are accessing private health care at home or abroad and are mixing and matching at the dentist. The multimillion pound business of over-the-counter medicines is testament to the culture of self-diagnosis and self- management of our health issues. NHS 24 and community pharmacists are all on hand to offer help and advice with that. In addition, we have the internet and Google. People are empowered by knowledge and by a greater understanding of their health issues. That has fundamentally changed the relationship between doctor and patient and it is changing the health service as we know it. We cannot blame people for taking such opportunities; they are not always a bad thing. However, a consequence is that we are widening the gap between rich and poor. That prompts a question: What are we doing for those who are left behind? Now that we have lifted people's demands and expectations, we cannot suddenly say when things get serious, "Well, that's nothing to do with you. You can only fix your sore throat or your headache." When things get serious, and when family members are rallying round, we cannot suddenly say to people, "We are putting a cap on your expectations, your influence and your involvement." In reading the report of the Public Petitions Committee, I felt that no point was put better than the point that was made by a group of terminally ill women who were consulted by Breast Cancer Care. What they said lies at the heart of the matter: they described top-up treatments as "morally wrong", but confirmed that they would remortgage their homes to buy themselves and their families some extra time. Whatever we do in the light of this debate and the subsequent review, we should consider the wider context. Our aim should be to level people up, not to level people down.

The current reoffending rates are unacceptable to us all. With people simply going into and out of our courts and prisons, wasting time and money and creating new victims time after time, it is in all our interests to put a spanner in that revolving door. However, I have concerns not only about the current plans and the way in which they have been presented but, I have to say, about the cabinet secretary's language, which was completely different from the considered approach that was taken by Nigel Don. Mr Don's initial point that reducing the prison population was a desirable outcome united the whole chamber and stood in contrast to the cabinet secretary's view that these targets should be forced down our throats. The public want criminality to be dealt with effectively and punished. The cabinet secretary needs to work with the Parliament on this issue but, unfortunately, his style and presentation have prevented that. Despite the fact that all parties in the chamber have broadly agreed that we must tackle the alcohol culture in Scotland that fuels much of the violence and disorder, his approach has given rise to confrontation, not co-operation, and certainly not agreement. The result is a missed opportunity. The cabinet secretary's language this afternoon will again fail to assure the public—who, after all, are vital in any attempt to move to a different system—that he cares more about their safety than about saving money. Indeed, if it is not enough of a blow to the confidence of victims to have to live beside someone whom the cabinet secretary has described as the daft laddie—the person who makes people's lives a misery week in, week out; who verbally abuses the man, his wife and his family; who damages his car and the value of his property; and who is certainly not known by those people as a daft laddie—Mr MacAskill thinks that it is a good idea for that person to work alongside them as well. They may be forced to put up with that, but they will not accept a daft laddie running our courts and prisons. The cabinet secretary needs to up his game. If he wants us to take him and the issues that he confronts us with seriously, he needs to work with the Parliament, not against it. He needs to deliver honesty in sentencing and the end of automatic early release. If his attitude to serious crime is to be believed, he needs to be decisive on mandatory custodial sentences. He must not pass  the buck. Let there be no comfort for anyone who supports today's plans in thinking that the elimination of six-month sentences will make it easier to achieve mandatory custodial sentences; rather, the plans make such sentences more difficult to achieve for those who carry knives, including repeat offenders who carry knives and those on bail who carry knives. The cabinet secretary needs to give a voice to victims. He must put people such as Damian Muir's father, John Muir, at the heart of the sentencing council. He needs to give us confidence that when people are given community sentences, they will complete them, and that community sentences are not soft options or even that they are an option at all. He needs to ensure that when the mass prisoner releases that he proposes take place, the police will be properly resourced to deal with the results. Finally, he needs to guarantee that our communities will not bear the brunt of a flawed experiment. If he does so, gains the Parliament's confidence and gives our communities confidence, we can change how we deal with the situation that we face.

In your answer to Nigel Don, you referred—

I apologise, Presiding Officer. The cabinet secretary referred to an announcement that was made by the First Minister about £100 million that was to be allocated to deal with some of the housing problems. Can she confirm that that £100 million will be available this year? Can she also confirm that every local authority in Scotland will benefit from that money?

In the interests of clarity, will the cabinet secretary confirm that all local authorities will receive their fair share of that allocation?

Our joint ambition to deal with what is a massive problem in Scotland is obvious, and many of us have sometimes taken the opportunity provided by debates on this subject to express our frustration at a lack of speed, focus or clarity in dealing with the issues. I did that with my own ministers in the previous Administration and, indeed, I will do it again this morning. I welcome the proposal in the programme for government that was outlined yesterday to review and update the children's hearings system, and I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the 2,800 volunteers who serve on children's panels. The panels' capacity is certainly significant, and those people do what they can to deal with the many, many children who come before them. Indeed, having spoken to the people who serve on the panels in Inverclyde, I am well aware of what they get out of their involvement. I also welcome the minister's support for those volunteers in a press release that was issued some weeks ago on a consultation covering the recruitment of more people for panels. After all, those ordinary people can bring their own experience to bear in helping children who are in real difficulties. According to the same press release, in 2006-07, 56,000 children were referred to the reporter. That figure, of course, has to be seen alongside the 60,000 young people who have to live with drug abuse and the resulting break-up of families. There is no doubt that the problem is massive, and no Government or Administration will be able to deal with it without addressing the thorny issue of providing resources at a local level or recognising the role that foster and kinship carers can play. Without those people, we would be in an even bigger mess.  I do not underestimate the task ahead; in fact, it bears down on resources and the ability to address the problem. Many on the front line are struggling to deal with those who have already presented at the children's panel and are in dire circumstances. Indeed, because resources do not seem to be available, local government, police, the health service and others are being prevented from carrying out their own duties and providing risk assessments of children who have not yet become statistics and are still living with parents who are abusing alcohol and drugs. The needs of those children are not being met and the risks are not being evaluated. All that we can do is wait until they appear before a panel or until they—tragically—become the subject of a fatal accident inquiry.

I agree with the minister that the getting it right for every child programme is a massive job that requires resources at a local level. However, I am not confident that those resources are readily available to allow those who are in the front line to identify the children in question and to deliver the necessary services. Those people are already burdened with the scale of the problem elsewhere. That brings me on to kinship carers who, as Bob Doris has made clear, do a good job. Last December, we welcomed the fostering and kinship care strategy as a worthy ambition, although I remember at the time asking where the funding would come from and who would get it. The fact is that my local council in Inverclyde cannot identify any new moneys in its budget to deal with kinship care. Of course, I will take Mr Doris's tip and speak to the council again on the matter. Grandparents and members of the wider family are doing the job now. In fact, they are trading off their benefits to do so. The benefits stay with the addict and then go to the drug dealer. By intervening at an earlier stage, when social work should be intervening, other family members sacrifice their own benefits and exclude themselves from the support and benefits that we want them to have. Again, the problem is massive, but I understand that some of the issues are being dealt with. In addition, as we made clear in last December's fostering and kinship care debate, the benefits system works against those who are deemed to  be carers. We all recognise the role that is played and the commitment that is shown by kinship carers, and we acknowledge what they do for society by looking after children, but surely we cannot offer them money for providing such care on the one hand if it means that, on the other, we reduce their overall household income. Politicians in local government, in the Scottish Parliament and in the UK Parliament face a massive task in getting it right for children in Scotland. However, those children need the help, focus and support that we owe them.

I ask the minister to remember that he said in the chamber that he would not blame councils for their failure to implement kinship care payments. The minister told us that 2,000 people are in receipt of payment this year. How many people were in receipt of that payment last year?

In his contribution to the debate on fostering and kinship care in December, the minister outlined the key principles that he said were at the heart of the strategy, one of which was "identifying at an early stage those families who need more support. Then, we can mobilise agencies, under the getting it right for every child framework".— [ Official Report , 5 December 2007; c 4086.]  In its publication on kinship care, the Scottish Parliament information centre said that there may be up to 10,000 looked-after children who are not known to local authorities. What action have the minister, his department, the local authorities and other agencies taken since the debate to identify those children and improve their life chances?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As convener of the Local Government and Communities Committee, I make it clear that our inquiry's remit did not cover the ministerial code. The First Minister should not say what is untrue.

Today's debate has been constructive. Who among us would disagree with the scale of the drugs problem in Scotland and the scale of the chaos that it brings to the lives of individual users, their families and people in the community at large? Who would disagree that people who face inequality and exclusion are more likely to abuse alcohol or drugs? Who would disagree with a strategy that has, at its heart, the ambition to move us on from harm reduction and towards recovery? I certainly would not. Who could possibly disagree with the objective of giving young people the knowledge and support that will ensure that they can make better choices, or disagree with acknowledging that parents and the wider family have an important role in the preventive strategy? In the chamber last week, we heard the minister saying that the Government does not condone or promote the use of any illegal drug. However, if the consensus that exists this week and that we had last week is to go beyond the chamber, we would like to hear the minister condemn a little more the drug-abusing lifestyle, which cannot be an excuse or justification for criminality, antisocial behaviour or violence in our communities, which are themselves innocent victims of a drug culture and drug dealing. The strategy looks to recovery. We have high hopes for that, but not much has been said in the debate about the fact that with the strategy comes a recognition that some people choose to take drugs and enjoy them, and that some drug users, perhaps the majority, will remain on methadone for a very long time indeed, if they ever come off it. We need to acknowledge that under this strategy, smoking drugs is moving on from injecting drugs. Residential rehabilitation has poor rates of return at the moment, and those rates must improve if we are to see any significant improvement in the problem. If the significant problem of drug addiction continues to be with us, all the negative impacts on society will also continue. Tom Wood, until  recently chair of the Scottish Association of Alcohol and Drug Action Teams, said in evidence to the Parliament's Health and Sport Committee: "If we are ever to get ahead of the problem ... We need to invest in young people and families. We need to invest in the unborn and young children who are in an environment in which there are alcohol or drug-dependent people, instead of pouring lots of money into lost causes."—[ Official Report , Health and Sport Committee , 14 November 2007; c 162.] I will need to cut my speech because we are pressed for time. On 9 August last year, the Minister for Children and Early Years said in a written answer that the needs of children at risk were being discussed, identified and met. On 6 September 2007, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice advised me that he was discussing children at risk with his Cabinet colleagues. On 27 September, he assured me in the chamber that those discussions had indeed taken place. On 25 November, the Minister for Children and Early Years told me in a letter on behalf of his ministerial colleagues that "ministers are driving progress on this important and complex agenda." That was not evident, I am afraid, in the minister's statement to Parliament last week. If we are driving forward this agenda, we need to get more action and maybe just a little less consensus.

I welcome the minister's statement and his objective of setting in motion a programme of action to improve the identification of children at risk and to build capacity in services. In his meeting later today with COSLA, will he discuss the funding of core children's services—where the gap between the grant-aided expenditure funding allocation and actual local government spending is massive, to the detriment of children? How will the action programme ensure that information will indeed be shared to the benefit of children at risk? That has so far been difficult to achieve. Will the—

Will the action programme include legislation, if necessary, to ensure that information is shared?

To ask the Scottish Executive—

Sorry. I will start again. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to ensure that all schools operate a good neighbourhood policy. (S3O-3452)

As MSPs know, if there is one thing that strains neighbourhood relations around our schools, it is the problem of litter. Recently, I made some representations to a local secondary school, Greenock academy. In its response, it said that it has organised a programme of assemblies in which litter and pupils' wider responsibilities are addressed, and that it has established a good working relationship with community police. It has put in place disciplinary measures, and some pupils have been charged with litter offences, which sends a strong message. Litter patrols have taken place around the school and there is additional supervision at lunchtime—

Yes I do, Presiding Officer. Catering staff have also become involved, and there has been work to make the area more attractive to stay in. Does the minister agree that Greenock academy is a school that takes its neighbourhood responsibilities seriously? Should its action plan be commended as an example of the good practice that should be adopted in schools throughout Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

In the Inverclyde area, we are well served by the ambulance service, and we congratulate it on the job that it does. We currently have an 80 per cent response rate to category A calls. Does the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing recognise that there are real concerns about the target of 75 per cent for those calls for 2009 and does she understand that we cannot allow that to have a detrimental impact? The  ambulance service in my area already does better than the target for 2009 and we want to maintain the high standard in relation to response times. Will she accept that the changes might impact on the good service that we have by stretching it geographically, which would have a detrimental impact in taking us back to a 75 per cent response rate?

rose—

I look forward to receiving the evidence of your scrutiny of your committees. I hope that you do better than your colleagues in the Local Government and Communities Committee did because they failed that test.

It is unsurprising that the debate has focused mainly on the fight over the £30 million of attendance allowance money, which will not in itself make our ambitions for our elderly people sustainable, although there is no doubt that it would plug a gap. However, I am glad that some members have cut through that to discuss our policy, born in the Scottish Parliament, for free personal care for the elderly in Scotland. We knew the consequences of adopting that policy, and we had debates about its sustainability. The Parliament's health committees have been referred to. I was a member of the Health Committee away back in 2006. In that committee's reports, there was some good reading for the then Executive. We were satisfied with policy decisions and with their implementation. We acknowledged that the policy, born of this Parliament, provided greater security and dignity to many elderly people. Not only did it allow people to be looked after in a residential environment, it allowed more people to be looked after in their own homes. The policy gave great support to carers, and it reduced problems of delayed discharge. However, not everything in the Health Committee's reports made for pleasant reading for the Executive. The committee included members of all parties: it was led by Roseanna Cunningham and Shona Robison served her time there, as well. There was also an independent member. However, committee members came to a unanimous view. I do not know whether we will ever achieve that under the present Administration; I do not know whether SNP back benchers will be as questioning of their own Government as the members of that committee were of the then Executive. We raised significant questions in 2006, many of which have been debated in this chamber. They concerned the funding formula, delivery of services, food preparation and feeding, and raising standards of quality. However, I would like to focus on some other areas. Shona Robison expressed real concerns about the funding formula that was put in place by the then Scottish Executive and which is now being used by the Scottish Government. As I do, Shona Robison represents an area that has a declining population. As a consequence of that decline, the number of elderly people left in such communities is disproportionately high. That issue has to be focused on. We do not need to have a fight with London, or to have a big argument to resolve problems. We can decide for ourselves that the funding formula is unfair to areas that have declining populations  and increasing numbers of elderly people who are seeking care. I will use my constituency as an illustration. In Inverclyde, the proportion of people who are older than 65 is increasing. In 2004, it was estimated that nearly 14,000 people were aged 65 or over—17 per cent of the total population. The number of people aged 65 or over is expected to increase by approximately 25 per cent to 17,000. As the proportion of people aged 65 or over increases, the requirement for care home places and care-at-home services will obviously increase, too. Over the next four years, the number of people aged 65 or over is projected to increase by almost a third. That increase in the number of older people is coupled with a decline in the number of younger people. Those changes magnify problems in the size of the local pool of labour that can look after older people, and in the size of the local pool of younger informal carers. In my community, the carers of people who are very elderly—the over 80s—are now reaching ages at which they themselves need to be looked after. We are not talking about a problem that is far away; it is right on our doorstep and it affects several communities. I received a very constructive response from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth earlier today, when he assured me that he would consider all these issues and would ensure that we do not simply provide a blanket solution across Scotland, but take account of the fact that some communities face a disproportionate impact in looking after their elderly people. Those communities suffer from significant underfunding at present. I ask the ministers and cabinet secretary in the health portfolio to give a similar commitment to recognise that certain communities have significant and serious problems and to address those communities' needs as soon as possible.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will review the local government funding arrangements to reflect the needs of local authorities which have ageing and declining populations. (S3O-3348)

In his discussions with local authorities on the funding mechanisms for elderly care, will the cabinet secretary ensure that proper consideration is given to the disproportionate impact of the demand for elderly care services on authorities with declining populations? Currently, 17 per cent of the population of the Inverclyde Council area is 65 and over, but the figure is set to grow to around 25 per cent. As I am sure the cabinet secretary is aware, the problem must not be addressed in a blanket form across Scotland, as there are significant pockets in which it is even greater than it is generally.

For the first time ever, I need a microphone. I will try to make it through. As expected, we have had a political knockabout this morning, in which the minister has described the 30,000 houses that were built and provided as affordable rented housing by the previous Executive as bad news. Only in his world. I will concentrate on the experience in Inverclyde, and the difference between the minister's stated support for housing associations and his actions. The stock transfer had a real mandate in Inverclyde. There was a 65 per cent turnout—the envy of any politician—and a yes vote of 72 per cent. I have heard it said here and elsewhere that the people who took part in that vote were the victims of blackmail and that they were duped and bribed. That view is an insult to,  and a slur on, those who took part and who took their housing needs into their own hands. It was real engagement in and enthusiasm for the transfer.

I am having enough difficulty getting through without interventions. The transfer was power to the people in a real sense. We should be congratulating them on their wise decision because we now know that, if they had not made that choice, their lives would not be changing as they are changing now. The size of the turnout and majority made it impossible for the Government, despite its opposition to housing stock transfer, to do anything other than accept the will of those people. How has the transfer changed people's lives? After five months, delivery is well under way. Community ownership has allowed a real focus on Inverclyde's housing needs. Where rents were among the highest in the country, affordable rents are now being tackled. Rents are capped by the retail prices index for five years, with the aim of holding them to that for 14 years. Improvements to services, tenant support and neighbourhood relationships, measures to tackle antisocial behaviour, welfare rights and a more responsive repair service are all in place and working. Investment of £83 million is in place for internal and external programmes in one of Scotland's smallest local authorities, and 850 new homes will be built by 2015. Importantly, that will link in with the wider regeneration activity and ambition for the area. It will give people homes, houses and—crucially—areas that they want to live in. All that potential is denied to people in the Lothians, the Highlands and Renfrewshire on the basis of a political policy and principle. It is easy for somebody who lives in a nice house to be principled about the matter, but we need to get practical. This is about people's lives, which we can change by the decisions we make here. The policy needs to change and we need to get it right. In Inverclyde, we still have concerns that are not historical. We are concerned about the Government's attitude to housing associations, which might have a direct impact on River Clyde Homes and all that it wants to do. We are concerned about the uncertainty about housing association grant funding that could scupper the policy of affordable rents, force rents up and affect our ambitious development plans. We are concerned about the drive to efficiency, which in everyday language means that cuts hang over our ambitions. I ask the Government to recognise that housing associations that are managed by their tenants are  delivering. The Government should be careful that whatever actions it takes do not harm the progress and delivery that are changing people's lives for the better in my community.

Chasing away business was an issue. Does the member share my disappointment that, despite comments from the sidelines, the Confederation of British Industry, the Institute of Directors and the Scottish Chambers of Commerce gave no response to the committee about failings in the planning system? Does he concede that the Trump Organization had no complaint about or issue with the planning process in Aberdeenshire Council?

Will the member give way?

Name one.

Leave the chamber.

I am glad that you have clarified the situation. The First Minister welcomed the inquiry, as did all the members of the committee. To suggest that ministers and officials appeared before the committee willingly is simply not true, and the evidence bears that out.

I thank the clerks and officials who supported us in our work for their support and patience throughout the process. The uneducated observer might be surprised to learn that much that is contained in the committee's report is uncontroversial and unanimous. The first 138 paragraphs of the report set out uncontested fact. Where the committee disagreed was on how those facts should be interpreted. I will attempt—manfully—to set out the facts and allow the chamber to reach its own conclusions. We are familiar with the circumstances that led to the inquiry. I will set those out as briefly as I can. On Thursday 29 November 2007, Aberdeenshire Council's infrastructure services committee refused consent for the Trump Organization's planned development at Menie estate. On Monday 3 December, the First Minister met representatives of the Trump Organization, at their request. At 2.20 pm on Tuesday 4 December, the chief planner met representatives of the Trump Organization, at their request. At 3.45 on the same day, the chief planner phoned the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth recommending that the application be called in; the cabinet secretary agreed. At 5 pm on the same day, the application was called in. Cynics might say that Trump said, "Jump!" and the First Minister of Scotland said, "How high?" The committee's task was to examine how and why the decisions that I have described were taken. We examined, to quote our inquiry's remit, "the decision-making process of ministers and officials, the legal advice relied upon and the transparency of their actions." As controversial as the application was, the decision to hold the inquiry was not—it was supported by the whole committee, various experts and even the First Minister. Only when scrutiny started to bite and committee members started to ask hard questions did the spin machine launch its campaign to denigrate the committee and its work, in a way that was unprecedented in  the history of the Scottish Parliament. I am confident that we will hear more of that today. We had the First Minister negotiating with the committee about when, how and for how long he would give evidence. He even tried to vet the questions that we would be allowed to ask. We exchanged letters with the Trump Organization's lawyers about whether its representatives would appear to give evidence. Civil servants sent the permanent secretary to try to restrict what we could ask officials and how officials would answer. The Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 even had to be used to compel the release of certain documents. Two hundred and forty pieces of information were provided to the committee only after it had reported. Against that backdrop, the report nonetheless sets out what we managed to discover. What evidence did we finally hear about how the application was called in? We heard that the call-in decision was taken on the back of two short telephone calls between the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, and the chief planner. John Swinney is notable by his absence today.

I wish him every success in his efforts there. I hope that he is serious in his efforts and that he tells the American bosses to get their act together and get the dispute settled. We heard that the cabinet secretary did not obtain legal advice or written official advice before he made his decision. The minute that recommended the call-in was not seen by the cabinet secretary until after his decision had been made. We heard that the cabinet secretary's decision to call in the application before the decision letter was issued might not have been illegal but was unprecedented. We heard that there was disparity between the reasons that were given for calling in the application and the real reasons. For example, there was a claim that the application had to be called in to maintain the integrity of the planning system, but the appeal mechanism, had the Trump Organization decided to use it, provides ample checks and balances. It was also claimed that there was fear over legal costs being awarded against Aberdeenshire Council, but contrary to the smears that were peddled about the council being in a shambles, it was plain that its decisions were fully competent  and that there were substantial planning grounds for refusal. I ask members what conclusions they would draw from those facts. Would they conclude that ministers acted hastily, that their reasons were not as they stated, and that the cabinet secretary's actions were concerning, surprising and out of the ordinary?

Alasdair Allan will have his time. He has had a number of weeks in which to set out his alternative conclusions on the evidence and the facts, but he has failed to do so. I will return to that. When we consider the actions of the First Minister, we find a similar position. He said—this is not in dispute—that he was bound to meet the Trump Organization's representatives as a local MSP, but he was under no obligation to meet them under the code of conduct for MSPs. He told us that he acted within the ministerial code, but we were unable to investigate that as the ministerial code is outwith our remit. The one person to whom he did not speak in that regard was the custodian of the code, who is the permanent secretary. The First Minister claimed that the Trump Organization did not understand the process, but it had the best planning lawyers that money could buy, whereas he had no special expertise in the matter. Indeed, in its evidence, the Trump Organization roundly rebutted the idea that it was in any way confused about the process. Again, what conclusion should we draw from those agreed facts? Should we conclude that they are hardly in line with a "precautionary approach" and that it is not a wise move for a First Minister to leave himself and his Government open to accusations of irregular practice? Should we conclude that he was acting in a First Ministerial capacity and that the ministerial code needs to be revisited? We found that, far from taking a precautionary approach, the First Minister was cavalier in his actions. The committee's report states that he "displayed, at best, exceptionally poor judgement and a worrying lack of awareness about the consequence of his actions." It might be that an alternative conclusion can be drawn, but we are still waiting to hear it. The Scottish National Party minority on the committee rejected everyone else's conclusions but has been unable to come up with any alternative conclusions in a minority report.  In conclusion, the Government's only defence may be that the ends justify the means, but even that is questionable. Yes, it has succeeded in keeping the development alive, but at some cost—the planning process has been compromised, and the Trump development faces further delay and possible court challenge. If the Government had acted within its powers at an early stage, it could undoubtedly have secured the investment for Aberdeenshire and Scotland.

No—you had your chance and you blew it on Grangemouth. If the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth had been here and had not been busy elsewhere, he would have had an opportunity, which the Government's representative, Stewart Stevenson, now has—[ Interruption. ]

Today, the minister has an opportunity to address the committee's concerns and to act on the report's recommendations. What is his response to the call for ministers, particularly when they exercise their planning functions, to take significant decisions only on the basis of proper written advice from officials? Will a full audit trail, including full minutes of meetings, be available for decisions involving planning applications? When ministers intervene in the ministerial decision-making process on planning applications, will they be particularly mindful of the ministerial code? Will they consider how particular actions might affect public perceptions and whether action by ministers or officials has the potential to imperil the decision that is taken? The ministers' attitude to date has been dismissive, at best, and I look forward to receiving serious responses from ministers to the concerns and recommendations of the Local Government and Communities Committee. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Local Government and Communities Committee's 5th Report, 2008 (Session 3): Planning Application Processes (Menie Estate) (SP Paper 73).

To ask the Scottish Executive how the criminal justice system will ensure that children of drug-addicted parents receive the correct support. (S3O-3001)

On 6 September, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, in his closing speech in the debate on drugs misuse, assured me that he would discuss child protection points with other ministers who have responsibility in that area. When on 27 September I asked him how those discussions had gone, he was not able to report any practical progress or action. When do ministers intend to report to Parliament on the actions that they have taken on this matter and to set out their proper co-ordinated response for protecting those children?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. There are clear rules on responsibility and the courtesy that members extend to one another in debates. Will you confirm that it is a discourtesy for the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, who led the debate, to leave the debate and have meetings with her officials at the back of the chamber? Does that not confirm her lack of respect for any view other than her own?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am sure that members are glad that we are dealing with the issue seriously and looking to tackle the problems. My question extends the debate from air-guns. The minister may be aware that Sheriff Swanney raised some concerns about ball-bearing guns in the case of a 16-year-old. Such guns are available for £4 and cause serious damage to victims. Does the minister have existing powers to deal with the sale of those cheap weapons and restrict their availability? They can be used to intimidate innocent people in our communities.

I agree that the tone of the debate has been less adversarial than it was in the immediate aftermath of the Gould report, but some of our discussions put us in danger of excluding voters. We should remind ourselves that the electoral system is not the sole property of members—or, indeed, of members of the Westminster Parliament, or of local government colleagues. At the risk of sounding pious, the electoral system belongs to the electorate. It is the property of those who use it to elect, not of those who are elected. Ron Gould famously said that voters were treated as an afterthought when arrangements for last May's elections were drawn up. He is right, and we are in danger of excluding them again today. As I said when it was first published, the Gould report confirms well-held fears that we have failed the people of Scotland by pursuing a politicians' agenda. Was it the voters who wanted a new voting system for council elections? Did they want council and Scottish Parliament elections on the same day? A single Holyrood ballot paper? Electronic counting? No. Those were all the demands of politicians. We—and by we I mean the entire political class—let our narrow interests take precedence over voters' right to have their voice heard. As Patrick Harvie implied, we are political animals. We are in adversarial politics and we want to win. If we take the politically expedient move of rushing through a quick fix without due consideration of the consequences, we will repeat exactly the same mistakes as before. As has become clear in the debate, aside from political expediency, there is no reason to push through hasty, ill-thought-out changes. We are, after all, three years away from the next scheduled Scottish Parliament and local government elections. At the risk of shocking the chamber, the public outside these walls do not hold us in reverential esteem. They already think that politicians are out of touch and solely motivated by self-interest; let us not prove them right by taking another decision that leaves voters' interests lying ignored in the corner.

That is an important point, but we should not ignore the consequences of decisions that are taken too hurriedly. There is too little knowledge in the chamber for us to ignore the Electoral Commission's reports on the election timetable, the election administration and the design of the ballot paper. We do not have enough  knowledge to say that the Local Government and Communities Committee's report and its testing of the evidence from Gould do not matter. Indeed, the case was made that we need to read the evidence that the Local Government and Communities Committee took from Gould because much—or, at least, some—of what has been said here today has been tested by Gould and stiffer emphasis has been given to certain aspects. I do not believe that we should rush ahead on this matter. We cannot afford to ignore the work that the Scottish Affairs Committee has done or neglect the Government-to-Government work that needs to take place. The commission's work and the Local Government and Transport Committee's work is extremely important in relation to any decision that we make. Apart from anything else, May's fiasco taught us one lesson above all: beware of the law of unintended consequences. That is why I argue that the detailed work that has already begun must be allowed to continue. We must look closely at how any changes will operate in practice and close any loopholes that could be exploited. Whenever a sharp move gains one candidate an extra vote, the legitimate recipient of that vote loses it and, more important, so does the elector. We should not forget that the job of the electoral system is to help as many voters as possible to exercise their democratic right—everything else is secondary. I assure the chamber that if it has anything to do with me, that will be the case in relation to the Local Government and Transport Committee's investigation. I ask the chamber to allow us to continue our work, get on with our job and play a part in helping this Parliament to make considered decisions about the future of our electoral system.

As was pointed out in evidence to the Local Government and Communities Committee, the number of spoiled ballot papers in last year's local authority elections was three times higher than that in the previous local government elections. What would be the reason for that?

There is a lot in the strategy with which it would be difficult to disagree. The disappointment that I express, as someone who has pursued the health inequalities agenda for some time, is that we will have to wait until May 2008 to hear what will be done to reduce the health inequalities gap, which is completely different from tackling health inequalities in general. I hope that, at that stage, we will bear in mind the words of the chief medical officer for Scotland, who said that access to health services can reduce that gap. Does the cabinet secretary have any concerns that, in the absence of clarity about the future of the minor ailments scheme or the extension of GP services, the move to abolish prescription charges may have an undesirable outcome for the poor in our deprived areas, who, it is conceded, already receive less time with their GP, are less likely to be referred to a consultant and are less likely to survive their condition?

Given the impact of drugs on our society—and, indeed, the disproportionate effect that they have had on our children—I welcome the minister's announcement, which recognises that too many children in this small country of ours need to be rescued from the dire circumstances of their parents' drugs misuse. We cannot overestimate the scale of the problem. There is a recognised need to increase the availability of care places through fostering and kinship care. By such means, we can improve these children's life chances. In short, we must be able to meet the increased demand for children's services on all fronts. I share NCH's concern that if adequate resources are not provided we will be unable to tackle this issue effectively. A national fostering and kinship care strategy is long overdue: the carers in question are the least supported, the least well trained, the least well paid, the least inspected and the most isolated of all child care workers. As a result, we need to understand what new money is being made available. How many carers will benefit? What social work assessment will be required? Who will meet the cost of those assessments? Given the current workload of social workers and child services, is the capacity that other members have mentioned available in the system? As Christine Grahame wondered, will the allowance impact on other benefits that carers  receive—particularly as many of them are elderly grandparents who receive, for example, housing benefit? Finally, will the benefit be available in all local authorities? Such questions need to be answered clearly. If the Government—with the cross-party support that it has secured today—announces this initiative and creates the expectation among carers that they will receive this allowance only for them to find out that they cannot access it locally or that there are other barriers to receiving it, it will be a cruel deception indeed. Worse still, what if children's services, which are currently underfunded, come under additional pressure, resulting in many children having to continue to live with parental drug abuse? The minister knows from our regular correspondence that I feel strongly about this matter. At the moment, these children do not have their needs assessed, never mind met. What if this measure overburdens existing services and means that people who are in greater need slip further down the priority list? Is it simply a case of robbing Peter to pay Paul? We cannot criticise the intent behind the strategy, as it aims to help carers and increase opportunities and real alternatives for young children who live in difficult family circumstances, but we cannot and must not introduce unintended consequences. We must not allow it to be detrimental to other children who face similar circumstances. I agree that the scale of the drug problem and its impact on families and children is massive. Indeed, previous Administrations and the Government have described tackling the problem as a priority. Christine Grahame is not here, but the priority that it is given was proved only last week when three cabinet secretaries gave evidence to her committee—the Health and Sport Committee—on the impact of drugs on society. Indeed, four cabinet secretaries and, to my knowledge, three ministers, are involved in the area. As a result, I am concerned that the number of ministers who are involved will be a problem rather than a solution. That said, I am confident that ministers agree with the chair of the Scottish Association of Alcohol and Drug Action Teams, Tom Wood, who said during a Health and Sport Committee evidence session: "We need to invest in young people and families. We need to invest in the unborn and young children who are in an environment in which there are alcohol or drug-dependent people, instead of pouring lots of money into lost causes."—[ Official Report , Health and Sport Committee , 14 November 2007; c 162.] Many of us agree with that statement. A Health and Sport Committee paper stated that the priority should be to give drugs and alcohol budgets to families with children, but figures  relating to children and family social work budgets indicate a significant reduction in that area—

I will cut short my speech by saying that the rhetoric and the reality must meet.

Good job I was here in plenty of time. To ask the Scottish Executive how many patients benefit from the NHS minor ailments scheme. (S3O-1361)

All 541,385—as the minister stated—recipients of free prescriptions currently qualify for the minor ailments scheme, which means that people on low incomes, the elderly and people who are in poor health are not put off seeking the expert advice of community pharmacists by the cost of over-the-counter medicines. Not only that, but it frees up hard-pressed general practitioners to concentrate on more serious cases. Will the minister guarantee that all recipients of free prescriptions will continue to benefit from the minor ailments scheme?

I thank Paul Martin for giving us the opportunity to have this debate this evening. I start with a confession: I was not born at Stobhill, or even in Glasgow. However, I visited Stobhill hospital on many occasions in my role as a trade union official representing people there. I was also a member of the then Health Committee when, under the convenership of Roseanna Cunningham, we examined car parking charges. I am pleased to see the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing at a members' debate. That does not often happen and it is worth noting. The anger that has been generated by this issue at Stobhill, at Inverclyde royal hospital and at other hospitals in the Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board area is as high as we have seen anywhere else. There have been protests, and petitions have attracted massive support. Unfortunately, industrial action is threatened. I have read the cabinet secretary's public statements and I am sure that she is working to prevent the situation going that far. We have had review after review, which just will not do. We have been given guidelines, criteria  and—supposedly—the right to consultation on the impact of car parking charges. Although most people would agree that charges should not be a profit-making exercise, I concede that some hospitals have suffered from abuse of their car parks. Such abuse has to be tackled, but I do not know that charges are the right way to do so. Safety and security issues have to be addressed when they arise. However, for Stobhill, the Inverclyde royal and other hospitals, a case-by-case, hospital-by-hospital consultation before the introduction of car parking charges is essential. Many hospitals in the west of Scotland are in different situations. This is not a dodge—people in Inverclyde are not suggesting that it is okay to introduce charges at the Glasgow royal infirmary or other Glasgow hospitals. People from my part of the world use all those hospitals, and we have the additional burden of the cost of the journey to get to them. However, there is a double whammy in that if we get a friend to take us there, we have to face car parking charges as well. It is a scandal that car parking charges will be rolled out across the health board area—and particularly in the IRH—without consultation. No one has consulted the local community, no one has consulted the local authority, no one has consulted the local users groups and no one has consulted people in the neighbourhood. I ask the cabinet secretary to use her powers and to insist that a full and proper consultation take place, so that issues can at least be aired. In June 2006, the Health Committee raised the issue of access—another issue that angers me. We are pushing ahead with car parking charges in and around our hospitals, but I see no such enthusiasm for dealing with the general issues of travel access to hospitals and health centres throughout the west of Scotland. There is no guidance on how health boards and various other agencies should deal with access. How soon will it be before the health board moves on to consider charging for the use of car parks at health centres as well? I hope that we can stop such a move, and I hope that the cabinet secretary recognises—I am sure she does—the seriousness of the situation. If we can, let us consider car parking charges and other such access issues as part of the broadest consideration of access. We have to think about how the most vulnerable people can access health services at their health centres and hospitals wherever they may be throughout the west of Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what role the  Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture plays in supporting community groups in applying for EU funding. (S3O-1158)

If John Swinney is responsible for European structural funds, Stewart Maxwell is responsible for community organisations and Jim Mather is responsible for something else, I am tempted to ask what the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture is responsible for. Is the minister aware that her Government's refusal to resolve the community regeneration funding crisis is not only forcing vital community projects in my constituency to issue redundancy notices to its dedicated workers but preventing projects from accessing crucial European funds? Can we have an assurance from the minister today that she will do everything in her and her Government's power to ensure that our communities are not deprived of European funds to which they are entitled?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Do you consider it appropriate for a minister to announce during First Minister's question time that the Government is to introduce a car park tax across Scotland? Do you agree that the hard-working families who use out-of-town shopping centres pay enough tax—

Thank you for the opportunity to speak in the debate, Presiding Officer. We have heard many excited words about something that I would have thought was very simple. More debate and more accountability in the chamber is not a bad thing—it is a good thing, and it is what people expect of us. Committee conveners—who have now left the chamber—have expressed what I presume are personal views that Labour's proposals would be detrimental to the work of the  Parliament's committees. My view is that that would not be the case; our proposals would complement committee work. The reaction from the SNP this morning is depressing, but not surprising for a party that, in Government, has studiously avoided parliamentary accountability. SNP members are in denial that they are in Government, and they have tried to avoid that accountability week in, week out. That is understandable—their manifesto was one of promises and bribes that do not bear scrutiny. There have been press briefings outside the Parliament about new policy initiatives, and vanity debates, rather than real ones. The SNP prefers backroom deals with other parties, which exclude members, including members of the party of Government. Are there any SNP back benchers here who can tell me what their ministers and whips have been discussing with the Greens and the Tories? Such discussions exclude not just the Parliament as a whole, but SNP back benchers, who meekly accept a situation that demeans their position as parliamentarians. There are cross-cutting departments. For example, four Cabinet secretaries and three ministers have some responsibility for drugs policy, yet not one of those Cabinet secretaries or ministers is actually accountable for drugs policy. How far we have travelled since the early days of this session, when we heard from the First Minister a recognition that we are all minorities in the Parliament and warm words describing a new politics. That was commendable, but is now forgotten. It was commendable in being consistent with the founding principles of the Parliament: access, participation, accountability and power sharing. The Parliament encourages all members to play a part in applying those principles through the full range of their work. This debate is entirely consistent with those founding principles—with the sharing of power between the people of Scotland, the legislators and the Scottish Government. The Scottish Government should be accountable to the Scottish Parliament; the Scottish Parliament should be accountable, open and responsive. It should develop procedures that make possible a participative approach to the development, consideration and scrutiny of policy and legislation. We are faced, however, with a Government that indulges in so much trickery and sleight of hand that it should be led by Paul Daniels. Against that background, debates such as this, now and in future, are not only permissible and correct but essential.

I thank Stuart McMillan for giving us the opportunity to debate this issue. I was pleased to sign his motion, and the motion that was lodged by my colleague Pauline McNeill. There is no doubt that the law lords' determination, on 17 October, to support asbestos companies and their insurers against their employees is an affront to justice. The legacy that asbestos has left is not a historical one—it is important that we bear in mind that asbestos is responsible for more work-related deaths in this country than any other cause. Mesothelioma, the cancer that is induced by asbestos exposure, is the third fastest-increasing cancer in Britain, and the figure is not expected to peak until between 2010 and 2015. Legal battles to expose the impact of asbestos on its victims and their families, and to ensure that justice is done, have taken place over decades. It seems that they are set to continue, given the determination of the employers and the insurance companies to unpick the rights that asbestos victims and their families currently have. There have been some successes—not least here in the Scottish Parliament—that were mentioned earlier. It is worth saying yet again that excellent cross-party work has been done by members of the Parliament. That includes our late colleague Margaret Ewing—not only in this Parliament, but in the Westminster Parliament; Mary Scanlon, who was here earlier; Stewart Stevenson; Bill Aitken; the members of the previous Justice 1 Committee, who did a sterling job under the convenership of my colleague Pauline McNeill; and Hugh Henry, in his previous role as Deputy Minister for Justice. Last, but not least, I am sure that members will acknowledge the sterling and consistent work that has been done with the unions and the campaigners by Des McNulty. We can be satisfied that the election did not diminish our number—and there are new recruits, as demonstrated by this campaign. I am delighted that the commitment that has been shown by the members of this Parliament has made a real difference to the victims and their families in shipbuilding communities on the Clyde, not least in my constituency of Greenock and Inverclyde. Sadly, it is time yet again for the Scottish Parliament, and ministers, to stand up for victims of asbestos-related disease. Ministers, as  we know—and as we have heard from Hugh Henry—have the power to act. The emergency powers procedure was created for situations such as this, in which a bill must be passed swiftly to close a legal loophole or right a wrong that has been created by a court judgment. That is precisely the set of circumstances that we face. I urge the minister to take the necessary first step, and introduce the ready-made bill that he has in his possession. He has the support of the law, of Parliament, of precedent, and support from all members in the chamber this evening. The interests of justice are in favour of the minister taking firm action, and taking it now.

No compulsory redundancies.

I thank Christine Grahame for giving us the opportunity to discuss this important issue. The scale of the problem is frightening and it is growing due to parental drug misuse. There has been a 13 per cent increase in the number of children on the child protection register, and there has been a worrying rise in the number of unborn children, babies and toddlers whose lives are endangered by parental drug addiction. The biggest rise was among unborn babies—a 72 per cent increase—and the scale of the problem continues to increase. I believe that 80 per cent of children whose parents abuse drugs are no longer living with those parents. In considering capacity to deal with the problem, we have to recognise the roles of foster carers. They play a great role in providing a safe haven and support for parents in crisis. It cannot help that the support that those foster carers get differs from one local authority to the next. How can we build capacity when we send negative messages like that? Foster carers are part of a solution to deal with an ever-growing and serious problem. Foster carers are, however, only part of the solution to the growing problem: members have mentioned today the role of grandparents, the extended family and the adoption services when we need to rescue children from the direst of circumstances and give them a place of safety where they can be nurtured for their future. Like most members, I have a grandparents group in my area—it is right that we mention them in debates such as this. As the minister will know—he has taken an interest in the matter—the  issues that those groups have are not solely about money, although there is a grievance about that: they are at the wrong time of their life and they find difficulty in seeing young children through their education. There is also a difficulty in respect of the relationships with social workers, who sometimes see grandparents as interfering when they try to intervene in the interests of the children. Grandparents are also aggrieved that social workers turn up when the children's parents have been jailed and ask them to take the children. If the grandparents rush in and prevent the situation from worsening, they are left with the children and given only basic support, which is not acceptable. Such stories have been told to me by the women to whom I have spoken. They are not anti-drugs and do not want to victimise drug addicts, but they are living with the reality of having a child who is a drug addict who has children. When the grandparents try to get some certainty into the young person's life—as opposed to the to-ing and fro-ing, the yo-yo system of going back and forth between the parents and the grandparents—and move legally to adopt the child, they receive the final insult. It can cost them, on fixed incomes and with limited means, £2,000 to adopt their grandchild, to take them out of their misery and give some permanence to their life. Also, the addict can then suddenly become interested not in the child, but in the benefits that they recognise will move with the child to the grandparent when their legal status changes. Those issues are important to grandparents and to the fostering service, whom the minister recognises are part of a solution. We must act to identify and protect such children and, when necessary, we must take them out of the homes that are doing them harm. We must have the capacity—through fostering, adoption and kinship care—to give those children the opportunities that we want for them.

While—predictably—we debate today who is to blame and avoid blaming ourselves, as a Parliament we cannot avoid the responsibility for putting things right. I believe that we should proceed on a cross-party basis. In my capacity as convener of the Local Government and Communities Committee, I have written to Ron Gould and the Electoral Commission, inviting them to give evidence on the report. The First Minister will be aware that the remit of the Local Government and Communities Committee is such that it can focus only on local government elections. Would the First Minister support an extension of the committee's remit to allow it take evidence on the Scottish Parliament elections and produce a report that the whole Parliament could debate? Our Parliament needs to face up to its responsibility and to put things right. I seek the First Minister's support for widening the committee's remit.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made towards working with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland to take forward a model of integrated assessment to ensure that the needs of children of substance-misusing parents are identified at the earliest opportunity, as stipulated in "Hidden Harm—Next Steps". (S3O-787)

I am pleased to hear that the minister recognises the need for an integrated agency approach. The minister will be aware of yesterday's damning report by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education into Edinburgh's failing child protection services, of the latest increases in the number of children on the child protection register and of the letters of assurance scandal. In his closing speech in the drugs misuse debate on 6 September, the minister assured me that the points that I raised about child protection would be discussed with his colleague, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, adding: "we have to ensure a holistic and joined-up approach."— [ Official Report , 6 September 2007; c 1483.]  What has been discussed to date and what action has been agreed?

I appreciate the opportunity to say a few brief words on the motion. It is said that almost all political careers end in disappointment because no matter what politicians want to change when they set out, they inevitably become disheartened by how long things can take and how tortuous the system can be. However, perseverance sometimes pays off, as the draft order proves. Back in 2005, when we amended the Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Bill to give ministers the power to raise the age limit, I did not think that we would need to wait more than two years before the order would be introduced. Nor did I think that it would take this long when the expert group, which was led by Dr Laurence Gruer of NHS Health Scotland, recommended that the age limit should be increased. The hold-up was largely down to the delaying tactics of the Liberal Democrats, who have demonstrated over the period some confused thinking and policy on the rights of our 16-year-olds to drink and smoke. Nevertheless, I will not allow that frustration to detract from my delight that we now, at long last, have the chance to vote for a change that the evidence shows will stop young people taking up the lethal habit. I support the motion and urge members to vote to make it harder for young people to buy  cigarettes so that it is harder for them to make the worst mistake of their lives.

I welcome the opportunity to discuss this issue. Because of its impact on communities and families right across Scotland, no issue is more important for us to discuss. Who could argue with the view that we should reach a political consensus on how to deal with the issue? However, our views on how to deal with it sometimes differ. The current methadone programme is a key part of the harm-reduction approach to drug abuse. It was supposed to stop addicts dying, but drug-related deaths have continued to rise—up by 25 per cent last year. It was supposed to get addicts off drugs by providing a legal substitute, but 70 per cent of those on methadone are still getting their illegal hits anyway. It was supposed to cut drug-related crime, but 80 per cent of addicts on methadone are still committing crimes, and our prisons are full of inmates with drug addictions. We have to grasp this issue. Members may not all agree, but I feel that by making drug use affordable and acceptable, current policies are conspiring to keep addicts in what—over generations in some cases—has become a way of life. The sad fact behind recent reported deaths is that some of those people were not our children but our grandparents. The harm-reduction approach has increased the risk for our children and our communities. Therefore, calls for "more support" or "more of the same" will not help. We have heard such calls from members this morning. Is the answer not to challenge the lack of ambition that saw stabilisation as the only realistic policy goal? We have to move towards cessation schemes. We have to challenge drug-taking behaviour and have a clear ambition—as Stuart McMillan said earlier—to get as many people as we can back to their families, back to work and back into the community. We have to acknowledge that some people who take drugs have multiple problems. However, whether we accept it or not, there are also people who like drugs and choose to take them. That behaviour has to be challenged. Those people are not the only innocent victims; the child, the neighbour and the parent of the addict are the victims as well. If the Executive is intent on setting up another consultation, that is a worthy intention. If we can reach a consensus on how to challenge the present situation, that will be great. However, I give members a reminder—as if it were needed— about how the children of drug-abusing parents find their way on to the priority lists. The reminder is from the recently published letters of assurance that the Executive sought from local authorities. Those letters reveal that any number of children in Scotland may be living—unidentified and unprotected—in the squalor of parental drug addiction. Among the correspondence is a submission in which Strathclyde Police chief constable Sir Willie Rae and NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde chief executive Tom Divers concede that "At this present time, we could not provide general assurance that all children affected by substance misuse have been identified." Those men are very senior figures delivering services in our communities. However, that is just the tip of the iceberg. The Executive's own summary acknowledges that "the vast majority of ... areas experience difficulty in consistently identifying those children affected by drug misuse." That was reported by child protection committees. In Inverclyde, the past council leader Alan Blair acknowledged that children were living in such circumstances. He admitted that their safety could not be guaranteed. In North Lanarkshire, a report signed off by council, health and police chiefs states: "We cannot provide a definitive guarantee that all children who ... have parents who are misusing substances have been identified." Senior figures in South Lanarkshire assert that the reason why "it is never possible to be entirely confident in relation to the identification of all children ... affected by parental drug use" is that drug users are hidden from services. However, precisely where those self-sufficient drug addicts—who have never accessed housing benefit, child benefit, council tax benefit, a general practitioner, a social worker, the housing department or any other public service—are to be found is, alas, not divulged. I could go on, but time is limited and I am sure that members get the picture. Children are being failed by a system that does not even see them as a statistic. Local authorities have been given a clear duty by the Executive to ensure that addicts' children get the services they need before they are at risk of harm. However, as has now been revealed by the letters of assurance, local authorities are nothing like able to meet that obligation. The inability to identify, far less protect, a significant number of children and young people is  not only creating much needless suffering but risking another child's preventable death. I therefore renew my call to the minister—whether it be Shona Robison, Fergus Ewing, Kenny MacAskill, Adam Ingram, or whoever can be put in post specifically to deal with this issue—to act now. There are no excuses and there can be no delay. Those children need our help now.

The First Minister and the SNP promised that a grant of £2,000 would be made to first-time buyers. Today that commitment has been replaced by a housing consultation paper. Will the First Minister take the opportunity today to confirm what his back benchers freely admit—that the SNP's manifesto promise will be ditched?

Does the minister acknowledge the issues to the extent that the Administration will move quickly to achieve not just equality of access, but equality of outcome for deprived people?

I will try to stick to time. This morning's debate reflects how difficult it is to focus on the issues faced by the health service and on the health of the people of Scotland. The debate—and the election—has been dominated by public-private finance versus trusts; local access; A and E; and so on. This week's news on the closure of midwife-led maternity units in Inverclyde and the Vale of Leven tempted me to go into that issue this morning.

I am sorry, but my time is limited. Suffice to say, the Inverclyde community and I will hold the cabinet secretary to her word, and to her presumption that there will be no centralisation of services and that an appropriate weight will be given to patient and public opinion. I am sure that she and her colleagues will take into account the impact of the closure of the midwife-led unit on the maternity strategy, not just in Inverclyde but in Scotland. However, I want to return to deprivation—and it is worth considering why it is that in communities where there is high deprivation, there is lower use of midwife-led maternity units. All the issues that I mentioned conspire against us and divert us from the focus that I believe the Parliament and the new Government should have on health inequalities. The big issue explored by Professor David Kerr was poor life expectancy and the long-standing illness that affects Scotland's most disadvantaged people. That has been described this morning as Scotland's shame. Hand wringing goes on about the reports that are regularly published, but it is difficult to act.  As the cabinet secretary and others mentioned, there have been some improvements in life expectancy—good news, we might think—but yet again those figures show that the more affluent have benefited. The gap is widening, not narrowing. I am sure that there is broad agreement on the reasons for that—members have touched on how life circumstances relate to health, unemployment, poor housing and poor education. We have also spoken about bad lifestyle choices, such as alcohol, drugs, poor exercise and diet, but I will focus on access to primary health care services and the difference that such services can make. It used to be considered that health care services did not have a significant impact on people's health. With medical advances, it is recognised that access to effective health care can have a significant impact. Evidence to the Health Committee in April 2006 recognised that 30 to 50 per cent of the gap in life expectancy results from reduced access to health care. If we improve access, we can improve people's life chances. There is a high uptake of health services by people living in deprived areas. The question, however, is whether it is high enough to meet the needs of those communities. Indeed, is the care that is being made available to them appropriate to their needs? The same number of GPs serve the poorest 20 per cent as serve the top 20 per cent. GPs in deprived areas are running to stand still. They deal with more people with more problems. As a consequence, poor people spend less time with their GP, are less likely to be referred to a consultant or to receive in-patient care, are more likely to receive emergency care, are less likely to get appropriate medicine and manage their health properly and are less likely to have their children immunised. The question is how we respond to that challenge. Behavioural change campaigns can actually widen health inequalities, because more affluent people are more likely to take up the advice. The gap is not narrowing and the situation will get worse unless we do something about it. Improving individual circumstances and providing better education, jobs and housing can make a change, but that takes time. We must surely recognise that the quickest way to make an impact on health inequalities is to target services in the most disadvantaged areas. We should be prepared to take a radical step to enhance access to health services for the disadvantaged. I do not think that that is an easy ask for the Parliament. Rather than forming another task force or group, I recommend the report of the Kerr sub-group on health inequalities as essential reading. The case for change is there. The case is outlined for moving resources to meet the need that is there, concentrated not just in the west of Scotland  but on some streets and in some neighbourhoods in all our communities. The test for the new Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and the new Government is whether they have the political will and the courage to do that. Indeed, the Parliament, not just the cabinet secretary, needs to meet that test.

The First Minister will be aware of the announcement today by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde that, following concerns over the assessment and diagnosis of possible breast cancer symptoms at Inverclyde royal hospital, the cases of 1,600 women have had to be reviewed and that, of those, nearly 200 patients must now be re-examined. Although, of course, the first priority will be to reassure every woman involved as quickly as possible—I am assured that every ounce of capacity in the entire NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area is being focused on that—will the First Minister instruct the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, as a matter of urgency, to initiate a full inquiry into what has gone wrong and how a reoccurrence will be prevented? Will he assure me and my constituents that any solution will be based on improving the quality of the services at Inverclyde royal hospital and not on removing them?

As a reasonable person and in the new spirit of consensus, I congratulate the First Minister, at least on that part of his statement in which he recognised the need for new laws to prevent our children from buying tobacco products, building on the Labour Party's successful ban on smoking in public places. However, I am disappointed that there was little mention in the statement of the things that matter to poor people. I speak specifically about the importance of social housing. Will he assure council tenants in my constituency that the stock transfer and record investment for which they voted overwhelmingly in November will not be delayed or cancelled?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure that the provisions of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 are used effectively. (S2O-12460)

The minister will be aware that, although we have given local authorities the tools to do the job, some local authorities are less than enthusiastic about using those tools on behalf of their residents. Will she assure me that councils will not be rewarded for such an indifferent, half-hearted attitude? Will she make it clear that, in respect of the powers and money that local authorities have been given, they must use them or lose them?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to ensure that children across Scotland are not being put at risk by the approach of local authority child protection services to the rights of drug-addicted parents, following the publication of "Joint inspection of services to protect children and young people in the Midlothian Council area". (S2O-12378)

The minister will be aware of the finding on page 5 of the Midlothian report that "Some staff tended to focus more on the needs of parents with substance misuse problems ... without sufficient consideration being given to the impact on the child." Manifestations of that attitude that are outlined in the report include, on page 8, some staff still being reluctant to share information when there were concerns about parental drug misuse, "despite the recent introduction of new guidelines for protecting children living in families with problem substance misuse." As my local authority, Inverclyde Council, is similar in size to Midlothian and has similar problems with drug abuse, I am particularly concerned that problems identified in Midlothian could be lying undetected in my local authority and in local authorities throughout Scotland, leaving children unprotected. Will the minister agree to take urgent action to ensure that all local authorities are perfectly clear about their duties to prioritise the rights of vulnerable children and to act in their interests?

I am sure that we all acknowledge that the future of the health service is about moving from simply treating illness towards giving people in the most deprived areas of Scotland healthier, longer and better lives. We welcome the extension of the preventive care programme that was announced today, particularly in my community of Inverclyde. Can the minister assure me that that much-needed money is earmarked for my community and that it will be delivered in my community as opposed to being lost in the greater Glasgow area?

rose—

As Shona Robison said, and as the member has pointed out, the SNP recognises the benefit of community casualty units. What communities would have a community casualty unit and what communities would have consultant-led accident and emergency units?

Will the minister take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will work with business to reduce the number of unskilled workers in the workforce. (S2O-11955)

The programmes that the minister mentioned in his comprehensive answer are bringing about a continuing fall in the number of unskilled jobs in the economy. Although there are examples of good practice in the public and private sectors, I hope that the minister acknowledges that there are some dark areas that need to be tackled. How can we create a culture in which both sides in industry see the value and good sense in training and upskilling? How do we ensure that private sector workers who are not getting or are not being encouraged to take the opportunities receive the same advantages and  access as those who work for the best employers in the public and private sectors?

The minister will be aware that Greenock and Inverclyde, like other areas in Scotland, has a large number of sufferers of asbestos-related disease and that, despite their illnesses, they have fought for justice. I bring a message from those victims—some of whom are here today from Clydebank—that they very much appreciate the gains that they have made and the support that they have received from ministers and all parties in the Parliament. The progress that the Scottish Parliament has made on this issue has made big changes to their lives. While there are colleagues from Clydebank here today, many victims cannot travel. Will the minister assure me that when she or another minister next visits my constituency, they will take time out to meet the victims who cannot be here today but appreciate the work that the Scottish Parliament has done, listening to their experiences and hopes for the future?

Does the minister agree that, notwithstanding the long-standing problems with getting the best value out of the contract, it would be unacceptable to pay our consultants less than they would be paid down south, as the consequence of that would be that we would lose further precious clinical staff?

Sorry, you caught me sleeping there—not for the first time. I blame Frank McAveety. My apologies, Presiding Officer. To ask the Scottish Executive what role it considers that midwife-led units will play in maternity services in the future. (S2O-11877)

If midwife-led units have a role to play, is it not essential that work is done to reassure sceptical expectant mothers that such units are perfectly safe and, where appropriate, offer the best care? How will the Executive work to boost public confidence in the units, which is essential to their long-term viability?

As Roseanna Cunningham—who has left the chamber—said earlier, lots has been said and it is difficult to say any more. I apologise before I start for the fact that I will repeat some of the points that have been made today. We all agree why we are here. Susan Deacon alluded to that earlier in her point about leadership, how it is used and whether it is used effectively. Such issues have brought us to this point and brought about Bill Butler's bill, which I supported initially because I felt, and still feel, that the imbalance between the medical profession and everyone else in our health boards is not only perceived but definite. However, I do not believe that it is right to go from that point to a point at which we treat the subject as if it were a numbers game and say that the more people there are in the room, the stronger their argument is. This is not a numbers game. We speak of trust, and we need there to be trust between those who provide the services and the communities that they serve, and the community needs to be able to trust the professionals who deliver those services. We will not reach a position of trust if we start out by saying, "We have a majority, irrespective of what anyone else says." We have to congratulate Bill Butler and those who have supported his bill on the work that has been done. At this time, we all agree that the status quo is not an option. The committee heard in evidence that moves have been made because the Parliament is not completely unheard in the right circles. Moves have been made over the piece by councillors who have used more modern and serious ways of consulting their communities both at the point of crisis and to keep people up to date on an on-going basis. That is as important as anything. We have moved on, but we now need to evaluate the risks and the benefits that the bill would bring.

It would be a more sensible way of proceeding. We have been asked to put the risks in the bill to one side and trust in the stage 2 process. If that does not work, we have been told that we can come back and see whether post-legislative scrutiny works. Hard questions have to be asked about the number of boards, who would be on them and whether we would be able to take people off them. Nanette Milne suggested that we should take the vote away from some people who are already on the boards. When we ask such questions, we are told to leave things up to the stage 2 process, to post-legislative scrutiny or to the minister, but we have a decision to make today about whether, with all the risks still in place, we should proceed. Of course, the committee recognised that. Its report said that it is unlikely that direct elections to health boards would change the political nature of health issues.

I am sorry, but I cannot. I have limited time; I did not get the time that others got. The report also said: "The Committee recognises concerns that the addition of directly elected members on NHS boards may undermine the national element of the NHS ... The Committee has concerns that the electoral system, and in particular the size of the electoral ward may result in undemocratic geographical representation ... Where this is the case the interests and needs of those living in different parts of the board area can be quite distinct." The committee recognises that it is very difficult to balance the needs of the majority of people who live in the cities with those of people who live in outlying and rural areas. Many problems and antagonisms came about with the process of centralisation. The bill does not answer many of those questions. I believe that, as suggested by the minister, it is better to address the issues by testing the proposals in the bill rather than subjecting the health service to additional upheaval. I believe that the issue is important, that trust is important and that we need to create a system that gives the public—not just two or three people—a greater say in the running of health services. I believe that what is important to the public whom we serve is the quality of the health service. Whatever decision we take as a result of the pilots, our focus must be on the objective of improving the quality and delivery of the health service. I believe that what people really want is  those improvements rather than elections with dubious outcomes.

Will the member give way on that point?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it believes that working families contribute  proportionately to the funding of local public services in Inverclyde. (S2O-11779)

I express some surprise that the minister does not acknowledge the fact that hard-working families already pay their fair share for the services that we all enjoy. Such families are the backbone of our national and local economy and as such should be valued, not targeted. Would it not therefore be utterly unfair and counterproductive to hit those hard-working families with an extra local income tax bill, as the minister's party and the nationalists propose to do?

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment has been made of the operation of anticipatory health care pilot schemes. (S2O-11703)

The minister will be aware of my disappointment that my constituency, with its particular public health challenges, was not selected to pilot this valuable initiative. However, now that the programme is deemed to be successful, will the minister assure me that anticipatory health care will be extended to Greenock and Inverclyde, where I am confident it will make real improvements to my constituents' health and quality of life?

To ask the First Minister what progress is being made towards setting a date for raising the age limit for buying tobacco to 18. (S2F-2647)

I am delighted that the Executive is taking decisive action to stop our children making the worst mistake of their lives. Following the smooth introduction of the smoking ban, thanks largely to joint working with publicans and hoteliers, will he assure me that we will co-operate fully with retailers, especially those with smaller shops, when implementing the change? Will the Executive examine whether provision of a proper national proof-of-age card, free of charge to those on low incomes, could be helpful in that process?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Presiding Officer, if you will indulge me, I will welcome to the Parliament the pupils from Earnhill primary school in my constituency. I am sure that everyone wishes them a merry Christmas. We all understand that many members have genuine concerns about post offices in their constituencies. I therefore take comfort from the Labour Government's commitment to maintaining a network of post offices throughout the UK. I welcome the fact that the Government will lay down rules to govern the location of post offices in the network and the fact that those network access rules will take care to ensure that remote and rural areas and deprived urban areas are served properly. Apart from anything else, the Government proposals will allow Post Office Ltd to manage the network actively. Contrary to what John Swinney says, that will put the right people in the right locations rather than being a case-by-case response to choices that individual sub-postmasters make. However, those are just boring facts that the SNP chooses to ignore because they do not fit its pantomime view of the world—told to us yet again by Buttons, played by John Swinney—in which the wicked stepmother Westminster beats and deprives poor wee Cinderella Scotland. Like the younger audience members at the Pavilion and the King's this month, SNP members do not care if the story is a bit far-fetched. As long as the songs are easy, there is lots of shouting and they get an ice cream at half-time, they go home happy.

How would the story go if the fairy godmother across the Thames—possibly played by Ian Krankie, with Jimmy Krankie as Nicola—waved her magic wand and made Scotland independent? For a start, as has been said,  Scotland has a disproportionately high share of the UK's post offices. Scotland has 11.7 per cent of the UK network, but 8.6 per cent of the population. We have 14 per cent of the rural network and 9 per cent of urban post offices, but because we are part of a UK-wide system, the cost of funding those post offices is spread throughout the UK. That would not be the case under independence. The SNP needs to tell us by how much the cost of a stamp would rise to pay for Scottish post offices that the union currently subsidises. How many postal workers would the SNP need to sack? Which post offices would it end up closing anyway? Why should we pay international postage rates to send, say, Christmas cards to friends and family abroad in England? What about the cost to business? Sending post from Northern Ireland to the Republic of Ireland costs 20 per cent more. Such a price hike would be passed on to Scottish businesses, and if those companies' main consumer bases were in England, Wales or Northern Ireland, why would they simply not relocate? How long would it take this pony express to deliver a letter from Stornoway to Sussex? How would the economies of scale that we would lose be paid for us? I could go on, but I am used to the wheels falling off SNP bandwagons. This one has turned back into a pumpkin, and it is not even midnight.

Will the member take an intervention?

What is the point of order?

Where is the point of order?

The minister mentioned welcome incentives for businesses in Scotland, especially small businesses. However, if businesses were burdened with administering the local income tax proposals, what impact would that tax have on them and the Scottish economy?

Will the member take an intervention?

Try and take her seriously.

We do not collect details of the requests that are received for outreach events. Our aim is to achieve a broad spread of engagement throughout Scotland.

We should remember that a number of events can take place. They include community outreach, which involves members and parliamentary staff, parliamentary officials engaging with community groups, and MSPs in schools. The breakdown by parliamentary region of all outreach activity—including MSPs in schools—from September 2004, when the outreach team was set up, to November 2006 is: Highlands and Islands, 18 per cent of the total activity; Mid Scotland and Fife, 16 per cent; West of Scotland, 12 per cent; North East Scotland, 12 per cent; South of Scotland, 11 per cent; Glasgow, 11 per cent; and Central Scotland, 7 per cent. The variance between the highest and lowest figures naturally reflects the fact that it can be easier for people in the central belt to visit Holyrood than it is for those who live in a more distant geographical area. Indeed, we prioritise communities that are further away from the Parliament.

Go and ask the tenants in Glasgow.

I am sure that my experience is similar to that of other MSPs. We have lost count of the number of constituents who come to see us because they cannot get the right type of house. Often, they cannot get a family home or there are problems with the quality or cost of homes. We meet elderly people who cannot get the modifications done that would allow them to stay in homes that they want to stay in long into their retirement. In those circumstances, it is surprising that there is still confusion when ballots come around, but I suppose that that is understandable given the rhetoric that we heard this morning and the scaremongering and propaganda about what is going on. Earlier speakers said that stock transfer is privatisation, but housing associations are not private companies; they are non-profit-making organisations and every penny that they make is ploughed back into serving tenants. Most housing associations are managed by tenants. I hope that the tenants who are receiving their ballot papers in Inverclyde today will join the 50,000 tenants in Scotland who have voted for housing stock transfer. If so, they will join tenants in the majority of council areas in which there have been votes on housing stock transfer—transfer  has been supported by a majority of eight council areas to five, and one of those five was Renfrewshire, where transfer was rejected by 36 votes.

No, thank you. When the tenants in Inverclyde vote to join those 50,000 tenants, they will be voting to clear away unpopular, run-down houses and build 1,000 much-needed new homes in the area. They will be saying yes to home improvements, modernisation and upgrades. However, if they vote against the great deal that is on offer in Inverclyde, they will lose out on that investment and rents will double in the next eight years. More pensioners will be forced into residential care unnecessarily because the council will not be able to afford to make the adaptations that would allow them to remain in their homes. We cannot ignore that fact. We want action now, not jam tomorrow. If tenants in Inverclyde want a stark illustration of what would happen without stock transfer, they should consider their neighbours in Renfrewshire, who voted against it. Their rents will need to increase by 275 per cent just to get their homes up to scratch. I ask the SSP, the SNP and other opponents of stock transfer where the downside is. Where is the catch? As they know perfectly well, the answer is that there is not one.

No. Mr Fox limited the time this morning, not me. The only reason why those parties are against stock transfer is pure, naked, cynical political opportunism. What sort of political party runs a campaign to condemn the least well-off tenants to damp, expensive, unfit housing for the rest of their lives? Who would campaign to ensure that rents go up next year just so that they can get a couple of good press releases out of the resulting misery? They can try to deny it, but the proof comes out of their own mouths. The Paisley Daily Express on 7 November reports a Renfrewshire SNP councillor having the cheek to say: "One in five families are living with damp in their home and 50 per cent of the housing stock needs repairs right now". He is one of the people who campaigned only last week for a no vote, which will ensure that tenants stay in those damp, unfit homes for ever and a day. Now they cannot wait to use that misery for political ends.  I urge tenants in Inverclyde not to give in to the scaremongers but to tell the SNP and the SSP that their lives and homes are not something for them to play politics with. I tell them in no uncertain terms: Inverclyde Council knows that it cannot match the good deal from River Clyde Homes, which is why the council has unanimously backed transfer. Trish Godman MSP, David Cairns MP and I would not be recommending the package if we did not believe that it was in the best interests of our constituents. If the residents think that they deserve the same housing investment as Glasgow and elsewhere and if they want new homes, they must vote for it—vote for the guarantee of improvement in their homes, not jam tomorrow.

Hear, hear. Good stuff.

I take it that the member has invited me to intervene. The answer is no, but I want the very best for people who live in council houses. I want their houses to be improved and I want the money that will improve the lives of my constituents to be obtained.

Many numbers have been bandied about this afternoon, but no one could disagree with the Deputy First Minister when he said that there is a huge waste of potential and talent. As convener of the newly established cross-party group on young people in Scotland not in education, employment or training, which was mentioned earlier, I welcome the Executive's commitment to tackling  the problem. Not only has the Executive chosen to hold this debate but, as has been noted, it has published the first ever action plan to reduce the proportion of young people who are identified as NEET. It is also seeking to identify the complex problems that many of our young people face. The transition from manufacturing to service industries has left whole communities behind. The break with work that working-class people have experienced and which has denied them the right to work has had an impact on our communities and on many families; that is not to mention the impact of drug addiction. In this debate we seem to have forgotten that there are very young children who do not go to school, because their parents are unable to support them in education. Some parents are not even able to support their children to get to school in the morning. Instead, taxis arrive at homes to take the children to school. There are deep-seated and complex problems. In all that is going on—the cross-party group, the Executive's action, the cross-party consensus that Alex Neil hopes for and the Enterprise and Culture Committee's forthcoming round-table event—I accept that there will be differences in how we tackle the problem. As has been mentioned, children come in all shapes and sizes; they have different backgrounds, and some are fast learners while some are slow. We must remember that, instead of believing that the whole group has the same needs. I support whole-heartedly the idea that young people should be given more choices in their education. We need to give them the chance to study topics and learn skills in which they are interested and have particular aptitude. Who would disagree that young people should be given the skills that they need in today's job market? Dennis Canavan has left the chamber, but he said that we must be careful not to slip into a brave new world scenario in which everyone is conditioned to slot into their place in society and in which the level of education that they will receive and the type of job that they will do is fixed even before they are born. That should not be on the agenda and it is not part of our policy.

It should not be at the heart of our policy, which should be about raising aspirations and promoting social mobility, not dividing children into roles for life when they reach secondary school, as some people have suggested. We hear much from the business community of which Jim Mather is an advocate that we need  more plumbers and joiners. When business people start advising their children to become joiners and labourers, I will believe that we have achieved some parity of esteem. In the past, apprenticeships were not the end of the road; they were a clear route to further education and into management to build a career. The suggestion that today's Executive is talking about turning back the clock to the days when leaving school at 14 and 15 was the norm, a supposedly secure job ceased to exist and the lack of broader and more formal education made it much more difficult to find work or retrain is simply not true. Any fair assessment of the Executive's policies would demonstrate that. If proper education teaches us anything, it teaches us how to learn. We cannot deny that most fundamental skill to a swathe of young people just because they have not set the academic world alight by the time that they leave primary school. Education is about raising our young people's expectations, not confirming them. When discussing that point at the cross-party group earlier this week, I spoke to Tom Kelly, the chief executive of the Association of Scotland's Colleges. He argued strongly that there can be no more revolving doors in education and training that spin young people round in a carousel of bottom-end, useless courses. Instead, we need escalators that will take young people on and up to better prospects and better careers. We need to learn from initiatives such as the one in my constituency. Despite our problems and the loss of the manufacturing and electronics industries, we have some of the highest attainers in Scottish schools, who come from all areas in that community. The suggestion that poor people cannot succeed is not true. We also have larger numbers of people going into further and higher education.

No, I am in my last minute. As I said, we need to learn from initiatives such as James Watt College's routes to work programme. Finally, we must make it clear that learning pays and that skills pay the bills. We should applaud not just the Executive but the Hunter Foundation, the Smith group, Barnardo's, the Association of Scotland's Colleges and the back benchers who formed the cross-party group on young people in Scotland not in education, employment or training for investing so much time and so many resources in solving this problem. I hope that the cross-party consensus will work; that today's good will and warm words will be turned into action; and that money will be given to  the have-nots rather than the haves.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in freezing and seizing the assets of those arrested during the recent operation triplicate police raids. (S2O-10917)

I thank the Solicitor General for Scotland for that answer, and on behalf of the chamber I welcome him here today. [ Applause. ] I want to put on record the sense of satisfaction that my community felt on hearing that tens of thousands of pounds-worth of money and drugs were seized during the recent operation triplicate raids. Will the Solicitor General assure me that the new powers that allow the courts to seize suspects' assets at the start of criminal investigations are being used to their full extent? When will he be able to outline how many houses, bank accounts or other assets have been either seized or frozen in my constituency?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive will review the  operation of the methadone programme. (S2F-2519)

It is certainly time for a review. Given the latest research by Professor Neil McKeganey, which finds that the methadone programme helps fewer than 4 per cent of addicts to kick their habit, does the First Minister agree that we need to review the methadone programme and drug treatment services in general and to ask hard questions about both? Is it not time to replace the open-ended and one-sided commitment that the taxpayer makes to addicts with some form of social contract with a clear programme for drug cessation? Would that challenge the prevailing view that drug treatment services are merely about stabilising addicts? Would it spell out our ambition to move addicts on, not to another form of dependence, but to a drug-free life?

I will not spare Dennis Canavan's blushes. His endeavour, experience and pragmatism put some other members who are in the chamber to shame. On Tuesday, Tony Blair underlined the importance of politicians, as well as being pragmatic, having the confidence and self-belief to take tough decisions. On the other hand, everyone loves a holiday—even at the end of November, when it is dark and miserable and we are saving for Christmas. There was always going to be a debate about the economic advantages or disadvantages of the proposal and that issue is still up in the air. There is also an argument about whether we should celebrate St Andrew, a Christian saint who never set foot in Scotland, on the ground that that is hardly inclusive. That said, I am of the view that we should use a national day as an opportunity to celebrate Scotland and Scotland's diversity. We have at least heard some ideas—from Alex Neil, Donald Gorrie and others—about working together to make it an exciting day, on which to celebrate the best of Scotland. Whether an additional holiday is necessary is still debatable. It would hardly be an inclusive national celebration if various sections of the population did not get the holiday. What sort of celebration would it be for low-paid workers in the private sector, who already have the lowest holiday entitlement? Some would say that such a celebration would allow the gap to grow between the people at the top, who get the holidays, and the people at the bottom. What is clear from today's debate is that we are not in any way  addressing discrimination against the low paid with regard to working time, holiday entitlement and work-life balance. To suggest that that is what we are doing is not to take the issue seriously. Two million people in the UK—tens of thousands of them in Scotland—do not receive any public holidays. If we really wish to end the discrimination that divides our workforce, we must end the practice of excluding low-paid workers from public holidays and making them take them as part of their annual leave. Stewart Maxwell has been the workers' champion here today. Continuing his theme, I am pleased to say that the Labour Party takes those issues seriously. It has a proud record in that respect and, for the first time ever, has addressed legal rights to annual holidays in the United Kingdom. There is the working time directive and maternity and paternity leave. As we would expect—and as Susan Deacon alluded to—we are going further. Working with business and trade unions, we will ensure that those who do not receive bank holidays will receive those extra eight days' paid holiday as a right. Stewart Maxwell says that the SNP will campaign on the basis of an extra day's holiday. The campaign slogan from Labour will easily match that: "One day for the favoured few with the SNP; eight days for all with Labour". Of course, we can guarantee those rights only through Westminster. The SNP may say that it could give workers the same, or perhaps even more, but in the chaos of separatism would it be in a position to offer workers the rights that they deserve? As Jim Mather and I know, it is the bosses, not the workers, who determine employment policies in the SNP. If the SNP ever comes to power, will it guarantee that workers will not lose out on the eight days' extra paid holidays that they would get if they were still in the UK, or will it continue to give more to those who have most and lock out the have-nots, on the basis of some spurious competitive example in the chaos that would follow separation?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will respond to the recommendations in the Sentencing Commission for Scotland's report on the scope to improve consistency in sentencing. (S2O-10687)

I look forward to the Executive's response to the commission's thoughtful and well-argued report. However, how will the minister respond to the representative of the faculty of procurators of Greenock, who said that "standardisation would be an impossibility"?  Does she agree that handing down wildly different sentences for similar crimes undermines public confidence in the courts? Is not consistent sentencing in the interests of everyone who is involved in the justice system?

To ask the Scottish Executive how much recyclable household waste, sorted for recycling by householders and collected by local authorities, goes to landfill. (S2O-10607)

That is hardly an enlightening response to someone who is not an expert on the matter. Although I am confident that much progress has been made on recycling, it has been reported to me that plastic containers that my constituents in Inverclyde take the time to wash and sort for recycling still go to landfill. After 18 months and £11 million from the Executive, does the minister think that that is acceptable and does he agree that much more needs to be done?

Does the member believe that consultants  should be forced to work every weekend?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will examine the case for adding the Japanese Akita to the types of dog proscribed  under the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991. (S2O-10443)

I thank the minister for the sympathy he has expressed for my six-year-old constituent, Stephen McCallum, who was savaged by an Akita while riding his bike, and to his family. I am disappointed that there are no plans to examine the matter. What has to happen before we take such action? Do we need to wait until a more serious event, injury or—God forbid—death? A cursory glance through the press reports shows that the latest attack is not an isolated incident. Therefore, is it not important to establish whether those dogs are being unfairly singled out by the media or are inherently dangerous? Can officials not, at the very least, collate reports sent to the police or the procurator fiscal regarding offences under the 1991 act?

Here we go again—we have had a speech from Des McNulty and there are campaigners in the gallery. I think that the Scottish Parliament has a good record of recognising the plight of asbestos workers and their campaign for justice, which has been ably supported by many members in the chamber, but particularly by my colleague Des McNulty. In November 2000, we had a members' business debate in my name that focused on the actions of the insurance companies on the asbestos issue. There was a long struggle in days gone by during which they made no apology. They delayed and delayed until a person died, in order to avoid paying compensation. Of course, we changed that situation, but the insurance companies then changed their tactics to one of blanket denial—justice delayed became justice denied. They drew out procedures for months and years to deny the paying of compensation. Victims were denied their very existence. For example, they were asked to prove that they had served their time and worked in a shipyard. They were also asked to prove, for example, that the Queen Elizabeth II was built in John Brown's shipyard. That was all done to deny the victims the justice that they deserved. What an insult and what an injury, on top of having a terminal disease and facing death, to be questioned about their very existence. We have had other crises along the way. We had the collapse of Chester Street Insurance Holdings Ltd, which bankrupted itself to avoid paying compensation, while paying its top bosses million-pound bonuses. Thankfully, some possible consequences of that situation for victims were avoided. Again, however, victims facing death were worried about whether they would receive a penny in compensation. We have also had other recent setbacks, including the most recent legal decision, which brings us here today, by which 90 per cent of the compensation that victims deserve was put under threat.  The insurance companies' tactics have been ruthless and consistent. They have used all methods possible to frustrate and deny justice for the victims. We should remind ourselves of what we are talking about, as others have said during the debate. We are talking about people who are cancer victims. It is a very aggressive cancer that takes their lives away in very difficult circumstances in around 18 months or two years. Given such circumstances, we as a Parliament, both politicians and law officers, have faced up to the situation and focused on the needs of the victims rather than on the will of the insurance companies. It is great news today for people whom I know in my constituency that we are making these decisions. We have had the intervention in the Chester Street crisis and, thankfully, we have had justice fast tracked for victims in Scotland. Pauline McNeill, who sends apologies for not being present, did a lot of work to make that happen. Of course, we are also having today the reversal of the law lords ruling that would have denied the victims justice, and we can expect a forthcoming bill that will address the issue of the victims' families. It is sweet justice indeed when a situation has been created whereby the insurance companies and the employers will have to sue one another rather than the victims of asbestos—hear, hear, and well done! [ Applause. ] If the Scottish Parliament means anything, it is about addressing wrongs in our society quickly, as Des McNulty said. We are doing that speedily for the benefit of the asbestos victims and their families. We are showing that the Scottish Parliament can work for the benefit of people in Scotland—this debate is a classic example of that.

Like other members in the chamber, I am pleased to hear about all the work that is being done to tackle the problem. Does the minister agree that prevention is always better than cure and that, alongside the efforts to get knives off the streets, we need to stop them getting there in the first place? Will she put pressure on online auction sites such as eBay to ban users from trading in the terrifying array of weaponry that budding psychopaths can buy with a few clicks of their mouse?

I thought that I would ask a supplementary question in case I did not have a chance to ask question 7. I give notice that I withdraw question 7. The minister is aware that there is a particular need for audiology services in my constituency, where many former workers in heavy industry suffer hearing loss. Despite a spend of £600,000 18 months ago to cut waiting times, people still wait far too long. Will the minister examine how the extra money was spent and ascertain why better results have not been achieved? If the service remains unable to meet demand, despite the best efforts of the people who deliver it, will he consider enlisting outside help?

Is the minister aware that 70 per cent of those who use drug rehabilitation services go back on to drugs within 90 days? Will he deal with the projects that are involved and consider their focus in order to find out how that poor record can be improved?

The First Minister will be aware of this week's press reports that highlighted the high rates of infant mortality in my constituency. He will also be aware that, in Scotland, each year, 300 babies are born addicted to heroin. Does the First Minister agree that that terrifying picture of modern Scotland is unacceptable? Will he assure the Parliament that he will consider every available option to turn the situation around?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I ask Christine Grahame to withdraw that remark. I never said in any statement in the chamber, publicly or anywhere what she just described. I ask her to withdraw her remark and to apologise unreservedly.

Although I do not want to focus on them, it is worth noting the issues that brought about the  Kerr report. Issues such as the European working time directive, consultants' specialisms and subspecialisms, junior doctors' hours and training and accreditation have brought us politicians to a point at which, like it or not, we have to make decisions to ensure that a much-loved, respected and valued institution continues in a modern form in Scotland. Although it is not a panacea, Professor Kerr's report gives us a course of treatment for the ills that affect today's national health service and offers a way forward that could revolutionise the health service and make it more responsive, effective and efficient. The key innovation in Kerr's report is the idea that services should be designed to suit need and that there should not be Berlin wall-style health board boundaries. As I have argued repeatedly, the case for designing services to meet need is strengthened by the fact that quality health services still tend to be most readily available to those who need them least. We are still beset by the strange one-size-fits-all approach. Out-of-date funding formulas and notional equal access to general practitioners has resulted in healthy, affluent areas having the same concentration of doctors as do the poorest pockets of public health. That results in poor sick people having less time with GPs; being less likely to be referred to a consultant; being more likely to be seen in an overburdened, single-doctor practice; being more likely to be seen by a younger doctor who has never been in a deprived community before in his life; and being more likely to die younger. The report of the Kerr subgroup on health inequalities confirms that that approach has seen the gap between rich and poor grow rather than shrink.

Yes, but today we are discussing the health service's role. If we wanted, we could discuss the community regeneration fund, the central heating programme, the warm deal and the massive investment that there has been in early years and other stages of education. We are making progress in that regard but, this morning, we are discussing the responsibilities of the health service with regard to that agenda. That is why I slightly disagree with the British Medical Association, which promotes the interests of consultant doctors in relation to subspecialisms, reduced hours and less contact with patients. The BMA lectures us about our responsibilities, but it needs to face up to its own responsibilities.  Last month, I had the opportunity to put some of those points to the chief medical officer for Scotland, Dr Harry Burns, who was attending a meeting of the Health Committee to discuss the Kerr subgroup's findings. To his credit—this underlines how the debate has matured and moved on—Dr Burns said: "If we are to tackle the increased prevalence of disease in deprived communities, we must match that increased prevalence with an increased number of GPs."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 18 April 2006; c 2725.] Implementing the Kerr report properly means giving most help to those most in need and using resources to maximum effect. However, if we are serious about doing that, bold choices must be made. We cannot continue to pour money into making the healthiest healthier while my constituents are dying in their 60s—indeed, too many of them do not even make it that far. This week, members will have seen figures highlighting the persistently poor infant mortality rates in some deprived areas. Further—and this will be difficult for some people to hear because of the positions that they have held—implementing the Kerr report properly requires us to address the complete disgrace that is the Arbuthnott formula. I understand that the work on the review of the Arbuthnott formula has been delayed—given the sensitivity around the issue of redistribution, I suppose that that is not too surprising. I await the outcome of those discussions with interest. I repeat: if we are serious about tackling health inequalities in Scotland, bold decisions need to be taken.

This is an overdue debate. Like many people in the real world, I express some surprise that there is a debate about whether a child should be left in the supposed care of drug-addicted parents who are living chaotic lives. How can anyone justify leaving a baby to fend for itself while dad is pimping, or robbing gran? How can it be acceptable to leave a seven-year-old to get up and get herself and her wee brother ready for school? How can it be acceptable to leave a seven-year-old in a situation in which he has to climb out of the back window to run to his gran at 2 o'clock in the morning because the latest man in the house is beating up his mother over drugs? Some would say that those examples are hyped or are of a tabloid nature. However, unfortunately, they represent the reality for too many of our children in Scotland and reflect my case load and the experiences of the people who come to see me. How can it be right, even in the politically correct world of Patrick Harvie, that we leave that situation unchallenged? How can we propose a test that asks whether something would be acceptable for our children and says that, if it is not, it cannot be acceptable for anyone else's?

No, we have limited time and Mr Harvie has already said a lot. The children whom we are talking about are the real victims of drugs. We have had many debates that have treated the drug addict as the victim. However, it is the children who take the consequences, not the individuals who turn down help and who are in a life of addiction, drug use and crime. Some of them choose to take drugs. Some of them end up pregnant when they are in no way able to look after a child.  I am pleased that we are talking about the hidden harm today. However, it has not been hidden at all; the problem is simply that we have not faced up to it. I am glad that we are facing up to it today. The measures in the document will do a lot to tackle the problem. Objections have been raised over the cost and dubious benefits of putting drug addicts' children into care but, as others have said, local authority care is not the only option. Indeed, it may be the second-best option. Many members would agree that we can address the situation with the help of the wider family. In my experience of such cases, grandparents are desperate to get involved, to look after the children and to protect them from harm. Grandparents can make a real contribution, but they have been excluded by the system. They believe that the system has conspired against them and prevented them from being involved. They have suffered from the actions of overoptimistic professionals who say that everything will be okay in a week or a month. Jack McConnell mentioned the role of grandparents earlier today, and Rosemary Byrne raised the matter as well. As Jack McConnell said, grandparents are not in it for financial gain, but we should not exploit their love for and commitment to the children. They need support to ensure that they can do a good job. Susan Deacon referred to the other question that we need to ask. Why are we in a situation where so many of those who are addicted to drugs are having children? We know from the document and from reality that there are dangers such as HIV and AIDS and dangers to the mother and child from difficult pregnancies. We are talking about people with long-term addictions. Susan Deacon gave us some ideas on how we can tackle the problem, but as a first step we need to explore putting an oral contraceptive in methadone. In that way, we could reduce the problem and prevent some children from coming to harm. That would be good not just for the families involved but for taxpayers, who spend a lot of money on the problem. I hope that ministers will take those ideas on board.

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it provides to angling. (S2O-9802)

Does the minister recognise the value of getting young people involved in angling?  It not only gets them into the fresh air and keeps them out of trouble but teaches them patience, discipline and other vital skills. To keep youngsters interested throughout the winter months, are angling clubs able to secure some modest funding from the minister's department or from other departments to purchase, for example, fly-tying equipment so that they can run classes during the closed season?

The Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body has put in place a range of policies and procedures to support the good health and well-being of members, their staff and parliamentary staff. Key to that is the presence of a general practitioner and nurse, which are provided by NHS Fife's occupational health and safety advisory service.

The member has asked many questions, and I will do my best to answer them. The organisers made a late approach to the Parliament to host the exhibition, and Roseanna Cunningham MSP agreed to sponsor it. I should point out that, under the usual procedure, all events and exhibitions must have MSP sponsorship. The role of the SPCB in this matter is to consider how, for example, such events and exhibitions can fit into the available space without intruding on any other parliamentary activity. It would be a matter of real debate if, despite MSP sponsorship, the SPCB and its members made decisions on exhibitions on a political basis. On what will happen to the information that was taken on the day, that is a matter for individuals and the people who gathered it. However, we have received assurances that it will not be used  in any way, shape or form. Anyone who wants to request that information back from the company can do so.

I confirm that we will indeed host a cow sculpture on the Parliament estate during CowParade Edinburgh 2006. We look forward to her arrival on 15 May.

As Mike Pringle knows, there was some discussion between officials and organisers about the role that the Parliament could best play. However, at the time, we could not take a quick decision because of other pressing matters—at which point I should say that we are pleased to be back in the chamber. However, we are delighted that we will now take part in the event. We wish it and Mike Pringle's reception well. We hope that the event will raise much needed and deserved money for charities in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects the expert group, led by Dr Laurence Gruer OBE, to report its findings on the case for raising the minimum age at which tobacco can be purchased. (S2O-9488)

I thank the minister for that update. Does he agree that, if we are serious about reducing the number of smokers in Scotland, we cannot have the ludicrous anomaly whereby it is illegal for adults to smoke in the local pub, but it  remains perfectly okay for 16-year-old children to have a cigarette while waiting for the school bus? How soon after receiving the expert group's report will the minister make a final decision?

Is the First Minister aware of the recently announced compulsory redundancies of 70 academic staff at James Watt College? I am sure that the First Minister recognises the importance of the college to my constituents. Does he share my concern that, understandably, positions have already become entrenched? Does he agree that difficult problems are rarely resolved by conflict and threats, and that it is in no one's interests that the dispute continues? Will he ensure that the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and the Scottish Funding Council do everything in their power to resolve the immediate problem to ensure a future for James Watt College?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it ensures that the funds allocated to community safety partnerships are used effectively and for the purposes for which they were intended. (S2O-09309)

I am glad that the minister acknowledges the importance of getting the best possible value from such new investment. Is he aware that Inverclyde community safety partnership obtained in excess of £100,000 from the Executive to buy a mobile closed-circuit  television unit, which has been hidden away for 10 months and will continue to be hidden away because Inverclyde Council will not fund its operation? Does he share my view that that hardly represents best value for the taxpayer and that it short-changes my community? Will he assure me that he and other ministers will investigate the matter?

In the interests of balance, I will bring some facts to the debate to counter the terrible and depressing stuff that we have heard from the SNP. Through the actions of the Scottish Executive, 630,000 Scots have been taken out of absolute poverty, 190,000 of whom are pensioners. In  addition, we have created 34,000 modern apprenticeships and we have achieved that figure two years ahead of target. We have lifted the burden from council house tenants in Glasgow by shifting it to the UK taxpayer, thereby enabling 1,000 new houses to be produced each year for those people, 99 per cent of whom are now in tenant-controlled housing stock, with 600 tenants participating in the management of their housing. We have achieved that and more. Scotland's employment rate is now the best in the UK and is also among the highest in Europe—unemployment is down by a third. In trying to meet our aim of ending child poverty, the number of children who live in absolute poverty has been halved. We have provided better transport links, including road, rail and station improvements and more bus and rail journeys are being made. Despite those efforts, some communities—such as mine—continue to miss out on the chance to gain from the improvements. It is very difficult to invest in and to grow communities that are in decline because we are competing with Edinburgh and the heart of Glasgow. The minister said that it is important to do more, better and that areas such as Inverclyde and North Ayrshire must not be left behind in the regeneration strategy. That signals the Executive's determination to ensure that that will not happen.

Those areas are the traditional Labour heartlands where people followed traditional employment patterns for many years. However, when those working people have taken up new employment, Alex Neil's colleague Christine Grahame has denigrated them for doing so. People have sought to move on from the traditional industries; they are working hard to create lives for themselves and to provide good homes and so on for their families, yet the SNP denigrates them for doing so. Alex Neil cannot give me any lectures. Tory members may be smiling, but Patrick Harvie got it right when he said that when tens of thousands of jobs are taken out of a community, the result is problems such as those that we have in my area. That is what happens, irrespective of the political leadership in the area. The job is a difficult one, but it is one that we are determined to tackle. The Clyde corridor is to become a national priority and a massive investment—£1.5 billion—will go into it as a result. The Tories refuse to welcome any of the investment. In their amendment, they seek to remove the word  "welcomes". As the minister pointed out, regional priorities have been set for areas such as Inverclyde and North Ayrshire, which will continue to face the challenges to which I alluded earlier. I call those problems the three Ds: deindustrialisation, depopulation and deprivation. Both those areas have great potential and I invite members, including Christine Grahame, to come and see the potential for themselves. Anyone who comes to Inverclyde will see it. The river that used to be the success of the past can become our future. That is why someone who is even as hard to please as I am welcomes the initiative. The announcement that Inverclyde and Irvine bay are to get their own urban regeneration companies is important. I say to Donald Gorrie that, instead of top-down objectives being imposed, those companies will work to promote confidence and to support communities in delivering their objectives. I hope that those companies will generate the confidence that will encourage investment and move us forward. I think that they will deliver on the ground by sealing the deals and bringing benefits. A question that was never far below the surface in some speeches is the one that is posed in dysfunctional families: "Where's the money?" It has been acknowledged that we can draw on massive amounts of private investment. To be fair, the Executive has shown its determination to provide statutory funding—it is in there for the long term. I am sure that the Executive is determined to succeed. If I may focus on my community, Scottish Enterprise Renfrewshire has committed £10 million to the Inverclyde regeneration programme. However, the First Minister made it clear in yesterday's announcement on regeneration that the issue is about not just money, but about changing how we work so that we ensure that a joined-up approach across Executive departments and agencies supports local action. Karen Whitefield, Donald Gorrie and Susan Deacon mentioned that. "Partnership working" and "joined-up government" are overused phrases, but they are not meaningless just because they can be used inappropriately. Genuine partnership working is not about throwing together a group of agencies and departments that have their own agendas and interests and which will negotiate themselves into a stalemate; it is about operating in concert, which requires real leadership, as the regeneration policy statement acknowledges. I am under pressure for time, so I will move on quickly. If communities like mine are to share in Scotland's increased prosperity, concerted efforts are needed at all levels. The policy that we are discussing will tackle the hard problems that Patrick Harvie described. It will give communities a real chance in the future.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member insulted many of my constituents.

The member insulted the many people in my constituency who work in call centres. Some of them are required to speak more than one language and they deal with the supply of services throughout the world. Will the member apologise to those people?

Turn your mobile off.

Moan, moan, moan.

I congratulate the SNP members who were able to turn up today. The SNP is clinically averse to good news and I think that Shona Robison had to leave and get two large spoonfuls of bad news so that she could come back into the chamber.  The debate from the SNP has been predictable and pathetic. We heard insincere words of congratulation to the national health service, which quickly changed to sloganising about fiddled figures. However, despite all the challenges that we face—such as the SNP's daily diatribes against the national health service, the sensationalising of the reporting of issues in and around the health service, increase in demand on the service and the expectations of our constituents—some excellent figures on waiting times have been published today. All those who are responsible for them should be congratulated. The minister made the point that waiting lists were not slashed by accident. That achievement is due, at least in part, to the record investment and modernisation programme that the Executive has delivered and that the SNP and others have opposed tooth and nail. However, there is a limit to what politicians can do. We can invest in the national health service and ensure that structures allow that investment to be put to best use, but results on the ground are delivered only by the determined efforts of national health service staff to provide the sort of service that their patients deserve. I will pick one example. Mr John Morrice, a consultant surgeon at Inverclyde royal hospital, which is in my constituency, spoke in the Health Committee's public debate "Reshaping the NHS in Scotland?" in April last year, when he described himself as "one of those dinosaurs" who provides a general surgical service. Dinosaur or not, thanks to his efforts and the efforts of those who work with and around him, the waiting times for breast cancer patients at Inverclyde royal hospital are, as he recently pointed out in the local press, the lowest in Scotland, while the waiting times for colorectal cancer patients are the sixth lowest. People in my constituency are alive today because of the Executive's policies. It does not get any bigger than that. That is not a frivolous point. In an area such as Inverclyde, which still suffers from poor public health, those are substantial achievements. They should be given the credit that they deserve and should not be sneered at by Opposition politicians who have never run much more than a bath. The results that were announced today are a testament to effective partnership working between the Executive and health service professionals. There is no complacency about the challenges that we face in meeting the expectations of those whom we represent. I have been critical. I have pressed ministers and I will continue to press them on waiting times, digital hearing aids and other matters, but today of all days we have an opportunity to come together, unite and celebrate  the success of the Scottish health service. Too many members in the chamber missed that opportunity.

Will the Lord Advocate take the opportunity to inform the chamber of his powers to instruct the police to commence a criminal investigation?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004 has had a positive impact in respect of prosecutions. (S2O-8954)

I welcome the progress that the Solicitor General has described, but can she tell me whether the results that the 2004 act is delivering are uniform across the country, or are some areas making better use of the provisions than others? What action will be required to ensure that progress is made throughout Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will help to promote Greenock as a port of call and embarkation for cruise ships. (S2O-8868)

From her visits to Inverclyde, the minister will be aware of the importance of Greenock Ocean Terminal to the local economy in my constituency. The 22 cruise ships that will call at Greenock this year will bring 30,000 passengers, plus crew, into the area. I hope that they will spend some time and money in the area as well as in other parts of Scotland. Although the port operator, Clydeport plc, and others continue their efforts to promote Greenock Ocean Terminal, we would be grateful for Executive assistance in one small respect. Will the minister look into the possibility of proper signage being erected, similar to that which exists on the approaching trunk roads for the ferry terminals? That would help to put Greenock Ocean Terminal on the map for visitors and locals.

The short answer is that there are no plans at present to do so. Of course, we recognise the great deal of work and range of activities that members of the Scottish Parliament undertake, but we take the view that that business is between the MSP and their constituents. It may not therefore be appropriate for the SPCB to commission research in this area.

I think that all MSPs would support that sentiment. The SPCB can and should ask the Scottish Parliament information centre to prepare a briefing paper in which some of the issues could be explored. We can provide a description of what MSPs do in and around the parliamentary complex, but it is more difficult to monitor their activities in their constituencies. I give Susan Deacon the assurance that the SPCB will discuss the issue with SPICe to see how best we can take forward the matter.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will make its regeneration statement. (S2O-8812)

Does the minister agree that, if we are to take advantage of the opportunity to regenerate my constituency, there is no time to lose? Will he assure me that, when the statement is made, it will underline the Executive's commitment to areas such as Inverclyde, include the long-awaited announcement of an urban regeneration company for the area and designate industrial zones, as well as residential, leisure and retail developments, on our waterfront?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Colin Fox suggested that I had intentionally misled the chamber. In my speech, I said that Lothian NHS Board was neutral on the bill. I quote Dr Philip Rutledge, who said: "Lothian NHS Board does not have an official view on the matter, because it has not carried out an official consultation. I am here wearing my professional advisory hat. In that respect, the answer is yes and no: yes in principle and no because we need to sort out the finances before we say yes."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 1 November 2005; c 2332.]

As Colin Fox said, this is a special day. It is a day for celebration when six Scottish Socialist Party members are in the Parliament building, never mind in the chamber. The event of the day must have been Shona Robison's speech. Anyone who took time to read the evidence would find no hint of the passionate support for abolition that she talked about today. There is no doubt that a lot of politicking is going on. Colin Fox claimed in evidence that the bill is a popular measure and complained today that politics is interfering with the bill's progress. I suggest that he is enthusiastic about the measure only because the politics suits his failing party and his failing leadership. An e-mail from Colin Fox to his SSP activists states: "Opinion polls put support for abolition at 4 to 1 in favour among the population at large. There are literally hundreds of health organisations, patients groups ... who support this Bill." He asks "the local SSP branches and regions to help by campaigning and building the party around this issue" and says that he is sure that they "will agree that this is just the kind of opening to 2006 we need." No luck at all, Colin. The reality is that the bill would cost a lot of money and that it would benefit well-off people at the expense of the poor.

No—we have been told that there is no time and that we need to let other members speak.

Just sit tight, Shona—you will be getting it in a minute.

Shona Robison agreed to the Health Committee's report, which says: "The Committee acknowledges that the abolition of charges would provide financial benefits to those on higher incomes who currently can afford to pay for prescriptions and therefore the removal of charges is unlikely to have a significant impact on the health of this proportion of the population." She knows that the bill would serve those people and she agreed to that statement, so there is no hiding place for her.

People who can afford to pay will undoubtedly benefit. It is not possible to fix a system that hammers at a maximum of 500,000 people—if all the arguments in favour of abolition are accepted—by giving 2.5 million people a benefit that they do not need.

The bill would give an even greater share of the health budget to the people who have the greatest access to the health budget, to drugs, to medicines, to GP's time and to consultant appointments. Let us cut the spin and let us hear no more nonsense—not in the name of the poor. The bill may be to the SSP's political advantage, but it is not to the advantage of the poor. Colin Fox claimed that the bill had great support from the Health Committee. For members who have not had the opportunity to read the committee's report, I will read the committee's statement of support. It says: "On the basis of the evidence received, and taking into account some of the reservations expressed, the majority of the members of the Committee"— excluding me, thankfully— "recommend that the Parliament approves the general principles of the bill." That is hardly a ringing endorsement.  The member in charge of the bill wants us to follow the example of Wales. Let us look at the evidence from there—or, rather, let us try to find some, because the committee found no evidence on its trip to Wales. There was little hard evidence—

SSP members should listen—they obviously have not read the report. There was little hard evidence from Wales about the political and financial impact of the measures. Janis Hughes—who visited Wales—said: "it was difficult to find any evidence." Jean Turner expressed her surprise that "the decision had not been based on any evidence" and Mike Rumbles stated: "It was clear that the abolition of charges was a political decision".—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 29 November 2005; c 2390.] The convener of the Health Committee, Roseanna Cunningham, said: "It quickly became clear that we were not going to get the cast-iron evidence that we were looking for and—to be fair—expected."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 29 November 2005; c 2391.] Only now, after three years, is the Welsh Government monitoring the impact of the abolition of prescription charges. Let us not make the same mistake. We should not, however, worry just because Wales could not give us evidence to support the bill. What about the evidence that we did gather? During our evidence-taking sessions, the convener asked various witnesses for their positions on the bill. There have been claims that there is great support for the bill, but what were the responses?

No. The patient partnership and practice organisations, Macmillan Cancer Relief and NHS National Services Scotland were neutral about the bill, while the Scottish Association for Mental Health supported it. The Royal College of General Practitioners Scotland was neutral and Lothian NHS Board had no official view. Greater Glasgow NHS Board and the Scottish Pharmaceutical Federation were against the bill, while the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain and the Highland area pharmaceutical committee were neutral. The suggested widespread support for the measure does not exist. [ Interruption. ] Members might howl, but widespread support does not exist. We could go on and on.  We should not proceed with the bill. The Health Committee and the Finance Committee were seriously concerned about costs and the impact on front-line services. The case for abolition has not been made, but the case for reform has. Let us get ahead and reform the system for the benefit of the people of Scotland.

We did not hear a word from Shona Robison at the committee meetings.

The motion states: "the Parliament agrees that developing the current and future workforce of Scotland is key to ending poverty and sustaining economic growth". Who could disagree with that? It is skills that pay the bills. I cannot take part in the debate without mentioning the recent lay-offs in the electronics manufacturing industry, one of the casualties being Sanmina-SCI's personal computer division in Greenock, which is to close with the loss of 370 core jobs, which will move to Hungary. One difference between the closures now and the past closures of shipyards is that we now recognise the need to invest not just in attracting companies to come and stay here, but in people, so that they are better equipped to move from one company to another. Life is more complicated now than it was many years ago, when people did their apprenticeship and then got a watch after 30 years. We all now recognise that we need to equip people for the changed environment. I have been in talks in the past couple of weeks, and this morning with the Deputy First Minister, to see how we can move the people at Sanmina-SCI from their difficult situation to continuing employment. There is an array of help that we can give: not rhetoric, not headlines, not taking on companies and globalisation, but real, practical initiatives. For example, there is the partnership action for continuing employment—or PACE—framework, which could put people in that factory in Greenock today to analyse the existing skills of the employees there. There are the job-match schemes that can match those people and their existing skills with jobs. There is the transport fund, which can make the wider labour market more available for them. There is training for work. All those initiatives are in place. They are all practical responses to help people get on. In addition, there is the massive public expenditure that will create jobs and infrastructure: in the classroom, classroom assistants; on building sites, the construction of new schools. All that goes beyond rhetoric and makes the right to work more a reality than a slogan.

Ireland, a country that has benefited greatly from inward investment and low-cost  manufacturing, will face the same problems as us. That is inevitable. Jim Mather knows that. Everyone else knows that. The Sanmina-SCI situation sums up the problem with the labour market in parts of Scotland. It reminds us that Scotland cannot—and indeed should not—compete with low-wage economies on the basis of cost. We cannot sustain those jobs. The only way to build the economies of areas with higher than average unemployment—on which I am pleased the framework will concentrate—is on a sound foundation of high-skilled, high-paid jobs that cannot be shipped overseas because someone else can do it more cheaply. However, that means attracting the right sort of companies to an area and it will require a concentrated effort from all sides to ensure that communities such as Inverclyde offer, for example, prime development opportunities and a highly skilled workforce. To succeed, the employability framework must map out how that is to be achieved. It is easy to go on about the need for people to hone their skills and continuously learn new ones throughout their working lives, but we cannot ignore the practicalities. How can we help, say, the working parents whose daily routine comprises getting up, dropping the kids off at school, going to work, picking the kids up from their granny's, making the tea and then ferrying various family members to and from the brownies, football training and so on? How can we help such hard-working parents to fit in the time to get to the local college or to study distance learning materials? Solutions to those practical barriers need serious consideration. For example, can we give employers responsibility for building training into the working day? Can we increase the rights of individuals to training and education throughout their lives? If we remove the barriers, should we also consider the responsibility of the workforce to use those rights? Should they take responsibility for ensuring that they have today's skills and will be able to learn tomorrow's? After all, why should only certain professionals, such as lawyers, accountants and doctors, be required to undertake continuous professional development? Enhancing the employability of the whole work force will, as has been acknowledged in the debate, require a concerted effort throughout the Government, including the United Kingdom. If the heart of the framework is rights and responsibilities, opportunities to use and exercise them must be its four corners. Whether that can be achieved will determine whether those plans—and communities such as the ones I represent—rise or fall.

Will Jim Mather tell me the Scottish National Party's policy for increasing the minimum wage and what it would increase to?

No one in my community is naive enough to believe that structures in themselves will solve all a community's problems. Moreover, they came to believe that structures were part of the problem. The minister's announcement in May that he was to put NHS Argyll and Clyde out of its misery was as welcome as it was inevitable. The minister was left with little choice. Over several years and under a series of management regimes, the board attempted to force through a string of ill-conceived reorganisation plans, its books were in a mess and, more important, it had lost the trust of those it served. Abolishing the board and pledging to write off its accumulated £80 million debt has, therefore, been warmly welcomed in my constituency. That move will, as I said in my submission to the consultation, tackle the two issues that cause the most difficulty for health services in my constituency: geography and debt. Geographically, it never made sense to have a health board that tried to balance the competing interests of remote and urban communities—it certainly does not now. Writing off the debt means, I hope, that the new board can start planning services with a clean slate and with nothing but the quality of patient care to consider. What of the new board? The minister announced today that health services in my constituency will come under the management of NHS Greater Glasgow. That is to be welcomed for a number of reasons. First, if we are serious about reducing inequalities, tackling the pockets of appalling public health in urban west central communities such as my own must be our priority. NHS Greater Glasgow has expertise in doing that. Moving health services in Greenock and Inverclyde to NHS Greater Glasgow will allow a focus to be put squarely on tackling those persistent, serious health problems as well as the high incidence of premature death. Secondly, moving services to NHS Greater Glasgow reflects what happens in practice: many  of my constituents who require highly specialised care have, for many years, received it in hospitals in Glasgow. Today's announcement also means that our health services will be provided by a board that boasts university-led acute services. It should not face the same recruitment and retention challenges that NHS Argyll and Clyde did. It follows that, with flexible working, that can allow acute services in Inverclyde access to a wider pool of clinical staff. In these days of reduced working hours, and royal college training requirements and guidelines, such a pool is essential to maintain near-patient local services. Furthermore, joining with NHS Greater Glasgow can deliver a strategic focus for the provision of services across all west central Scotland and make the best use of resources. Although I have no wish to tread on the toes of members who represent other communities in the Argyll and Clyde area, I do have an interest in patient flows from outside my constituency. If the principle of patient choice is to remain—and people on the Cowal peninsula have made it clear that they wish to continue to have services delivered at Inverclyde royal hospital—we have to ask whether patient flows can be maintained. We would certainly hope so. Notwithstanding all the benefits that I believe will come from this change, my constituents have certain expectations of NHS Greater Glasgow. There is an obvious need to create stability in local health services. For too long, it has been a question of what would go and what could stay. The future of Inverclyde royal hospital must be confirmed and alternative proposals to NHS Argyll and Clyde's discredited clinical strategy must be introduced as quickly as possible. Those alternatives must be acceptable to the community and to the clinicians. To achieve that, they must be consistent with the model proposed in the Kerr report. In other words, we must deliver services as locally as possible and as specialist as necessary.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I missed my opportunity to bid earlier. Will the minister confirm the Executive's continued support for the transport interchange at Gourock station? We had a recent meeting on the subject; will the minister tell me when he will be able to report on progress?

The First Minister will be aware of yesterday's determination in the fatal accident inquiry into the death of a baby who was born at Inverclyde royal hospital's maternity unit shortly after it became a midwife-led unit. Sheriff Herald found that that tragic death could not have been avoided, but his wider comments—that expectant mothers in my constituency receive a second-class service—has naturally caused serious concern and makes it increasingly difficult for the health board to maintain that the reorganisation of maternity services was carried out in the interests of patient safety. Does the First Minister agree that restoring public confidence in that midwife-led unit is vital? Will he and the Minister for Health and Community Care ensure that the specific weaknesses in the wider provision identified by the inquiry are addressed by the health board and others?

When Professor David Kerr kicked off the public debate on the future shape of the national health service almost a year ago in my constituency, he did so against a troubled background. For years, we had been calling for a strategic approach to be taken to NHS planning. As public outrage at health board plans for service redesign across Scotland grew, the calls were becoming impossible to drown out with the sugary words that it was all being done in the patients' interests. In my area of Argyll and Clyde at least, the absence of a clinical case for many of the plans that were being put forward was fast becoming clear. The outcry in Greenock and Inverclyde was particularly fierce: thousands of local residents marched against the health board's proposals to centralise services at Royal Alexandria hospital in Paisley. A petition against the plan attracted some 56,000 signatures. It is a vindication of our once-derided arguments that, after 14 months of detailed investigation, the expert group that Professor Kerr chaired has published a report that marks the end of the failed board-by-board approach to service reorganisation. Although it is important to remind ourselves of the context in which Professor Kerr's investigations took place, our job now must now be to focus on how to use this valuable report to inform and shape health policy. The real and radical departure of the report is the idea that services should be designed to meet need and not, as Professor Kerr put it at a recent meeting of the Health Committee, "planned on the basis of a rather irrational, narrow, geographic bit of Scotland".—[Official Report, Health Committee, 20 September 2005; c 2190.]  He was referring to the old, artificial health board boundaries—the Berlin walls behind which boards sat, drafting grand plans that barely acknowledged the existence of the outside world. The case for designing services to meet need is strengthened by the fact that, as I have pointed out previously, quality health services tend to be made available most easily to those who least need them—I refer to the so-called inverse care rule. However, in addition to being high in quality, services must also be accessible. The Kerr report rightly focuses on the local delivery of health services where possible. Most people accept that that, if someone needs attention at a world-class neurological centre, for example, they might need to travel to that centre of excellence. However, people do not accept that they will have to travel long distances for what they consider routine treatment.

No, thank you. In evidence to the Health Committee, Professor Kerr also said: "If we ask patients to move, we should ensure that it is for good reason, is logical and possible and does not involve three trains, two buses and an expensive taxi ride to receive standard care."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 20 September 2005; c 2190.] I welcome the minister's determination to break the link between deprivation and ill health. If we are serious about our stated ambition to reduce health inequalities, we must ensure that high-quality, accessible services for those who need them most are the cornerstone of our plans. When I say "we", I do not mean just the Labour Party, the Executive parties, the Minister for Health and Community Care and the ministerial team. I harbour a hope—perhaps it is a forlorn one—that the process in which we are all involved will lead to a more constructive discussion of the issues that the national health service must face up to. I believe that there is already some agreement across the parties on those issues. For example, although we may disagree on where admissions should take place, we agree that elective and unplanned admissions should be separated to improve forward planning and make more efficient use of resources. If there is to be tension, it will not be political but for geographic or economic reasons. If implementing Kerr means giving most help to those in most need, there may be a conflict between members who represent urban populations, with their pockets of deprivation and appalling public health, and those who represent healthy, affluent areas. I expect all MSPs, from every party, who represent areas across Scotland that have the same poor health profile as my own area to work  together on the campaign to end the scandal that sees money and resources directed into making the healthiest healthier at the same time as people such as my constituents are dying in their 50s and 60s. Although Professor Kerr's report is not a panacea, it gives us more than a course of treatment for the ills that afflict today's national health service; it offers a way forward that could revolutionise the NHS and make it more responsive, effective and efficient. Professor Kerr has done his job; the question now is whether we have the courage to do ours.

I will try to comply. What do we have here today? We certainly do not have a political conspiracy. I do not recognise what we have tried to do today as an attempt to do down back benchers or to limit their powers. What we have tried to do is build on opportunities to influence Executive thinking and to develop policy. We in the Scottish Parliament are experts in failing to recognise that among the Parliaments of the world we are the only one to have a unit that actually helps members—not of the Government, but back benchers—through policy development, drafting and handling support. What we have here today is not a political conspiracy but a failure to agree. Everyone has had a chance to talk about the issue and, even though I am a thick-skinned politician, I take slight umbrage at the pass-the-parcel game that we have been left with today. Everyone also seems to have the answers. If there have been answers out there, we have been missing them since 2000, because we have been struggling with this problem since then. We have the problem because we have given members the expectation that they have a right to introduce a member's bill, irrespective of when they lodge it. That ambition clashes with the reality of management of the process and not the politics. It would be entirely wrong for any group of people, particularly the corporate body—which has been elected by and is accountable to Parliament—to make decisions about the merits of one bill as opposed to another. That would take us into a political area, which would be unacceptable. To put matters in context, the criteria that we have described today will apply only when demand exceeds capacity. As Donald Gorrie said, that will happen, and our experience is that it does happen, which is why we are trying to manage the process. If we know or expect that demand will exceed capacity, we must manage the process.  Decisions about what bills are put to the side should not be made in a smoke-filled room or by a civil servant or an employee of the Scottish Parliament. As John Swinburne said, if a member's bill is not going to proceed, the member will want to know why. They will want to know what criteria were used and they will want the system to be open. That is what today's debate is trying to achieve. Where is our point of reference? Iain Smith mentioned the Procedures Committee. Its report stated: "we were unable to agree on how a system of prioritisation could be made to work in a way that would achieve its main aim of improving the management of the Member's Bill process while still protecting the rights of backbench members to initiate legislation ideas and have them considered on their merits." We are here today because the Procedures Committee could not agree. The report goes on to say that "A Member's Bill should be an attempt to secure a worthwhile change". Iain Smith made a very good point about the democratic deficit. The Executive has the opportunity to exercise its democratic mandate as the elected Government. The Procedures Committee report also stated: "A Member's Bill should be an attempt to secure a worthwhile change in the law (rather than a device to promote the member or his or her party's platform)." We are dealing with all those issues. There has been a great deal of discussion today about complexity and about who decides what that is. Again, the point of reference is the Procedures Committee, which said: "There is probably no single criterion that can be adopted in advance that will resolve any competition among proposals for resources that might arise. In practice, there will be various factors that could or should be taken into account in making such decisions, without bringing in directly political considerations ... Other relevant factors may be the order in which members obtained a right to introduce a Bill; the relative complexity of the proposals and hence the resource implications of developing them into Bills". That is all in the Procedures Committee's report and it is our point of reference when we address the issue. Of course we considered whether it would be a good idea to put more people into NEBU, but as Rob Gibson pointed out, it is not just about putting more money into the unit. The Procedures Committee rightly acknowledged that some committee members feel that they have been forced to pursue member's bills against the interests of their committee's bills. If we were to respond to that demand and allow more bills, this situation would continue.

Anyone who has dealt with NEBU will know that its role is not to stop people progressing bill proposals, but to actively encourage them to do so. I presume that that will continue to be the case. All that a back bencher needs to do is to prove that he has consulted on his proposal in some way, and then NEBU will develop the policy for him and support him throughout the development process. NEBU gives good advice from an expert point of view. Not many people can give the advice that that group of people can. I recognise that a few members acknowledged the good work that NEBU does, although it is a shame that more did not do so. It provides members with a unique service and it does so effectively and honestly. It is wrong to pretend that, as a result of our efforts to manage out the problems that we are discussing, that group of people will suddenly become gatekeepers who will prevent us from submitting proposals for bills. The Green party should know that. NEBU works long, hard and effectively with that party's members. In fact, NEBU has dealt with nine bill proposals from members of the Green party this session. If each member had been allowed to make only one bill proposal, the Green party would have needed to drop three of its proposals and this debate could have been held among its members rather than in Parliament.

I will give way to John Swinburne—I have already taken an intervention from the Greens.

It is my understanding that such a bill will not need to get over the same hurdles again and will be capable of being picked up by the member, or by someone else. That is an established procedure. I emphasise that the criteria that are outlined in the SPCB's report are not the result of political shenanigans; rather, they represent a genuine attempt to build on NEBU's success and on the opportunities that exist for members to introduce bills. They will apply only when there is over- demand and we are simply explaining how we will make decisions when that is the case. That partly answers the question that was asked about whether the SPCB's decision is for all time. I would expect such debates to occur perhaps once every parliamentary session. There will be an opportunity to suck it and see.

That is right, but we would have been accused of dishonesty if today we had attempted to discuss just the criteria and not their consequences. I understand the point that Karen Gillon makes. Other members have taken the opportunity to plead their case. I turn to Brian Monteith, who, even though he told us that he was not pleading his case, did so very well. It was unfortunate that we were not able to discuss his proposal for a bill because it had not been lodged. We look forward to its being lodged. Both Brian Monteith and Alasdair Morgan mentioned the time sensitivity of such bills. I hope that the Parliament will put aside the politics of the issue and agree that the problem that we face has been hard to resolve and that we must manage it. I ask members to support the motion in my name.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that health spending should be focused on the communities with the poorest health. (S2O-7783)

Professor Graham Watt of the University of Glasgow has pointed out that good medical care tends to be most available to those who need it least and Professor David Kerr told the Health Committee that current arrangements lead to a widening in health inequalities. Does the minister therefore agree that it is time that we looked again at how funds are distributed so that we stop pouring money into making the healthiest healthier while my constituents are dying in their 50s and 60s?

Is it not funny how the SNP wants to talk about independence only after an election, never during one? The sadly departed Ronnie Barker once brought us news of a strange happening during a performance of Elgar's "Sea Pictures" at a concert hall in Bermuda, when the man playing the triangle disappeared. Perhaps he went out looking for the SNP's commitment to independence in Cathcart and Livingston. In both campaigns, it was the dog that did not bark. However, after yet another gubbing at the polls, the nationalists are safely back in the chamber, well away from the electorate. Now they can get on with doing what they do best: talking to each other—or to whoever is left in the chamber—or, more accurately, talking to their activists in a bid to top up the ballot for list seats. I suppose that that is one election that an SNP candidate might stand a chance of winning. The SNP's double life extends beyond its embarrassment about independence. As far as the economy is concerned, I cannot believe that the nationalists have the cheek to try to lecture us about the virtues of enterprise. Is this the same SNP whose list of wild spending promises makes even our colleagues the Liberals look like iron-fisted skinflints? Is this the same SNP that demands more money for—to pick but a few examples—a Scotland-only honours system, the fishing industry, the arts and whatever the Fèisean movement is? I hope that it does not involve Highland farmers and their cattle. Before Mr Mather dismisses those pledges as the ramblings of a lunatic fringe, I should point out that he himself likes splashing the imaginary cash. He has demanded more funding for the Highlands and Islands, the creation of an independent office of national statistics, the waiving of fresh talent application fees and much, much more.

No. Is this the same SNP whose ideological hatred of the private sector is such that it would leave the sick to suffer on waiting lists instead of using the capacity in private hospitals to get operations carried out quicker? Is this the same SNP that would have our kids educated in cold, crumbling classrooms because of its dogmatic opposition to public-private partnerships? Is this the same SNP that can hardly say the word "profit" without  spitting? Is this the same SNP that promised money left, right and centre during the Cathcart and Livingston by-election campaigns? Yes, it is the very same SNP. Now, a mere week later, the nationalists expect us to believe that they have suddenly turned into the party of fiscal prudence. No one needs to get the Windolene out to be able to see through that. In short, if the SNP is to have any credibility as a serious political party—and I realise that that is a big if—it cannot continue to lead this double life. It cannot be a sober bank manager during the week and dress up as a showgirl at the weekend—or perhaps it is the showgirl who dresses up as a bank manager at the weekend. I am not sure which metaphor is more apt. Until the SNP decides whether spreadsheets or sequins suit them best, the people of Scotland—as they did in Cathcart and Livingston—will keep sending them homeward to think again.

That was a disgraceful speech. What a rallying cry for Scotland and Scotland's people, the CalMac crews and the communities that they serve. In fact, that speech represented an abrogation of political responsibility that would hand over the future of those people and communities to the courts to decide so that we could avoid making a difficult decision here today. Up to now, the debate from the Opposition parties has been an exercise in creative avoidance—it has been about why we should not do this, how we will sit tight and how we will challenge the decision in this way and that. That is not brave politics. We have seen that rhetoric in the past; we saw it take the miners union to disaster—we have seen it take all sorts of workers to disaster. Certain people are always brave to say, "We'll do this and we'll do that", but we are talking about the reality of people's jobs, their lives, their pensions, their wages and conditions, how they get to work and how they live in their communities. Certain people are always brave to say, "We'll back you up until your nose bleeds and then we'll complain that others failed you." We have a responsibility to face today; I and others made that clear last year. That is why we are having this debate—those Labour MSPs who have been much maligned ensured that today's debate would took place. Last year, we said that the proposed way in which the process was to be tendered was not acceptable to us and we blocked  it. We have worked hard—not on the rhetoric, but consistently, with ministers and with our colleagues, week after week—to ensure that what has been presented is a much better option than what was on the table last year. I have a particular interest in the matter because my constituency boasts three ferry terminals: the CalMac terminals at Wemyss Bay and Gourock and the Western Ferries terminal at McInroy's point. Gourock is also the home of CalMac's headquarters, so it is not surprising that I have followed the highs and lows of the debate since 1999. I appreciate that I approach the problem from a different perspective to that of colleagues who represent island communities and our neighbours across the river in Argyll, but, as I said last December, we have a shared interest and have made common cause. Their hard work on behalf of their constituents throughout the process deserves our praise and is in marked contrast to the behaviour of the Johnnys-come-lately who tell us in slogans that the matter is all about privatisation whereas in fact it is about securing massive public subsidy and ensuring that that is not challenged. Whenever there is a political opportunity, however, Fergus Ewing will be there at the front. I do not buy the conspiracy theory that the Executive, which I was forced to vote against in December, is motivated by a secret desire to privatise or sell out CalMac. On the contrary, if we are to avoid a debacle like the one at Fergusons it is essential that we get the tendering process right. Members should not wait until that process concludes and then complain when we lose out. I have no doubt that progress has been made over the years and I have previously welcomed the Executive's commitment to the Gourock to Dunoon service. That commitment was not put in place automatically, and I welcome it. It is important that the service continues to exist. Loss of the route would jeopardise the planned transport interchanges and affect the redevelopment of the Gourock waterfront, which is an ambitious project that the Executive continues to back. However, I was concerned that the proposed tendering process would have sold CalMac workers to the lowest bidder. That was not acceptable to me or to my constituents who work in the crews or at CalMac's Gourock headquarters, which provides highly valued jobs in a constituency that has consistently higher levels of unemployment. I could not back what the Executive proposed. The fact is that specifications to safeguard the workforce, the routes and the location of the company's offices can and should be written into any tender. I take some comfort from the fact that the minister now acknowledges  that and I welcome the fact that the specification that must be met by bidders addresses those issues. It is vital that staff pay and conditions, including pensions, are protected. There is agreement about the situation at NorthLink Ferries. I have made consistent representations to ministers over a long period of time on behalf of my constituents who serve on its vessels. In many cases, they were forced to go to the courts to ensure their rights. Surely that cannot be proper. On the location of the headquarters, again it is crucial that the tender documents contain the appropriate safeguards. As I have argued consistently, those documents must stipulate that the HQ is close to the services that are operated and they must contain a clear disincentive to relocate. Indeed, it would be sensible for the vesco's headquarters to be sited alongside the existing headquarters at Gourock. I make no apology for the fact that the future of my constituents who are employed by CalMac and the future of the Gourock development are the extent of my interest in the matter. The fact is that we are where we are. The primacy of European Union law over United Kingdom law is long established. We might not like it, but we need to make the best of it. We need to meet our international obligations and our moral obligations to those who elected us. For me, whether the solution that has been proposed today meets both requirements depends on whether it safeguards key infrastructure projects and the future of the workforce. Provided that the minister can give me his assurance on those points, he can be assured of my vote tonight.

Will the member give way?

The minister opened by welcoming us all back after the summer—with tongue in cheek. Nothing much has changed. The SSP are protesting outside to get in, those who are inside do not turn up for debates and the nationalists are still greeting and girning. I had a good summer mostly. I engaged with constituents, but I also found time to enjoy radio programmes. Some members might have noticed that Radio 4 ran a competition to find out the nation's favourite painting—a sort of middle-class "Pop Idol". They might have read in yesterday's press that the winning painting was "The Fighting Temeraire" by Turner. It is a depiction of a gunship that served at the battle of Trafalgar being taken to the breaker's yard by a tugboat after 40 years' distinguished service. What is interesting about the painting is what it represents. The obvious interpretation is that it is a sentimental lament for the passing of the romantic age of wood and sail. An alternative interpretation, however, is that it is a celebration of the dawn of the age of steam. That is a debate with which the chamber is more than familiar. Should we, as some advocate, hark back to the romanticised past with a tear in our eye, or should we, as my colleagues and I believe, look ahead excitedly to the future and the opportunities on offer? Take the theme on which we have concentrated this morning—supporting strong, healthy families. There are a number of interesting proposals in the Executive's programme, which deserve to be properly debated and not dismissed or hurriedly brushed aside to make way for the usual whingeing and wallowing in misery. Although we have taken steps to improve public health and to tackle health inequalities, I am glad that the Executive recognises that more needs to be done, especially in communities such as mine. The inverse care law whereby good medical care tends to be most readily available to those who need it least is still alive and well. Over the summer, I met Graham Watt, professor of general practice at the University of Glasgow, who told me  that that situation applies not only to coronary heart disease prevention, but to self-care—

No, thank you. SNP members have had two days in which to put their alternative vision; as usual, they have failed miserably. As I was saying, Professor Watt said that the inverse care law also applies to self-care, unscheduled care, planned care, the management of long-term conditions and palliative care. Modernising the delivery of care is essential if we are to tackle health inequalities. Support for young people to make the right health choices will be most valuable to the most disadvantaged children—the children whose parents do not make them an organic breakfast before jogging with them to the school gates. [ Laughter. ] I have my porridge every morning so members should not be so disparaging. Putting people in a position where they can make informed health decisions for themselves will always be more effective than compulsion. The health plans are just one example of the thread that runs through the Executive's legislative programme, giving everyone the chance to take advantage of the opportunities that are available in today's Scotland. Another notable move is action to reduce the number of 16 to 19-year-olds not in education, employment or training. Today, Scotland is the land of opportunity. Young Scots have never had more opportunities to enter higher and further education and modern apprenticeships. Of course, people who do not come from stable and wealthy backgrounds need more help to take advantage of those opportunities, but that is not the same as saying that someone who comes from a disadvantaged background is automatically condemned to fail. There is no reason why someone born today in difficult circumstances cannot succeed if they are given our backing and the support that they need. Yesterday, the First Minister said: "We need concerted action not just to identify such youngsters, but to support them. We must not only give them opportunities, we must help them along the way. We must give them not only a first chance to take up opportunities, but a second and a third chance if they fail at the first attempt."— [ Official Report , 6 September 2005; c 18797.]  I believe that that is a clear response to the hand-wringing excuses that have failed our young people for too long. I reject the excuses for failure and I am sick of politicians who revel in them. This legislative programme is a vision of what Scotland can become. The SNP—which models itself as the  Opposition in the Parliament—has signally failed, over a day and a half, to present its vision. We can only conclude that it has no vision at all.

Will the First Minister outline how hard-pressed communities can benefit from the programme for growth and prosperity that was announced this morning? Will he ensure that constituencies such as Greenock and Inverclyde—which has an abundance of brownfield sites that are ripe for regeneration—are considered in any development plans?

It is difficult to disagree that health problems, including sight problems, have to be identified. However, it is also important to point out, as Kate Maclean said, that children already receive free sight tests, although we might have to address certain issues with regard to take-up. As Kate Maclean pointed out, the current policy is that all children aged four to five will receive a sight test as part of comprehensive vision screening in their pre-school year. No one is complacent, of course. Built into the current policy is the recognition that there must be on-going review, and that is necessary. It is important to point out that the current childhood vision screening policy is supported by a large body of professional consensus and scientific research from the United Kingdom and North America. I suggest that further advances on, or a review of current policy will be successful only if we proceed by consensus. Continued consensus must be based on robust evidence, and the professional consensus for routine sight testing as outlined in Kate Maclean's amendment is simply not there. There is a debate about that, as we have seen in the e-mails from people who have contacted us, and I believe that my amendment 64 can resolve some of the issues that arise from that debate. Amendment 64 places a duty on Scottish ministers "to meet all reasonable requirements, to provide for the detection of vision problems in children." It allows for a flexible approach, so that experts can assess the optimal age for screening, the most appropriate screening technique and the most suitable personnel to undertake and supervise the screening. Most important, it would allow the assessment and clear definition of the health impact of that intervention. I hope that there will be as inclusive and broad a consultation as possible and that RNIB Scotland will be involved in that. I hope that there will be a timeframe to push on that consultation study and that some of that work will include pilot schemes in certain areas to address that unmet need in our most vulnerable groups across Scotland.

I welcome the amendments that have been lodged by the Executive and Stewart Maxwell, because they give us an opportunity to review the age restriction on the sale of tobacco that dates back to the previous century, when smoking was viewed as harmless and glamorous. That was before the availability of scientific evidence that demonstrated the health impact of smoking. Knowing what we know now about the dangers of smoking, it is our duty to protect young people from them. In 2005, is it correct to leave to 16-year-olds the decision about whether to buy cigarettes? According to a BBC healthy Britain survey, the majority of the public—particularly those between the ages of 18 and 34—supports the raising of the age limit. Furthermore, I am pleased to be able to announce that the British Medical Association conference decided today that the Government should be more effective in denying the supply of alcohol and tobacco to minors and that the minimum legal age for the sale of cigarettes should be raised to 18—that is now BMA policy. Several European countries, including Sweden, Ireland, Finland, Iceland, Malta, Norway and Poland have set the minimum age for tobacco sales at 18. As we know, the age restrictions in North America are even stricter; some American states have set the age limit at 21. Recently, Nova Scotia and Ontario increased the age limit to 19.  Of course, there is no need to look across the world for good examples when there is a good example under our noses. Guernsey, with its devolved Government, has introduced a package of measures to reduce smoking. It has increased to 18 the age at which people may buy tobacco and the island is now credited as a world leader in reducing smoking among young people. The number of young people who report that they smoke has reduced by half and only 3 per cent of 11-year-olds think that they will smoke when they are older. Nearly twice as many young people smoke in the UK as in Guernsey. If amendment 1 leads to an increase in the legal age for tobacco sales from 16 to 18, we will not be a world leader. We will not even be the first part of the British isles to introduce such legislation. We will simply be modernising our laws to give children the protection that is the norm throughout the modern world.

Does the minister recognise that the downturn in the manufacturing industry and low business growth rates limit the opportunity of young people in my constituency of Greenock and Inverclyde to gain access to the successful modern apprenticeships scheme? Will he give an assurance that he will look into that matter, with a view to improving the situation?

I am happy to give the Health Committee credit—and take some of it myself—for driving the agenda on when the previous convener of the committee dragged her feet on it. However, surely Roseanna Cunningham is being disingenuous in describing Professor Kerr's report as similar to the committee's report. There are common themes, but Professor Kerr takes us further and offers us options and solutions, which we on the Health Committee have not yet done. We look forward to taking evidence from him.

If Elton John, the man who famously spent £293,000 on flowers in a mere 20 months, can lecture us on world poverty, I suppose the Tories can lecture us on the national health service. When the Kerr report was published, it received a favourable response all round and, having read the report over the past week or so, I concur with that response. There is much in the report that will  give us plenty of food for thought over the coming months. Professor Kerr's proposals offer a more strategic view of how we should deliver health services in Scotland as a whole. They contain an implicit criticism of the failed board-by-board approach to service reorganisation, which led to such disasters as the discredited Argyll and Clyde clinical strategy. I do not understand how the Tories can welcome the report and, in the same breath, call for any sort of strategic planning to be abandoned. I know that there is some disquiet in the Tory ranks—there is talk of splits and defections—but I did not think that things had become so bad that they were arguing with themselves even in the motions that they lodged. The Tories want design decisions relating to the health service to be handed over not to patients, as they allege, but to vested interests—hospitals and the professionals who dominate the service. They say that their market-led chaos theory would deliver a better service, but it was hardly a roaring success when they ran the NHS in the past. This morning reference has been made to trusts, which were bad enough.

No. We saw what happened when individual health boards hunkered down behind the Berlin walls of artificial boundaries, and dreamed up grand reorganisation plans with no regard for the outside world, for neighbouring authorities or for the people to whom they delivered services. In Argyll and Clyde, maternity services for up to a quarter of the Scottish female population were to be concentrated in two hospitals that were 7 miles apart, as were consultant-led in-patient services for 800,000 women and children in the West of Scotland. What on earth would the system be like if it were even more insular and disjointed? The Tories say that they want local, non-centralised health services. Good—don't we all? However, they cannot condemn centralisation and at the same time advocate renouncing all our powers to do anything about it.

No thank you. Having continually done battle with the vested interests in the national health service over the years, I have learned that we—the only elected element in the decision-making process—have the least power. Why should the power of our voices and, by extension, of our communities' voices be even further diminished? That would be the effect of the Tory policy. Our communities elect us to improve services, not to abdicate responsibility.  On one point the Tory members are correct: if we are to have the level of services that we want and deserve, the NHS must reform. Where we are now, or where we were a few years ago, is not good enough. Before the explosion of public fury over the latest round of unpopular clinical strategies—almost a year ago to the day, in the case of Argyll and Clyde NHS Board—I was not exactly overwhelmed with letters telling me that the NHS was perfect. The Kerr report proposes a number of far-reaching reforms, which I look forward to debating in the Health Committee in the coming weeks. I applaud Kerr's intention to move away from the idea of the patient merely as a passive recipient of health care. Patients' interests, and not the interests of doctors, managers or politicians, should be the starting point for service design, with more services being delivered locally.

No—I have run out of time. The raft of far-reaching reforms that Professor Kerr proposes will be examined and debated in the coming months. During those considerations, we will have to focus on the basic ethos of the national health service, which still commands universal public support. That ethos is that free and comprehensive care should be available to all. The challenge to politicians of all parties here will be to provide genuine leadership and to create a compelling vision of where we are taking our health service. That will be our test in the coming months.

Will the member take an intervention?

The First Minister will be aware of the publication today of the Accounts Commission's damning best-value report on Inverclyde Council, which has been met with anger and concern—if not much surprise—in my constituency. Does he agree that my community should not be resigned to having poor service from the council? Will he confirm that failure on such a scale will simply not be tolerated? Does he understand my constituents' concerns and doubts about the current leader and chief executive of Inverclyde Council being up to the task of sorting out the mess?

It is always a pleasure to attend Opposition debates on a Thursday morning. We rush into the chamber full of enthusiasm, listen to the opening speech and get the same old story. My God, but we have had the violins out this morning. SNP members have wailed about debts that never seem to be paid off despite generous incomes. With tears in their eyes they have pleaded for us to do more for the lucky individuals whose wallets and prospects are enhanced by their time at prestigious Scottish institutions. At one point I thought that they were talking about Scottish football, which has its own problems. However, there are enough problems with the SNP motion to be getting on with. For a start, the basis of its argument is false. The motion states that the system of student finance "hinders opportunities for the individuals concerned." Are they sure? More than 50 per cent of young Scots are at university—a higher proportion than anywhere else in the UK. Graduate endowments do not deter entry to university. If a person is unable to grasp the concept that going to university is good for their financial prospects, they are probably not cut out for the world of higher education. The real problem with the motion is not that it is inaccurate—I expect nothing less from what passes for the Opposition in this place. What I find offensive is the hypocrisy and the dressing up—yet again—of self-interest as concern for the poor.

No. Sorry.  Today's topic is poor students. With the heart-rending sentimentality of a television movie, SNP members tell us stories about gifted urchins starving to death as they struggle to put themselves through university. They say that we must bring back universal grants, but the reality is that the poorest students get the most state help and end up with the least to repay. Grants would not be much use to them, but would be of use to the comfortable better-off families which—by pure coincidence I am sure—are a bit like the SNP's own and already take disproportionate advantage of higher education. There is nothing new in that. SNP members try the same con trick with pensioners. They shed crocodile tears and wail about poor pensioners being forced to sell war medals, grandchildren and kidneys to pay their bills. They say that we must let all pensioners off paying their council tax. The reality is that the poorest pensioners do not pay council tax; they receive council tax benefit, so scrapping the tax would not be much use to them. Wealthier pensioners—a bit like SNP members' relatives—would find the extra cash very handy indeed. That is not social justice; it is feathering their own nests. Of course, there is nothing inherently wrong with acting from one's self-interest; the human race would not have evolved if we had not learned how to do that. However, it is unforgivable to dress up self-interest as concern for the poorest people in our society. Poverty is an evil to be stamped out, not an opportunity to be used for one's own ends or electoral advantage. The right thing to do is to give the poorest students the most help; giving more disadvantaged young people the chance to go to university is the right thing to do and focusing on the poorest pensioners is the right thing to do. I accept that that will involve some redistribution of wealth from the haves to the have-nots, but anyone who calls themselves a socialist should be comfortable with that. That might not be politically expedient, but it is right and I am happy to debate the issue honestly. Sadly, the same cannot be said about the SNP and others until they stop hiding behind the poor.

On behalf of a community that engaged effectively with Professor Kerr and the debate, I welcome Professor Kerr's report and the minister's statement. I look forward to that community's continued participation in the general debate over the summer; it would be wrong for that community not to have the opportunity to write to the minister or to participate in the debate over the summer after it has given a view. I also look forward to the evidence that Professor Kerr will, I hope, give to the Health Committee before the summer recess. My first impression is that what makes the report so important is that its starting point is the patient. Does the minister agree that our health care system needs to be designed in the interests of patients rather than the interests of politicians, doctors or managers, and that it must give patients access to world-class services?

Is the minister aware that GP practices that serve the most rural and remote areas in Scotland receive four times the amount of additional payments per patient than do practices in the most deprived areas? That information was recently highlighted in a letter from Professor Graham Watt, professor of general practice at the University of Glasgow. The minister will also be aware that six years ago, the Arbuthnott report "Fair Shares for All?" concluded that the Scottish Executive Health Department should make health care inequalities a priority with a view to formulating a modified model for resource distribution. Has any progress been made on the issue?

I welcome the minister's statement, as it tackled head on the issues that have plagued Argyll and Clyde for so long: geography and the board's debt. Will he reassure the chamber that the consultation will not take 12 months, as some people have reported, because such a delay would not be helpful? When he visits Inverclyde royal hospital today, will the minister take time to thank those front-line staff who have delivered an improved service under difficult circumstances? Will he also make it clear to the staff and the wider community that Inverclyde royal hospital has a secure and sustainable future?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to promote enterprise and business in the Inverclyde area. (S2O-6608)

In asking about business in Inverclyde it would be remiss of me not to mention and add my voice to the strong and consistent representation that my colleague Trish Godman has made on behalf of Ferguson Shipbuilders. I hope that ministerial colleagues will ensure that no stone is left unturned to secure the future of the yard. Its closure would have a severe impact on West Renfrewshire and Greenock—many of my constituents work in the yard. The minister will be aware of the successful pathfinder projects throughout Scotland. Does he agree that the Inverclyde riverside regeneration action plans would benefit from the creation of an urban regeneration company for Inverclyde?

The Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Bill will bring direct improvements to the health of people in Scotland. I am part of the majority on the Health Committee which believes that the bill will have a positive impact and will help to save lives. Members who sit on subject committees might agree that some evidence-taking sessions are less than illuminating, consisting largely of people whom we would expect to be giving evidence giving the evidence that we would expect them to give. The Health Committee's stage 1 evidence on this bill—on part 1 at least—was a prime example. In one corner, we had the fundamentalists; in the other, the libertarians. Round after round, they traded statistics and counter-statistics and bashed each other with studies and counter-studies. In the end, they boxed themselves to a standstill. Did anything emerge from that? It is pretty clear, and accepted by all, that active smoking kills. We knew that already. Passive smoking can kill—especially when people are exposed to high levels of second-hand smoke. As the minister pointed out, people who live with smokers are at a greater risk of smoking-related disease. However, that is not the same as saying that environmental tobacco smoke in public places is, on its own, going to kill people. It would be interesting to see the results of a study that focused purely on people who were exposed to tobacco smoke only, for example, in a pub on a Friday night. We did not see such a study.  We heard a lot about the Irish experience. Some elements in the chamber are desperate for us to copy Ireland at every turn. I sometimes think that, to have an influence in Scottish politics, a person would have to be elected to the Dáil. However, in this case, we could learn from the Irish approach. As the committee heard, the Irish did not turn down the choice versus health cul-de-sac. They bypassed the argument between the right to smoke and the right to clean air. That is an argument in which we have become bogged down, turning the debate into one between smokers and anti-smokers. Instead, the Irish concentrated on the working conditions of employees in the hospitality industry. By doing so, they united smokers and non-smokers in support of the ban. We all know that employees do not have the choice that customers have over whether to enter particular premises. Employees also spend far longer in such environments or atmospheres than their customers do; sometimes employees will spend long periods in those atmospheres seven days a week. I have campaigned across the whole range of industries for the right of workers to have a safe working environment. If the health of workers in the hospitality industry is damaged by working in a smoky environment, I cannot stand here and argue that they should be denied the same protection that is afforded to every other worker. However—I borrow an argument from the Green Party when it talks about genetically modified crops—just because we can do something does not automatically mean that we should do it. We must ensure that smokers do not feel stigmatised by this process. We cannot just impose our will from on high; we need to win smokers round to our arguments and we need to take them with us. If we are to tackle the large number of active smokers, we need to offer them the opportunity to become part of the debate. As others have said, we cannot marginalise them. We cannot sweep the problems of addiction under the carpet. We all know that most smokers would like to stop. All smokers wish that they had not started and I think that they would back moves to help them to stop. They would also want to prevent their children and grandchildren from starting in the first place, and to protect them from being harmed by smoke at their workplace. We are serious about tackling the damage that is done by tobacco and I think that smokers will join us in welcoming new legislation. Smokers and non-smokers will also support us in using the powers that we already have. What about illegal sales of tobacco to children? We know that it happens—from ice-cream vans to corner shops.  Smokers and non-smokers disapprove of that, so let us have some action. Should we allow anyone—including parents and teachers—to stand smoking in school premises or adjacent to them as they wait to pick up children? We can see that happening as we go by our nurseries and schools. We have powers and we should use them. Smokers and non-smokers would agree that it is wrong to set that bad example. We need to reduce the harm that tobacco does in our communities—particularly in communities such as my own, where smoking is clearly killing people who are too young to die. The need to reduce harm is not up for discussion. In new legislation, we must not worry about the comfort or the agendas of unelected lobbyists, however well-meaning they might be. Instead, we must pursue the principle of reducing smoking and the damage that it does in our communities.

To ask the First Minister whether all options need to be considered to ensure that safe, sustainable services are delivered for the patients of NHS Argyll and Clyde. (S2F-1585)

I welcome the First Minister's response. Is it in the best interests of patients to allow a health board to soldier on if, over a period of years and under a succession of management regimes, it has pushed forward a string of ill-thought-out reorganisation plans, its accounts are in a mess and it has lost the trust of those whom it serves? Does the First Minister agree that although structures are not the solution, they can be part of the problem? Will he give an assurance that he and his ministers will not shirk from taking the toughest action when it is required?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether its policies reflect the view that hard-working families are the cornerstone of a successful economy. (S2O-6304)

Does the minister agree that to hammer with a local income tax hard-working families, who already pay their fair share, is unfair and poses risks to the economy, of which they are the backbone? Does he agree that excluding one major source of wealth—property—from taxation would unbalance the tax system and create nothing but a big pay-day for tax lawyers?

I welcome the minister's recruitment plans and her action to recruit professionals complementary to dentistry, but will she acknowledge the point that I made earlier, which is that hygienists and dental nurses are leaving the dental service in great numbers every year? Has  the Health Department examined the reasons for that in any detail? If it has not, should it not carry out a study to find out why those people are leaving and consolidate the position before we start recruiting?

I am sorry to disappoint Alex Fergusson, but given the recent debate, the minister's statement and today's subsequent debate, it is hard to generate any heat at all on the issue, which has been well discussed over the past few weeks. As a member of the Health Committee, I welcome the interesting and well-researched document that has allowed this morning's debate to take place. One interesting factor that should inform us in today's holistic debate is that it is not necessarily true that if we provide more we will get a better result. Where there is a greater number of dentists and where there are increased opportunities for access, the result is poorer rates of dental health. The report helpfully points out several aspects of that phenomenon. Availability and dentist to population ratios are important, but the proportion of time that dentists spend with patients, disabled and wheelchair access to local dentists and the distance to the surgery are also important factors. I suggest that there is perhaps also a culture of fear, which means that people leave it until the last minute to go to the dentist, rather than seek to prevent problems from arising. The dentist's accommodation is also important, as are waiting times and the availability of dentists in the evenings and at weekends. Easy access to services is high on people's agenda, because there is an expectation that people will not get a dental appointment. Mike Rumbles, who is dashing back and forward in the chamber to have a conversation with another member while the debate continues, has said that although there is no doubt that the Executive's action plan, which seeks to reward dentists who are loyal to the NHS, is welcome—it certainly is welcome—rewarding dentists alone will not solve the problems that we face. As members have said, we must move the service away from repair to care. The education and training of the wider dental team, including professions complementary to dentistry—a term we had not heard until about six weeks ago—will help us to achieve that objective and will be important in increasing access, as the report's authors said. The debate has focused on the recruitment and retention of dentists and on dentists' concerns, but  there is a bit missing from the report—

Yes, I accept that the researchers' remit was to focus on those concerns. However, as members have said, we must build on the research and focus on the people whose skills complement those of dentists and who can and will make a difference to the quality of and access to NHS dental services. Dental hygienists can increase the productivity of dentists by 45 per cent, as has been said, and other professions can have an impact on productivity. I highlight the fact that there are 335 vacancies for dental nurses and hygienists, which represents a failure. I leave members with that thought. I hope that we can build on the research and address that serious issue. By raising the status of dental nurses and hygienists, we will make a real difference to the delivery of NHS dental services in Scotland.

Does the member approve of the actions of the dentist in Stranraer last weekend? Does she approve of the ultimatum that he gave to loyal patients, who had to queue in the rain to get back on a reduced list? Does the member approve of his actions? Yes or no?

As members have said, the motion is not entirely without merit. In fact, in places, it approaches a measured attempt at a contribution to what is an important debate. That image is only slightly tarnished by the fact that the SNP chose to publish the motion via the press rather than the Business Bulletin . If, as the motion alleges, the existing legislation is fragmented and unclear, a proper consolidation and clarification exercise must be undertaken. Whether the law needs to be revisited and, if so, how it should be improved are important topics that merit examination. The need for the effective control of firearms is plain. To look ahead to the next debate, it could be argued that, given the global death toll from firearms, they are the real weapon of mass destruction in the world. The issue is too serious to be used as a political football. I find it slightly distasteful that the SNP has chosen the subject as an excuse for its latest synthetic constitutional crisis. I will not say too much about that, because the subject is not fit for party-political knockabout. I merely invite the SNP to reflect on whether citing recent tragedies and implying that one constitutional arrangement rather than another could prevent them might be seen as crass. The nationalists have not made a case for the claim in the motion that we have a "distinct ... gun problem in Scotland", or even that we have a distinct problem in the UK. Given the SNP's fondness for league tables and referring to other countries, I am surprised that it did not come across the fact in the Home Office consultation that firearm homicide rates are worse in Lithuania, Slovakia, Estonia, Latvia, Portugal, Switzerland, Germany, Denmark and Sweden—the list goes on. Firearms regulation is not like other devolved issues such as health, in relation to which our geography and public health profile mean that we need specific Scottish solutions to particular Scottish problems. The issue is not like education or justice, in which Scotland has distinct systems—guns are just as deadly in Glasgow as they are in Gateshead. In any event, the important question is not who makes the laws, but their substantive content. Much has been said about tightening the  regulations on air-guns. The Executive is right to work with the Home Office to make them harder to acquire. I also welcome the First Minister's determination to close any loopholes and get air-guns out of circulation. In the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003, Westminster rightly increased the minimum age for the possession of an air weapon from 14 to 17 and introduced a new offence of having an unloaded air weapon in a public place without a reasonable excuse. Of course, we might conclude that we need to go further, but I am sure that any reforms will be something on which the Home Office and the Scottish Executive will work closely in the interests of nothing other than public safety.

As my presence here proves, we do not need to be down with the kids or an authority on the hit parade to realise that the music industry—[ Interruption. ] Members are laughing. I can claim that my 30-year-old daughter is a fan of Franz Ferdinand. Tonight, we are recognising the importance of the music industry to the economy. As Pauline McNeill and others have pointed out, we have an abundance of raw musical talent in Scotland. The question, of course, is how, in practical terms, we can harness and develop that talent. Members with an interest in the subject could do much worse than examine the great work that is being  done at Greenock's James Watt College of Further and Higher Education in my constituency. I hope that the minister will take the opportunity to visit and witness for herself at first hand the good work that is taking place there. Perhaps even the members of the cross-party group on contemporary music will visit some time in the future. In 1999, the college shared with me its vision of a state-of-the-art community music centre for Inverclyde. It wanted a centre of excellence based in the community that was attractive to and supportive of young people. It would offer music and audio technology teaching alongside business start-up support and other services that young musicians need, such as rehearsal areas, recording studios, a performance venue and a personal computer suite. True to its word, the college has made its vision a reality. The brand-new facility—the opening of which I attended last year—will make it much easier for young musicians to take the all-important first step into the professional music industry. As many members have mentioned, the financial outlay that is required by a new band to put on its first performance makes the experience too much of a gamble. The ready-made performance venue and the gaining of some basic business skills will undoubtedly make that leap a great deal easier, releasing more of our young talent. Back in 1999, when the college's plans were first floated, I remember fearing and discussing with the college that the usual suspects would moan about layabouts with long hair and say, "It wasn't called a job in my day." Thankfully, the response to the investment has been far more positive. It is accepted that it is not a waste of money and is not following a fad, but rather makes perfect social and economic sense. Music is an important part of young people's lives and can act as a stabilising factor for young people who have turbulent personal or home lives. It also helps young people to develop essential life skills. How can someone reach performance standard without self-confidence? How can they stage a live event without communication or financial skills? I am delighted that Pauline McNeill gave us the opportunity to have this debate and I am delighted that James Watt College took such a bold step and that young people will have access to the college's wonderful resource. As a near neighbour of the college, I am also delighted that the studios are well sound-proofed and that I can live in peace.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to use technology to cut waiting times, improve efficiency and increase access to services in the NHS. (S2O-5585)

When I visited Aberdeen's Robert Gordon University during the February recess, top researchers there showed me an array of innovations that could revolutionise the running of the national health service. If the technology to manage bed allocations better, to streamline administration of drugs and to do much more already exists, how can we make it easier and faster to get those developments out of the labs and into the wards?

I am sorry; I must have pressed my button by mistake.

As a compassionate unionist, I feel sorry for the SNP today. It reminds me of an aging rock band. Its last release, the experimental "Fiscal Freedom" EP was too subtle for its old fans and too thin to win over any new ones so, in an attempt to get back in touch, it is belting out the fans' favourites from the 1970s as loud as it can, hence today's rerelease of the old favourite, "Oil and Independence". I will turn to the specifics of the SNP's motion in a minute, but I would first like to make a couple of brief but important points about the economy of my constituency. There is no doubt that the scars of the industrial vandalism that took place in the late 1970s and 1980s run deep. Although the issue was scorned this morning—"It was their fault," and "It wasn't our fault"—and an attempt was made to laugh it all off, real damage was done in those years and we are living with that now. We have come a long way since then. Unemployment now is nothing like it was under the Tories, when it was over 20 per cent in my constituency. New employers have moved into the area and sections of our waterfront—a real asset in the Clyde area—have been regenerated. However, some of the legacy of those years remains. Our economic base is still too narrow, we are still too reliant on a small number of large employers in electronics and manufacturing industry and we have to deal with the problem that occurs every winter when companies lay off workers during the annual market downturn. We also face a challenge of global competition but, although we will never compete with sweatshop economies on cost—and nor should we—today's worldwide marketplace offers opportunities such as those that the Deputy First Minister and Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning discussed with the Chinese company Lenovo, which is due to come into my constituency in the spring. The only way in which we will be able to deliver sustained economic regeneration is by making Inverclyde the home of high-skill, high-value and secure jobs. The only way in which we can do that is to ensure that our workforce has today's skills and the ability to update those skills.

No. The SNP is not interested in such mundane practices of economic regeneration. It is more concerned with playing another round of "The National Lottery Jet Set" and scouring the globe for a country that fits the case that it is trying to make that day. Today, we have won a trip to  Norway, a land of milk and honey where standards of living are among the highest in the world, everyone has a widescreen TV with Sky Sports and fresh-faced children spend their days reading books under trees, although life expectancy in Norway is actually the same as it is for UK males.

Sit down. What is the secret of this Norwegian nirvana? "Easy," says the SNP, "it's independence." Apparently, it has nothing to do with the fact that, as Mr Gallie mentioned, Norway is not in the European Union. Presumably, it also has nothing to do with the fact that anyone who is paid more than £26,000 a year—about two thirds of the Norwegian workforce—has a marginal income tax rate of more than 49 per cent or that there is 12 per cent VAT on food and 24 per cent VAT on almost everything else, or that taxes on cars and petrol are sky high. A terrifying fact is that the tax on beer in Norway is the second highest in the world, which makes the price of a pint double what it is in Britain. The web is a wonderful tool. I just plug in the word "Norway" and all these facts come out.

I cannot say no to Stewart Stevenson.

I have that information somewhere in the papers before me. I will provide Mr Stevenson with the answer at the end of the debate. The SNP blithely asserts the line—without offering proof—that Norway's secret is oil and independence. In fact, the reports that I have read about Norway suggest that the high level of social provision in Norway is due to high taxation. Funnily enough, none of the reports mentioned that it is because Norway is independent. We have been here before. The SNP spins the globe, picks a few countries and says, "If only we were independent, we would automatically have all the advantages that those countries have without any of the drawbacks." We cannot have Scandinavian levels of social provision with American levels of taxes, yet here we are again on this groundhog day. The parties on this side of the chamber are forced to deal with real politics, which is about making choices and striking balances.  Sadly, the SNP does not do real politics; it finds it hard enough to do "Rockin' All Over the World".

As she campaigned hard and successfully for the Scottish Parliament to become the first Parliament in Europe to offer a crèche facility, Elaine Smith will be pleased to learn that the crèche has had more than 200 bookings since opening. Every booking means that someone—or a group—who might otherwise have been unable to access the Parliament could do so.

The facility is available for breastfeeding mothers and has been used. After extensive discussion, we agreed when we established the crèche that we would monitor use in the first year, establish demand and put in place a flexible contract that allows us to make amendments that reflect our needs and those of crèche users. I give the assurance that that will be done. We have produced about 500,000 leaflets that highlight the facility, which are distributed across 5,000 venues in Scotland. However, more needs to be done to target mother and toddler groups, for example. We will also consider signage. The new print run will emphasise the fact that the facility is available for public use.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I wanted to point out that the duplicate card that I received is not working, but please go ahead with the vote.

I am confident that the minister is aware that investment in audiology services is necessary if we are to achieve our partnership agreement targets on the provision of digital hearing aids. However, does she agree that there are areas of identified need, such as Inverclyde royal hospital in Greenock, which deals with high numbers of people who suffer from industrial deafness? Will the minister investigate that matter with Argyll and Clyde NHS Board and agree to meet me to discuss the issue in the near future?

I am grateful for the opportunity to make a short speech in this debate. That said, I am slightly unnerved by all the agreement in the chamber, as it does not exactly suit my debating style. To the outside observer—and, at times, to humble back benchers—politics can be a slow business. The wheels of government seem to take an age to grind. However, in the Scottish Parliament at least, if people make their case repeatedly and stick to it, those wheels certainly will grind. The way in which the criminal justice system treats victims and witnesses—if that is the way to describe what happens—is a prime example. It is clear from other members' speeches that I am not the only MSP to represent constituents who, after falling victim to an offence, felt excluded and humiliated by the system. Victims or their families were effectively told that matters such as the Parole Board system were nothing to do with them  and, after conviction, their involvement came to an end. That was the case for decades. Indeed, I recall two of my constituents telling me of almost identical experiences, despite the fact that the incidents in question occurred almost 20 years apart. If the Scottish Parliament is good at one thing, it is the reform of specific aspects of the legal system. Indeed, we have started to take a number of big steps in that respect, such as the passing of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003. Provisions such as victim statements, new rights to information about an assailant's proposed release and the right to make representations to the Parole Board about any release have all put a few pounds on the victims' side of the justice scales. Now that the wheels have been set in motion, they show no signs of slowing down, as the publication of the criminal justice plan at the beginning of last month shows. It is hard to disagree with the plan's aim of restoring public confidence in the criminal justice system, but the key to any such approach must be a reduction in reoffending rates. After all, what is the point of working harder to catch and convict criminals if, at the end of their sentence, they are simply allowed back on to the streets to commit more crime? The international comparisons are not favourable. In America, 47 per cent of prisoners reoffend within two years of their release. In Norway, the figure is 43 per cent and in Germany it is 36 per cent. In Scotland, to our shame, 67 per cent of prisoners—six out of ten—reoffend within two years of their release, in a cycle that not only wastes valuable time and money but creates a whole new set of victims each time round. It is right that a top priority for the plan is to break that cycle and put a spanner in the revolving doors of our prisons and courts. I restate my view that the Parole Board must be made more accountable. It is only fair that we should have the right to challenge Parole Board decisions and be given reasons for prisoners' release on licence. I look forward to the Executive's continuing work in the area. We are all members of the public and as such we are not disinterested bystanders. The justice process exists to serve us and we must be at its heart.

Christmas has indeed come early—to hear Fergus Ewing and the Scottish National Party welcome a ministerial statement is truly historic—but it is a pity that the Christmas spirit has not reached the party of Scrooge. When the minister considers concessionary travel for young people, will he acknowledge the  fact that, in poorer communities, many young people who are in education face significant barriers to accessing our historical sites, our cities, our cultural centres and even the Parliament?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will introduce community reparation orders. (S2O-4634)

I thank the minister for answering the question as it appears in today's "Business Bulletin" and not as it was originally published. Together with my constituents, I am delighted that reparation orders are to be piloted in Greenock. Will the minister confirm what age of offenders will be forced to make good the damage that they do to their communities and what type of crimes will be covered?

rose—

As medicine and health technology continually advance, so must health policy. Whereas our approach to delivering 21 st century health care is cutting edge, the nationalists and  others are still stuck applying the leeches. I wonder what great Scots such as Sir Alexander Fleming would make of the SNP's timorous approach or its opposition to change and innovation. Would he have discovered penicillin if he had asked, "Do we really need antibiotics? Can't we just have more leeches?"

I have got only seven minutes. Please hurry.

I am sorry, but Shona Robison has wasted her time and has taken too much of mine. I cannot afford to give her any further answer. The Minister for Health and Community Care has pointed out the fact that progress has been made. It has had an impact on my constituency, which has a poor public health record. Like many other members, I have friends, relatives and constituents who are alive and well today because of the initiatives that have been taken. We should be celebrating that work, not condemning it. However, to the minister's credit he accepts—as I do—the fact that we cannot stand still. His willingness to consider innovative ways forward is to be welcomed. Who is against that? A prime example of what needs to be done is the better use of technology, which has not been focused on yet in the debate. When I go into hospitals, I see staff pushing shopping trolleys full of medical records around the corridors. Quite apart from the issue of what those staff could be doing instead, is it any wonder that medical records get lost? It is simply not acceptable that constituents who visit a consultant, having worried about that visit for weeks, turn up only to find that their records are no longer there but have been lost. Information technology is not just about better administration; it can give Scottish patients access to the expertise of the best doctors.

Let me make this point. IT can give patients access to the best doctors not just in the west of Scotland, in Scotland or in the UK, but in the world. That is our ambition; that is where we should be going.

I have limited time and Shona Robison took too much of it. Stewart Stevenson should blame his colleague. The raft of tough new targets on waiting times is to be welcomed, but those targets will be met only if we couple the extra investment with real reform. Having listened to the minister, I believe that he is determined to drive through that reform. I am pleased to hear of the emphasis on improving access to health care through new capacity and better use of existing capacity. For those who have been sad enough to listen, I have been saying for long enough that access to health services is as important as the services themselves. A service that people cannot access is no service at all. So, it is good news for patients that all available space at the Golden Jubilee national hospital is to be brought into clinical use. It is good news for patients that the Executive will seriously consider Professor David Kerr's report on the national framework on service change to see what further opportunities it brings. It is good news for patients that we will provide mobile diagnostic units in our communities. That is especially good news for constituents in the more deprived parts of my community. Within the local authority boundary, in Kilmacolm, the average male life expectancy is 80. A few minutes by car into the east end of Greenock, the figure is 65. Early diagnosis, which those mobile units will deliver, could add years and quality to people's lives. Let me nail some of the nonsense about this being all about saving money. As the minister reminded us, by 2007-08, the health budget will have risen to £10 billion—a 110 per cent rise since 1999. This programme of reform is a marked contrast to the SNP's repeat prescriptions. They dismiss the innovations out of hand. "Let them wait", is the SNP's only response. The minister says that there will be specialised care treatment centres to concentrate on a few key operations that will dramatically improve patients' quality of life; that cannot come soon enough for my constituents. The SNP says, "We don't care. Let them wait." The minister says that there will be penalty clauses in the contracts for services to prevent the poaching of NHS staff. The SNP is not interested; it says, "Let them wait." The minister is designing reforms to guarantee that they will add to NHS capacity. The SNP does not care; it says, "Let them wait." The SNP is used to waiting, of course. It has been waiting for independence for a long time now, but we will not wait with it. It will never achieve independence because it is out of touch.  The SNP does not care about patients having to wait; it is more worried about holding on to an old and outdated ideology. Patients—my constituents—do not care about that ideology or about what lies behind the procurement method for their operations; they just want them to be done. The principles of providing free health care to those who need it must include providing that care when they need it. That is what the minister's measures will do, if we have the courage to drive them through. It might be too much to ask a party whose health spokesman is Shona Robison, but I ask the SNP to put to one side the sniping, moaning and groaning and to show a bit of compassion. I ask the SNP to move on and put the patient first.

Who knows why the Scottish Socialist Party called this debate today? Some would say that Iraq is the only issue on which members of the SSP group still agree. Some would say that they are guilty of using the current situation in Iraq to further their own political ends. Most would say that the motion before us presents a simplistic view of the reality of the situation in Iraq today. The SSP members are fully aware of the realities of the devolution settlement, as voted for by the Scottish people. That settlement recognises and respects the fact that defence and foreign affairs are policy areas reserved to the Westminster Parliament. In fact, I think that the Scottish Parliament has now debated Iraq more than the Westminster Parliament has done. In Westminster, Scotland's voice is rightly represented by our 72 MPs, none of whom, of course, is a member of the SSP. The idea that we could simply bring all troops home for Christmas is not only simplistic but dangerous. To pull our troops out now would be to abandon the Iraqis to their fate at the hands of extremists and terrorists groups who are working to undermine democracy and freedom in Iraq.

No, thank you. We have heard enough from Frances Curran, and we are likely to hear more. Whether we agree with the reasons for our actions in Iraq or not, we must recognise the realities of the current situation. Iraq is being run by the Iraqi people, preparations are being made for elections in just over a month and the British Army, as part of a multinational force, is working to build the stability that is needed to allow those elections to run smoothly. I do not intend to rehash the old arguments about the pros and cons of the Iraqi war. I am here today to move the Labour party's amendment.

No, thank you. I am here to move an amendment that is based on our objectives of peace in the middle east, a settlement in Palestine and security for Israel. Our key obligation in this Parliament is to support the political process in Iraq, as the Egyptians, the Arab  League, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, the European Union and the United Nations are now doing. First, let us be clear about the realities of the situation in Iraq. On 28 June this year, responsibility for governing Iraq was handed to the Iraqi interim Government. That interim Government will continue until the formation of the transitional Government after the January elections. Prior to 28 June, the UN Security Council unanimously passed resolution 1546. We are part of the multinational force in Iraq that is authorised by that resolution, which specifies that the UN is to assist the people of Iraq to form their institutions, in particular to convene the national conference; to help with elections; and to promote national dialogue and consensus building on the constitution. As the presence on the ground increases, our troops take on traditional UN roles, including humanitarian co-ordination and the protection of human rights. We are there with the agreement of the UN to support the Iraqi people in their efforts to establish a democratic Government, to enhance security, to provide humanitarian assistance and to facilitate economic reconstruction. If the SSP had the Iraqi people's interests at heart, it would support us in our efforts. Indeed, the Parliament should be clear in its support for all those efforts. Iraqis clearly want elections and that is borne out in all Iraqi opinion polls.

No. Recent polls indicate that a large majority of Iraqis intend to vote. Elections will provide the opportunity for Iraqis to determine their own political future and we will extend to them all the help that we can.

No. I am trying to get through this. There is much more work to be done, but the interim Iraqi Government is committed to holding elections in January. The UN in Baghdad is confident that progress is on schedule and that elections are still on course for January. Security for the elections is vital. We should make no mistake: forces are at work in Iraq that seek to undermine the freedoms that the Iraqi people have waited so long to enjoy. I acknowledge that there are insurgents in Iraq, but  they are not fighting a foreign army; they are fighting democracy. The Iraqi Prime Minister, Dr Iyad Allawi, has tried to persuade terrorists to lay down their weapons and to agree to participate in elections, but they have refused to do so. Why? They know that, given a chance, Iraqis will reject their form of leadership in favour of real freedom and democracy.

Go on.

Absolutely. We want to give such an opportunity to the Iraqi people, to give Iraq back to them. The SSP should take note of the facts. The interim Iraqi Government is co-ordinating humanitarian and reconstruction work in Fallujah and it reports that there is no humanitarian crisis so far in Fallujah or the surrounding area. The International Red Cross, the Red Crescent Movement and UN agencies agree with that assessment. The UK Department for International Development's strategy in Iraq is set out in its interim country assistance plan. Its key priorities are to promote rapid, sustainable economic growth, to encourage effective and accountable governance, and to promote social and political cohesion and stability. Who could disagree with that strategy? To that end, the Department for International Development has committed more than £333 million for humanitarian aid and reconstruction assistance, of which it has distributed £245 million so far. Two hundred and forty hospitals and 1,200 primary health centres are functioning in Iraq. Routine immunisation restarted in 2003 and national polio and measles vaccination programmes are now complete. There are more than 6 million pupils and 300,000 teachers in more than 20,000 schools, and 350,000 students and 50,000 employees in higher education. There has been major school refurbishment and there are 70 million new textbooks. Power regeneration is taking place and major repairs are under way to build a substantial power grid. The list goes on and on. Of course, we recognise that people—our people and our service personnel—have paid the ultimate price for that progress. We all welcome and look forward to the homecoming of our boys—our troops—and we are proud of the role that they have played in returning Iraq to its people. I move amendment S2M-2132.6, to leave out  from first "notes" to end and insert: "believes that there should be a peaceful and democratic Iraq and supports all those who are working for world peace and the extension of democracy; recognises the importance of international support for the people of Iraq in their efforts to achieve stability and democracy; reaffirms its support for a route map to peace in the Middle East which delivers a free and viable Palestinian state and security for Israel; affirms the importance of the principles of the rule of law, including respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, and of democracy, including free and fair elections; believes that the planned withdrawal of British forces should only occur at the first practicable opportunity after the establishment of a democratic government in Iraq; acknowledges that the United Nations should play the leading role in assisting the Iraqi people, in particular in the formation of institutions for representative government; continues to express its gratitude to UK service personnel and their families including those from Scotland, and offers its sincere sympathy to the families of those members of the armed forces who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the service of their country."

Given the contributions in the debate today and the representations from the Scottish Trades Union Congress, does the minister not consider that it would be worth while to make one last effort in the next six weeks to further examine the definitive position and whether we need to put the service out to tender?

As a representative in the Parliament with three ferry terminals in my constituency—there are CalMac terminals at Wemyss Bay and Gourock and a Western Ferries terminal at McInroy's point—and with the CalMac headquarters at Gourock, I have followed the highs and lows of the debate since late 1999. During the process, we have sought common cause with island communities and with our neighbours across the river in Argyll—albeit for different reasons. We had a common concern about the restrictions that were in place, which damaged the viability of the Gourock to Dunoon run. We see some solution to that in the proposals. However, concerns on our side of the water were about the impact that the withdrawal or reduction of the Gourock to Dunoon service would have on the transport interchange proposals and subsequent development of the plans at Gourock. We were also concerned about the future of the CalMac headquarters in Gourock, which provides highly valued jobs. Another concern was the loss of the vehicle service at Gourock and the displacement of traffic on to the narrow roads through Gourock to the Western Ferries terminal. We welcome the Executive's commitment to the Gourock to Dunoon service, which we anticipate will address some of the concerns in my constituency. I also welcome the announcement that CalMac will order a further two new vessels. I am sure that the Deputy Presiding Officer, Trish Ferguson, who has a shipyard in her constituency, will be delighted if we do all that we can to ensure that those contracts are awarded to Scottish shipyards and preferably, from her point of view, to Ferguson's shipyard in Port Glasgow. I am pleased to hear that the minister appreciates that employees in my constituency and others are naturally concerned about the impact that the proposals will have on their future employment and on their terms and conditions. When he sums up, will he reassure us that employees will not pay a price in reduced terms and conditions and that, in discussion with tenderers, he will ensure that TUPE applies? In his discussions with CalMac, will he seek to clarify and take into account the impact of offshoring on employees if he decides to go ahead with the proposals? In his discussions with tenderers, will he ensure that pension entitlements that are not covered by TUPE will be addressed to the benefit of any transferring employees?

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Executive will ensure that the Parole Board for Scotland upholds the rights of victims and their families. (S2F-1252)

I am sure that the First Minister agrees that it is unacceptable for victims to be afraid to go about their daily business for fear of meeting their newly freed assailant. New rights and information will be welcome. However, does the First Minister agree that we need to go further and bring to an end the attitude of authorities towards victims and their families in my  constituency and elsewhere in Scotland that it is none of their business?

When I first saw the motion on lung cancer awareness month, I wondered why on earth we needed to dedicate a month to raising awareness of the most common cancer in the world. However, as Irene Oldfather's motion says, early diagnosis is important and saves lives. If the disease is detected early, victims are 40 times more likely to survive. For that reason, I welcome  the opportunity that Irene Oldfather has given us to have the debate. What are the barriers to achieving the goal? An article in the BMJ in June reported on research by Chapple, Ziebland and McPherson that gives voice to lung cancer victims. The research study finds that lung cancer patients feel stigmatised—especially those who have stopped smoking, who believe that they were affected by industrial pollutants in their working lives or who have never smoked. Whether or not they smoked, they felt particularly stigmatised because the disease is strongly associated with smoking. It was found that many patients felt unjustly blamed for their illness. Some believed that the medical profession failed to take proper notice of their smoker's cough and put off diagnosis. A patient suggested that the Government allocates less money to screening for and research into lung cancer because of the link with smoking. Many spoke of feelings of guilt and shame. That led some patients to conceal their illness, which sometimes had adverse financial consequences or made it hard for them to gain support from other people. If we are serious about raising awareness of lung cancer with the campaign, we need to understand why people do not report early and what part politicians and figures in the public health debate have played in the reluctance to report. The scary statistics that are trotted out in hard-hitting advertisements and debates such as today's may have unintended consequences. The study to which I referred found that television advertisements that aim—rightly—to put young people off tobacco, but which also portray a dreadful death, may exacerbate fear and anxiety. One patient said that the ads upset her greatly because they made her fear a dreadful death by drowning. They affected her deeply and increased her fear and anxiety. All that makes patients worried that diagnosis, access to care and research into lung cancer might be adversely affected by the stigma that is attached to the disease. We must raise awareness about lung cancer, but about all aspects. Tackling lung cancer involves more than just reaffirming the evils of tobacco. In the campaign month, we must recognise the shame and blame that lung cancer patients experience and adjust our attitudes accordingly.

Does the First Minister agree that, if we are to make a success of the fresh talent initiative, we must understand what attracts people to live and work in Scotland and what discourages them from doing so? What steps is the Executive taking to listen to the valuable insights that are being voiced on that subject by, for example, the 800 foreign nationals who are vital to the success of the IBM international call centre in Greenock?

Does the First Minister agree that it would be counterproductive to have fewer people smoking in public, surrounded by adults who choose to be there, but more people smoking in their living rooms, surrounded by their kids? I am pleased that resources and support will be targeted at the deprived communities that suffer greatly from the incidence of smoking. How much money will be used to reduce smoking overall, rather than just to switch the situation round?

It has been a good week for me. Having heard the news of the arrival of my third grandchild—mother and child are doing well—the whips gave me time off yesterday to visit wee Charlie and his mother in the maternity unit at the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley. I probably should have kept quiet on the name of the hospital. Having mentioned it, I can only say that—despite our campaigning—it was our only alternative. I thought that life could not be sweeter, but the price for my time off was to attend and participate in today's debate. At the time of making the arrangement, I though that I had got myself a bargain. Even after a 6 am alarm call, a walk to the station in the rain and a two-and-a-half hour journey to get to the Parliament, the smile was still on my face. But the reality of the debate this morning made me realise that all good things have  to come to an end. A price had to be paid and the whips have got their pound of flesh. We had to endure a lecture from our former colleague Alex Neil, in which he invoked the spirit of Peggy Herbison. Alex Neil spoke about her aversion to means testing, but Peggy Herbison also despised Labour party traitors—the people who defected when the going got tough. She was also convinced that only the Labour party could bring the lasting changes that would benefit the poorest citizens in our country. As someone who was once described as "the miner's wee sister", Peggy Herbison would have been proud of the Labour party's delivery of £1.2 billion in compensation to retired miners.

Let me get started. The point was well made by Karen Whitefield and others that yet again the SNP has forced us to debate reserved issues. [ Interruption. ] We love to hear the SNP groan. The SNP could have decided to debate their ideas on the national health service, business or transport. Admittedly, they would have been short debates, but at least Executive ministers would have been put on the spot and forced to argue their portfolio policy areas. What a wasted opportunity today's debate is. My plea to Nicola Sturgeon is for her to ask Mr Salmond if she could possibly use some of her party's time to debate something of her choosing—something relevant to the Scottish Parliament. It was always going to be a challenge to make a silk purse of a debate out of Nicola Sturgeon's sow's ear of a motion. I am used to hearing SNP members contradict each other. I am even used to hearing them contradict themselves from one day to the next. But for an SNP member to contradict herself in the space of a single sentence is truly an achievement. I congratulate Nicola Sturgeon on raising her game to such previously unscaled heights. The SNP motion says: "Scotland must face up to ... tackling current pensioner poverty and ensuring decent living standards for future generations of pensioners" by—wait for it— "removing the pensions means test". The motion asks us to tackle pensioner poverty by stopping the targeting of money to the poorest pensioners. On what planet could that make sense? Even by nationalist standards, the proposal does not stand up. It should never be forgotten that 80 per cent of the £2 billion that we are making available to pensioners, goes to poor pensioners. The SNP  attitude to the issue seems to be that all pensioners are the same.

I will ensure that a note on that point goes to the Greenock Telegraph,  given its long tradition of liberal thinking. As I said, the SNP's attitude to the issue does not acknowledge that all pensioners are not the same. We all accept that some pensioners live on the breadline, but we also have to accept that other pensioners live on the cruiseline. What is the point of taking money away from pensioners who are struggling on the margins only to give it to pensioners who are sunning themselves in Marbella? As colleagues have pointed out, snatching pension credit from our poorest pensioners would leave them £30 a week worse off. How can the SNP answer that question, even if we spend the resources that are freed from basic state pensions?

I give way to Jeremy Purvis.

I will come back to that point.

Targeting does work. Liars can figure and figures can lie. When asked in Parliament whether the effect of the Liberal Democrat policy would be that younger, poorer pensioners would not get the money they need, Steve Webb, their spokesman on pensions,  replied, "I accept that." No argument. They accept that. I hate to dismay the doom merchants in the chamber this morning, but the Labour Government at Westminster is well on the way to achieving our target of 3.2 million households receiving the pension credit by 2008. [ Interruption. ] I took the member's intervention. Now he is at it. He is quite entitled to heckle if I do not let him in, but I have given—

Is the SNP really calling for an end to tax relief on pension contributions? How much more would the SNP need to put in its pension schemes to defuse the pensions time bomb? Will that not hammer hard-working families?

What about the damage to inward investment, attracting fresh talent and bridging the skills gap? I will cut to the chase, because I have got thousands—

Robert Brown has just mentioned the earnings link. David Willetts, the Tory spokesman, said: "I know that many campaigning pensioners would like to see the earnings link restored. It is not affordable, and would not be targeted." What does Robert Brown say to that?

Stewart Stevenson claims that we cannot know enough about drugs. However, does he agree that some of the information that is available contains a great deal of harm? For example, on one top search engine, I found a cannabis cookbook, discovered how to grow cannabis or make LSD in my kitchen and was offered the complete guide to manufacturing ecstasy. I had only to push a button. Is it not about time that we worked with our UK colleagues to ensure that these sites are not accessible and do not put our young people in harm?

Will the member take an intervention?

indicated disagreement.

I will need to watch—my name has been taken in vain so often this morning that it is giving me a complex. What have we got in the Tories' motion? It says that "the Parliament is opposed to the centralisation of health services". So far, so good. I am glad that they agree with me. The motion says that communities across the country are up in arms over hospital reorganisation plans. Again, well spotted—although I wonder how Tories would know. The motion says there is a centralisation agenda in the national health service. I know—I have been trying to tell them that for years. The Tories recognise the problem—albeit belatedly—but what do they say we should do about it? How do we resolve this emotive, important and complex problem? Sack the minister? Is that it? If the minister goes up in a puff of smoke tomorrow, will the artificial health board boundaries disappear? Will the royal colleges throw away the rule book? Will the European working time directive cease to exist? Will neighbouring health boards leap into each other's arms and start co-operating? I think not. The Tories know it, and I know it. I do not believe for a minute that the Tories have  suddenly converted to the hard-left creed that everything is politics. Somehow, I do not think that the motion was forged by Comrades McLetchie and Davidson at the revolutionary command council of the Tory party. Rather, I suspect that the motion represents more than a spot of opportunism—cynically playing games with the most serious of issues. The Tories do not share the genuine concerns of our communities. To them, those concerns are just another political opportunity. What an insult to those communities and to the people in the chamber who have put aside their political differences over a long period, who have shared platforms and who have made common cause against centralisation and its impact on communities.

Sorry, Bruce—I have limited time. In Inverclyde, people of all political persuasions have come together—except the Tories.

No, I will not. Tory members already have too much time for my liking. There have been a couple of questions from David McLetchie at First Minister's question time and there have been three Tory debates in five years on the issue. That does not give the Tories any credibility at all. However, every cloud has a silver lining and, as others have said, at least we are debating some of the real issues here this morning.

Again as others have said, it is not only in the Parliament that we need a serious debate. We need a serious national debate, one that involves service users and taxpayers and not just bureaucrats and clinicians. The public, the professionals and the politicians are demanding that debate. It must be a national debate because we need to reach consensus on the issue. The voices of our communities must be heard. People must not be dismissed as being too emotional or too thick to understand the issues. They, and we, must be involved in a genuine debate about what care can be delivered locally. There must be access to emergency services and elective services. Health inequalities must be considered, as must specialised care and care for the elderly and our children. None of those issues was raised by the Tories this morning; the Tories seek to diminish serious issues. I believe that we have all the ingredients for a truly national debate. The minister has created,  beyond any reasonable doubt, a stable environment that will allow David Kerr and his advisory group to inform that debate. The Parliament's Health Committee is led by Roseanna Cunningham, who will be a key person in the debate in the coming months and years. I do not flatter to deceive; I seriously believe that she can play an important role, along with the members of the Health Committee, in developing the debate and the committee's inquiry into work force planning. The campaign of The Herald has been very useful in informing the debate and that campaign has to be built on. We should ask The Herald how it could sponsor debates throughout Scotland. Can we do more? Can the BBC—the public broadcaster—be used to take the debate to the country? Can we have health-in-the-chamber sessions similar to the business-in-the-chamber sessions? We should be able to give this chamber over not just to politicians but to the campaigners and the professionals. At the moment, the debate is taking place outside the chamber rather than inside it. I believe that we have the opportunity to have a real debate so that the Parliament can, on behalf of our constituents, influence the future of health services in Scotland in the next 30 years. I hate the phrase, but it is time to "raise our game". We must have the debate and influence the whole process.

I welcome the minister's emphasis on clinical safety. On the centralisation of consultant-led maternity services in the Argyll and Clyde NHS Board area, will the minister, in his discussions with the board, ask its members whether the number of women from Inverclyde giving birth to still-born babies is increasing or decreasing and whether the number of Inverclyde women giving birth by Caesarean section is increasing or decreasing?

I am pleased that the minister agrees that as far as public consultation is concerned the issue is not just how much it costs but how to ensure that those who undertake it actually listen. Does the minister support the comments of Professor David Kerr, the chair of the advisory group on service change in NHS Scotland, who was reported in The Herald today as saying that he "would contemplate changes at Inverclyde Royal Hospital ... which would keep it open in a way that would satisfy public demand"?

Given some of the contributions that we have heard from the Scottish Socialist Party and others, it is no wonder that some people think that a debate in the Scottish Parliament about business is akin to a debate in the British National Party about equal opportunities. It is surprising that when we debate business and enterprise, there are still members to whom we need to make the case for wealth creation, which would be regarded anywhere else as a statement of the obvious. A strong economy creates jobs; having a job gives people dignity; and having money improves people's quality of life. However, that should not be allowed to overshadow the fact that, for the second week running, the Scottish Parliament is debating real issues for Scotland. Long may that continue. In the partnership agreement, the Executive makes the commitment to "reduce the gap in unemployment rates between the worst 10% of areas and the Scottish average by 2006", and to "regenerate those communities where there are persistently high levels of unemployment."  That is of particular interest to me, because I represent Greenock and Inverclyde. In his statement to the Parliament last week, the First Minister made clear his commitment to reach out to people who are still unemployed and to give them the tools that they need to take up the jobs that are there. The First Minister continued: "To do that, we must help to create the conditions in which our companies can grow."— [ Official Report , 7 September 2004; c 9880.]  It has been pointed out that we must also rise to the productivity challenge. That seems to make sense, but how should we do that? As we have said before, in similar debates, the regeneration game is a package deal. In communities like Greenock and Inverclyde, where the scars that were left by the industrial vandalism of the 1970s and 1980s are compounded by a downturn in electronics, we need a larger number and a greater variety of employers and jobs. The economy cannot be rebuilt on the foundation of low-pay, low-skilled, temporary jobs, so the quality of jobs is as important as the number. It is about more than that, of course. If we are to attract talent, families and businesses, we need to make places such as Greenock and Inverclyde places of choice, where the general quality of life is high. We need to provide affordable, quality housing in areas in which people want to live. Parents need to know that their children will be well educated in a warm, comfortable classroom that is fit for teaching in the 21 st century. The environment must be improved and brownfield sites must be redeveloped. Crime—and perceptions and fears of crime—must not be allowed to drive people out of Inverclyde and to deter newcomers. Progress has been made on some of those issues locally and some of the developments on reclaimed waterfront land will be nothing short of spectacular, but more needs to be done. I welcome some of the recent plans—

Okay, I take the point. I am glad that the Executive acknowledges the importance of the issue and recognises—even though some people choose to look away—that enterprise and a business-friendly environment are essential if we are to have healthy, prosperous communities in a successful Scotland. The Executive also recognises that, just as every public service depends on a successful economy, a strong economy depends on just about every public service. We, too, need to recognise that everything that we do in the Parliament can contribute to the creation of that successful Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member agree that we need an honest debate on the challenges that we face? She mentioned The Herald , but does she agree with that newspaper that her new leader, Mr Salmond, is avoiding the real issue by refusing "to give unmitigated support for the maintenance of local hospital services"?

I endorse and welcome the minister's response about the valuable job that paramedics do. I am also pleased to hear that the Scottish Executive keeps the Ambulance Service under review and monitors it regularly. What research has been commissioned into the impact on the Ambulance Service operating in Argyll and Clyde of transferring large numbers of patients to Paisley Royal Alexandra hospital?

Are we up and running? I will take it from the top. The only regret is that—this will be confirmed or not tomorrow morning—the story tomorrow will not be about the number of suicides in Scotland but be about the fact that the microphones broke down. To those who continually tell us to raise the game, maybe we can send the message that the real debate tonight is about international suicide prevention week. I thank all those members who have signed the motion and who have made time to attend the first ever members' business debate in the new chamber. When one looks seriously at the issue of suicide, one's own worries suddenly seem a lot less important. When I spoke in the last members' business debate before we handed our temporary lodgings back to our theological landlords, I reflected that it was appropriate to ask, "Why are we here?" Today, in the first members' business debate in our new building, members might well ask the same question. Well, I will tell members why we are here. We are here because the biggest killer of young men in Scotland is neither a blade nor a car but their own hand. According to the Samaritans, although suicide rates in England and Wales fell over the 10 years up to 2002, they rose in Scotland. The latest figures show that people in Scotland are twice as likely to kill themselves as people in the rest of the UK are. Although I welcome the fact that the numbers are now falling, suicide is still the main cause of death for men aged 15 to 44. Indeed, according to the Registrar General for Scotland, almost three quarters of those who committed suicide last year were male. The reasons are many and varied; they are medical, cultural and social. They include mental health problems that are brought about or are made worse by drug abuse; the lack of a role for men in our society and the tendency to blame young working-class men for just about everything; unemployment or financial worries; a stressful living environment; the inability to come to terms with homosexuality or the fear of doing so; and a reluctance to seek help from a health service that is neither designed to meet, nor particularly sympathetic to, men's needs.  So what do we do about the situation? We cannot eliminate stress, money worries or setbacks from modern life. No matter how tough we are, the war on drugs will not be won overnight. Moreover, although we must carry on working to tackle stigma over mental health and to end prejudice about homosexuality, we cannot continue with the waste of young lives until that work is done. If we are going to end Scotland's suicide shame and take long-term action to address the root causes that can be addressed, we also need to better equip young men to deal with the difficulties that they will face. Given our reluctance to seek help, we need more people in our communities who are trained to spot the early signs and to step in to prevent suicide. That is why I believe that the Executive is to be commended for initiatives such as the choose life strategy, which is aimed at reducing suicides by 20 per cent over the next 10 years, and the introduction of applied suicide intervention skills training. I also welcome the fact that, through the choose life initiative, every local authority will by the end of the year have trained staff accredited with such intervention skills. I do not intend to detain members at length with the details of those schemes, because I am sure that the minister will ably highlight the Executive's work in his response. However, I would like to urge the Executive to push on with its efforts to meet and exceed its targets. In particular, as far as the Health Department is concerned, we should examine how we can change the NHS to ensure that it is more responsive to men's needs. Does the way in which we treat depression need to be revisited? Do we provide adequate health education in this area? We will need to answer those questions and others if we are to end the scandal of young men feeling that they have so little to live for and so little hope that their only way out is to take their own lives.

My microphone does not appear to have come on.

Are you suggesting that I do not need the microphone? I thank the members who have signed the motion and those who have made time to attend the first ever members' business debate in the new chamber. Before anyone else suggests it, I say that there is no connection between the subject matter of the debate and the entirely unrelated fact that it is my birthday. When we look seriously at the issue of suicide, our own worries suddenly seem much less important. When I spoke in the last members' business debate before we handed our temporary lodgings back to our theological landlords, I reflected that it was appropriate to ask, "Why are we here?" Today, in the first members' business debate in our new building, members might well ask the same question. I will tell the Parliament why we are here—

I welcome the opportunity that the motion affords us to debate the clinical strategy. Although the motion is about Argyll and Clyde as a whole, I will not surprise anybody here by focusing my remarks on Inverclyde royal hospital. In doing so, I declare an interest. Inverclyde royal hospital is my hospital. It is not just in my constituency; it is in my  community. It is where my mother went when she recently broke her hip and where my wife went when she broke her shoulder. Indeed, as a result of the maternity contingency plans, it is my grandchild who is likely to be born in Paisley and not in the Rankin unit this autumn. When the stress of fighting the continued plans from the health board to centralise the services finally gives me a heart attack, Inverclyde royal is where I want to go. In the last ever parliamentary debate in this chamber before we hand it back to our theological friends, I suppose that it is appropriate to ask, "Why are we here?" How did we arrive at a situation where, on one hand, the Government—or, to be more precise, the taxpayer—is putting more cash than ever into the national health service and, on the other, our services seem to be disappearing? The root of the problem, as I have long argued, is NHS work-force planning. I have spoken countless times in the chamber about the impact that that is having on services. I take some comfort from the fact that the British Medical Association and Sir John Temple now publicly acknowledge the importance of the issue. The Health Committee is set to question the health industry's key players as part of its major work-force planning inquiry. The issue is not just about money—I wish that it was, but if it was that simple, we would have solved it. If politicians are good at anything, it is giving more money to the national health service. If the problem of centralisation is the same throughout Scotland, the proposed solutions are not. Other areas are responding better by, for example, sharing services between hospitals. However, Argyll and Clyde NHS Board's plans are almost all one-way traffic. It seeks to cram most of those in need of emergency or in-patient services into a hospital that is already struggling to cope with its current numbers—Paisley Royal Alexandra hospital is full to bursting. We all agree that the strategy has weaknesses, but if we are to expose them, we need to muster support, knowledge and expertise. Our local newspaper, the Greenock Telegraph , has to be congratulated on leaving the health board in no doubt about the strength of local feeling. Such support is essential, but on its own it is not enough. We must also back up our passion with precision. In other words, we must engage the health bosses on their own terms and challenge their arguments and the assumptions on which they rely with cold, hard facts. In order to frame our arguments, I have been speaking to academics, clinicians, trade unions and the many others who deliver our health services locally.  Tomorrow, I will make the case for Inverclyde royal to Dr Andrew Walker, the top academic who is charged with independently evaluating the plan. Although I would not seek to pre-empt his expert analysis, I am convinced, after examining the strategy in some detail, that it is seriously flawed and that a better way forward can be found. A number of clinicians are ready to stand up and be counted. Leading Inverclyde general practitioner and chair of the local health care co-operative, Dr Mustafa Kapasi, and senior consultant surgeon and clinical director of surgery at the Inverclyde royal hospital, Mr Ian Morrice, have both assured me that they are prepared to challenge the plans and play their part in drawing up credible alternatives. I now hope that others will come on board, because there is a big job to do. The health board's proposals are the product of many officials working over many months—those are two luxuries that we will have to do without when we draft our alternatives. I therefore look forward to the Minister for Health and Community Care outlining how our efforts will be supported in terms of time, resources and expertise. I would also welcome an undertaking that the minister will ensure that equal weight is given to any alternative plan and to the health board plan. Finally, we need a guarantee that the consultation process will be worthy of the name. I agree that the process is a complex one, but my bottom line is that closure is not an option. There shall be an Inverclyde royal hospital.

As the First Minister is aware, Argyll and Clyde NHS Board is reverting to type and is once again seeking to deal with the undoubted difficulties that face the national health service throughout the country by centralising everything in sight. When he next meets the Prime Minister, will the First Minister take time to discuss how the Westminster Government is meeting those challenges and what can be done to find a better way forward than the deeply unpopular and questionable plans that are currently being presented in places such as Argyll and Clyde?

That is all very interesting and is all clearly disputed by other evidence. We have had two or three minutes of Stewart Maxwell's speech. Is he seriously suggesting that we will have no diseases, no asthma and no children with ear ache when we ban smoking?

To passive smoking?

In May 2003, the British Medical Journal published the results of a study that said that the link between environmental tobacco smoke and coronary heart disease and lung cancer may be considerably weaker than generally believed. What is the minister's comment on that?

Here we are in another debate about asbestos-related diseases. I thank Des McNulty  for managing to get the issue on the agenda once again. Members have already pointed out that Clydesiders have in this matter been victims of their past. Day and daily now, people are presenting with asbestos-related diseases. It is still a huge problem—a recent study has shown that the European asbestos epidemic has not yet reached its peak and that more people are affected by asbestos-related cancers than are affected by, for example, cervical cancer. Previous debates in Parliament have concentrated on justice and compensation issues and members have already acknowledged the part that was played by the Justice 2 Committee and others in ensuring that this much-maligned Parliament made a difference. Indeed, we should celebrate the fact that we have made a difference to the lives of people who suffer from asbestos-related cancers. Although it was necessary and right for us to tackle the injustice of the legal system in respect of treatment of asbestos victims, and to focus on issues such as compensation and justice, such an approach might well have sidelined the human and health aspects of the problem. It was as if compensation would dull the pain and erase the sense of bereavement that families felt but—of course—it did not and has not. Des McNulty's excellent and detailed motion takes things a step further by bringing us back to, and making us focus on, the health aspects. There is no doubt that asbestos-related diseases are horrible but, because of the legal system's adversarial nature, for people who presented as suffering from these illnesses, the matter was almost dehumanised. For example, they were said to have mesothelioma or an asbestos-related disease. Let us call mesothelioma what it is: it is a particularly horrible cancer. It is a cancer like any other cancer, which is why, as Des McNulty rightly points out in his motion, it is essential that people be diagnosed early. After all, early diagnosis prolongs lives—compensation does not. Obviously, we support Des McNulty's call for the Scottish Executive Health Department to develop a comprehensive strategy to deal with the matter. However, we should also remember that the legal system traumatised the people who were involved. Not only were they presented with horrible medical evidence about how their bodies were breaking up, but they and their families had to sit through discussions about that evidence in courtrooms and with lawyers. We had to deal with such a dehumanising system. Tonight's motion gives us a real opportunity to get on to the preventive issues and the more  human issues, and to offer the support that families need. We need to get on to health interventions, so that we can prolong life and not merely increase compensation.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As leader of the parliamentary Labour Party, I seek your ruling on a point of order relating to the rights of backbenchers. The motion that we are about to debate did not appear in the Business Bulletin until today. That means that although the business managers had a copy and could lodge amendments, that right was denied to backbenchers and, I suppose, to independent members also. Mr Swinney's actions might be within the letter of paragraph 6 of rule 8.2 of standing orders, but they are certainly not within the spirit. They also make it difficult for you to exercise your duty to take account of the interests of members equally under paragraph 3 of rule 3.1 of standing orders. I understand that this practice is against your guidance and I ask if a breach of standing orders has not occurred, and for your guidance on how rules can be tightened up to give all members a fair crack of the whip.

Does David Mundell support the reduction in the hours of junior doctors?

To avoid any problems, I will ensure that Shona Robison gets a copy of my speech and of everything that I have ever said about the national health service. Given her performance as SNP spokesperson for health, she needs all the help that she can get.

Yes, my committee work, too. Investment and modernisation in public services are like chopsticks—useless unless one has the pair. The Tory motion argues that we have had the former in the NHS but not the latter and it condemns us for that. Of course, I welcome the fact that the Tories have said today that they recognise the record investment that the Executive has put into our health service; in the past, they have just whinged on about us fiddling figures and so on. The Tories are right that the NHS needs to be reformed and modernised. Where we disagree, however, is on what is meant by reform. The Tories want to reform the NHS in the same way as they reformed shipbuilding, steel and coal. I want the NHS to be reformed so that we can get a bigger bang for our buck and put patients at the centre of the service. To be fair, the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party has acknowledged that the Executive has gone some way towards meeting those aims. Indeed, the Executive has swept away the last vestiges of the costly and bureaucratic internal market. Moreover, the Parliament has just passed the National Health Service Reform (Scotland) Bill, which makes health boards co-operate across boundaries—something for which I have called for some time. The bill also gives ministers greater powers to intervene where health services are failing.

I do not describe clerical assistants and the people who run the administration of the NHS as bureaucrats. It is essential that we have good managers who encourage modernisation—I  would have thought that the Tories agreed with that. How do we expect to achieve modernisation and reform if we do not have excellent managers in the health service? We have introduced new contracts for GPs and consultants and the agenda for change process is on-going. Those essential reforms were overdue. Of course, more remains to be done, as the minister acknowledged. We have invested a lot of money in the new contracts and we have great expectations, but we have yet to see the returns on our investment. Unfortunately, senior figures in the Scottish Executive Health Department are unable to tell me when we might expect patients to benefit from the new contracts. If we are serious about moving forward, we must avoid making the mistake that the Tories and others make when they consider only what politicians are doing about the health service. We must also examine external factors, such as the role of health professionals. The problems that are being blamed on the European working time directive and the agreement on junior doctors' hours have been well documented.

There are problems and I am sure that the minister will refer to them when he sums up. Debates between consultants and junior doctors are taking place in hospital wards about matters such as tea breaks and overtime. Many people in the health service welcomed the reforms but think that they have gone too far—patients have certainly felt their impact. The Tories did not mention that this morning, because they presume that health professionals vote for them and that they are acting in those people's interests. Royal college rules and guidelines appear to be arbitrary and undemocratic and have led to the collapse of services in Inverclyde and the Vale of Leven. Such guidelines should be reconsidered and I hope that the Health Committee's inquiry into work-force planning will prove to be a useful tool in that process. The Government attempts to effect reform, but the dead hand of professional interest is slowing us down. It is time that we encouraged the professionals to face up to the realities of change. Change is always difficult. It has been difficult for public sector workers across the board to come to terms with the European working time directive and changes to their jobs. It has certainly been  difficult for my constituents, who have had to go to Paisley to access consultant-led maternity services. Patients understand the impact of change, but I am not sure that the professionals understand it. It will not be easy to reform the way in which the NHS works and consultants cannot have it all their own way. We must be able to develop the skills and experience of the whole NHS work force if we are to avoid the fate to which the Tories would consign us—if they had their way, more services would be privatised. I much prefer the chopstick approach to the Tory meat cleaver.

No. I have heard what the minister said and I am happy with that.

No, I am not.  Amendment 9, by agreement, withdrawn.

I apologise for the delay, Presiding Officer. The partnership agreement pledges that the interests of the patient "will always come first." Sadly, I am not sure whether our communities agree that that happens. When health bosses sit down to consider the most controversial issue that faces the national health service in Scotland—service redesign—they have certain legally binding obligations. There are, for example, the European working time regulations and the new consultant contract. In fact, there is some sort of statutory protection for everyone's interests, except those of the patient. The interests of the patient get a look in only when the four corners of the debate, as defined by law, are agreed, and that cannot be correct. Amendments 9, 10 and 11 seek to redress the balance and give patients' interests parity with professionals' interests. Amendment 9 would give ministers the right, through regulations, to set legally binding guarantees for patients on maximum waiting times for certain services. Amendment 10 would give health boards, in partnership, a duty to ensure adherence to those waiting times guarantees throughout Scotland, and amendment 11 would mean that the powers of intervention in the bill would apply to bodies that, or persons who, do not comply with the waiting time regulations. I do not pretend that the amendments in themselves will put patients at the heart of the national health service, or even the decision-making process—they would simply give  patients' interests the same status as those of the professionals. I know from our discussions on the matter that the minister argues that what we currently have is better than what the amendments would deliver and that making maximum waiting times legally enforceable would lead to less ambitious targets being set. However, I do not follow that logic. If we really are already delivering on our tough targets, does the sanction for failure make a great deal of difference? If health boards are not meeting the guarantees, however, the option of recourse to the legal system would put the power to take action in the hands of the patient rather than in the hands of the bureaucrats at the national waiting times unit. On the other hand, boards may have been relying on the public's lack of knowledge in order to meet their targets and they would be under real pressure if more patients knew their rights—as amendment 6 would have ensured—and were better able to exercise them. Whatever the case, I cannot see how what is proposed would be detrimental to the people whom I was elected to represent. I move amendments 9 and 10.

Yes. I am sorry.

I will make some brief statements of fact. The more socially disadvantaged and less well-educated members of our communities have the poorest health and shortest life expectancy. Our constituents, especially the more socially disadvantaged and less well-educated, are not conversant with their rights to NHS treatment. It is not possible for somebody to exercise a right if they do not know that it exists, and a right that cannot be exercised is no right at all. Amendment 6 seeks to put right that situation by placing a statutory duty on community health partnerships to take active steps to make the public aware of what they are entitled to, the timescale within which that should be provided and which alternative sources of treatment they can access in the event that the service cannot be delivered within the timescales. The amendment would also place a duty on CHPs to ensure that access to that information is as wide as possible. It would require that the information be made available in a range of formats—for example, Braille and languages other than English. With amendment 6, I am determined to improve the health record of our most deprived communities and to close the opportunity gap, and so I am sure that I can count on Executive support for such a modest move.

I thank Johann Lamont for working with me to secure the debate. As members know, the motion is a composite; it brings together two motions that Johann Lamont and I lodged on the difficulties that disabled drivers face. I suggest that, unlike the products of some meetings on composites, which Johann Lamont and I remember fondly from days of yore, this motion enjoys widespread support. I thank members from all parts of the chamber who supported one or other—or, indeed, both—of the previous motions and who have supported the successor motion. Although I would not presume to speak for Johann Lamont, I think that I am safe in saying that we are grateful to all the members who have made time to attend the debate. I will focus my speech on the problems that disabled drivers face in private car parks and on the work that the Baywatch campaign has done.  Let me give an example. A young woman who is the primary carer for her mother came to me at a surgery in Inverkip in my constituency. She told me that the highlight of her mother's week was her outing to the shops in Greenock—as soon as she was back in the house after one trip, she was looking forward to the next. That is a simple pleasure, I am sure members will agree, but it is made almost impossible to enjoy through selfishness and indifference. Fresh from the young woman's Herculean efforts to get her mother up and dressed, they get to the shops only to find the disabled parking spaces filled with the cars of perfectly able-bodied people. That is unacceptable, unless sheer bone idleness is counted as a disability. When disabled drivers and their carers make representations, they get a shrug from the car park attendant or warm words, but no action from the store management. That is not a clever move. Turning a blind eye could leave stores facing legal action under the Disability Discrimination Act 1995—indeed, they are vulnerable to legal action now, not just in October when the additional rules come into effect. As every member here tonight knows perfectly well, the case to which I have referred is not an isolated one. A survey conducted by the campaign group Baywatch shows that the rate of abuse rose from 18.5 per cent in January 2003 to nearly 21 per cent in January 2004. In other words, more than one in five disabled parking bays are being used by non-disabled drivers. Although we might not like to admit it, we in Scotland are the laziest and most selfish of the lot. We abuse the system at a rate of 27 per cent, whereas in Wales only 23 per cent of bays are dishonestly occupied and only 19 per cent of bays are abused by the far more considerate English. A survey of more than 800 car parks that belong to the big four supermarkets throughout the United Kingdom showed that in more than a third—37 per cent—of stores disabled people were unable to park in a designated space because of abuse by non-badge holders. All supermarkets have seen an increase in abuse levels. People who complain to stores say that the response they receive has worsened, with only 30 per cent saying that stores responded well to complaints, compared with 32 per cent in 2003. What can be done? First, the anger and frustration of disabled drivers and their carers must be recognised, as must the severe impact that the abuse of disabled parking bays has on their quality of life. Secondly, I ask for the minister's help in getting all the interested parties round the table to discuss the powers that are currently on the statute book, how they can be used and by whom. Thirdly, will the minister  assure me that, if those steps fail, we will examine the possibility of extending the powers of local authorities to allow parking attendants or environmental wardens to enforce parking policies in private car parks? It is sad that we might need to stop appealing to people's better nature and to start appealing to their pockets, but if that is what it takes to make it game over for the space invaders, that is what will have to happen.

In his question, Jamie McGrigor raised concerns about NHS Argyll and Clyde's centralisation programme. Should the minister not be concerned that the programme is reducing choice and access to services for women and children? If that is not bad enough, does the minister share my concern that the overuse of the Royal Alexandria hospital is increasing waiting times and has led to recent outbreaks of infection and the problems with cleanliness that were reported at the weekend?

I do not live in Glasgow.

I congratulate Robert Brown on raising this important issue and for making an excellent speech. Robert Brown is absolutely right to say that axing green spaces and leisure facilities—such as bowling greens, libraries and the like—is counterproductive and flies in the face of most Scottish Executive policies, such as lifelong learning, reading together, healthy living and so on. In fact, his speech was so good that I will send it to every one of his Liberal Democrat council colleagues on Inverclyde Council who, as we  speak, are axing leisure facilities such as bowling greens and libraries. That flies in the face of a host of Executive policies: lifelong learning, reading together, healthy living and so on. The fact that Robert Brown so roundly condemns actions such as those of his Liberal Democrat colleagues on Inverclyde Council—the same colleagues whom he defended gallantly in the chamber on 22 January—might force those councillors finally to see sense.

No, thank you. I am sure that Robert Brown agrees that those councillors' actions have been impetuous, to say the least. They have closed libraries in the most deprived areas of my community, thereby denying underprivileged children access to books, to a safe place to study and to information technology. Those kids do not have the luxury of being able to buy the books that they want or the luxury of a bedroom of their own, equipped with a personal computer, where they can study. Fresh from that decision, Robert Brown's colleagues moved on to take bowling greens away from those kids' parents and grandparents. In areas such as Inverclyde, where public health is poor, it is vital that we help people to keep active—especially people who are in their middle and later years. Bowling is an ideal way of keeping active, so to take away bowling greens undermines a key plank of the Executive's healthy living strategy.

I see that I am causing some irritation among members, but I will press on. Residents are up in arms about planning development on the beautiful Inverclyde green belt near Inverkip, but the allegedly cash-strapped Inverclyde Council has found up to £60,000 of ratepayers' money to pay a specialist planning lawyer to help to force through its plan in the teeth of fierce local opposition. I am delighted that Robert Brown has given us a chance to air such vital matters this evening.

No, thank you. I am about to finish. As a man of principle, Robert Brown rightly speaks out when he disagrees with decisions in Glasgow and he bravely sets aside parliamentary protocol when he wants to praise Inverclyde Council for decisions with which he agrees. He is a Liberal in the best traditions of that party and a man of note and influence in those circles—

I am therefore sure that he will accept my invitation to come to Inverclyde and explain—

I am happy to conclude at this point.

I welcome the minister's statement and agree that we cannot excuse the fact that Reliance was unprepared to comply with its contract. However, does the fact that a prisoner was accidentally released from Greenock sheriff court on Friday as the result of an administrative mix-up, rather than because of Reliance, not undermine the argument that everything in the criminal justice garden was rosy until Reliance became involved? Of course, two wrongs do not make a right. However, will the minister assure me that the poor performance of one company will not be allowed to derail the broader objective of getting police officers patrolling our streets instead of sitting in the back of vans with shoplifters?

Will the minister assure the chamber that any solutions that are developed to meet the challenges that our universities face will not be to  the detriment of the further education sector, which has such a vital role to play in our lifelong learning strategy?

In communities such as mine that suffer from poor public health, many older people with respiratory problems are dependent on oxygen therapy dispensed through large, non-portable cylinders that restrict their mobility and reduce their quality of life. The Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care originally said that portable cylinders would be available on prescription by the end of last summer. In October, however, he said that that would happen in April. With that month only a matter of days away, can he confirm at long last that that implementation date will be met?

If the minister were to have considered the idea for a couple of minutes, she might have thought that such an organisation could have been called the confederation of nefarious scoundrels, or CONS for short. Thankfully, she is not prepared to do that. Will she give Parliament the absolute assurance that she will not under any circumstances allow the transportation of murderers or drug dealers to trades union meetings of prisoners?

Will the member give way?

Can the minister give some positive examples of where the new consultant contract will make a difference so as to ensure the flexibility that will be necessary to give the people we represent accessible services?

I appreciate the opportunity that I have been given—thanks to Rob Gibson's motion—to spend a couple of minutes speaking about Scotland's maternity services. I am here to remind members that the issue affects not only rural areas but every area in Scotland. Of course, we all know that we are culpable, because we all joined the campaign to reduce doctors' hours. Who was against reducing junior doctors' hours? I see no hands going up. Which members of the Health Committee were against improving general practitioner and consultant contracts? None of us. However, we failed to secure the flexibility within those contracts that would allow us maximum access to services. What depresses me and frustrates me as a politician is that we have not tackled that issue over the past few months and years. The minister needs to take into consideration the need for active engagement of consultants. The Rankin maternity unit was closed down not by Malcolm Chisholm but by the consultants who informed the health board that they could no  longer sustain a safe service. The same happened to the Vale of Leven hospital. We all get emotional about that, but it is very dangerous to go down the road of allowing politicians to instruct clinicians about what is and is not safe. Eleanor Scott set a commendable example—although it might be quiet in at least one household tonight—by putting the case from the clinical perspective. However, too few clinicians have been prepared to do that. During Argyll and Clyde NHS Board's consultation on maternity services, which went on for years, not one consultant was prepared to turn up at any of the meetings. They were not prepared to face the public and to explain that as well as receive an increase in wages they would work fewer weekends and that services would have to be centralised as a result. We need to tackle that issue and I hope that the cross-party Health Committee will provide us with an opportunity to rally to that challenge. If we do, it will be the first time Parliament has done that. Carolyn Leckie was right that Parliament has had four years to tackle the planning issues in the national health service that we all knew were coming, but we neglected to look at them. The Health and Community Care Committee did not consider those issues at all, but the Health Committee is now beginning to consider them. The horse might have bolted—I concede that we may be chasing it—but I hope that we will be given the opportunity to get clinical opinion to join the debate that needs to take place. I also hope that we can bring out these people who call themselves the "royal colleges". We need to find out not only who they are but what decisions they make, when those decisions are made and what impact they have on our communities.

Will the member give way?

Tell that to people in the estates.

Young people are also victims.

Eleanor Scott has mentioned uncertainty about finance a couple of times. Does she agree that the evidence shows that the people who have moved to a single board—in the Borders and in Ayrshire and Arran—have said that, in their experience, the process was not costly and could actually create savings?

Will the member take an intervention?

rose—

Does the minister agree that the call from various parties for a moratar, a moraturi—

A moratorium on maternity services—that is difficult to say at this time of the day. Does the minister agree that that call is just a cop-out and that it would have made no difference  to maternity services in Dumbarton or Inverclyde, where the clinicians decided to shut the services down? Does he agree that there is no role for health board managers or politicians in overriding the wishes of clinicians when they believe that an unsafe service is being provided?

rose—

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in the debate; I thought at lunch time that I had lost my chance. I support the motion in Malcolm Chisholm's name, as it recognises the challenge that faces the Executive and the national health service and the need for more flexible ways of working. The minister is right that staffing issues—how professionals are recruited, trained, retrained and deliver their services—are at the heart of the major issues in today's NHS. Indeed, they are the key to cracking perhaps the biggest challenge—the relentless march towards centralisation. As we know, throughout the country staffing problems are causing or being used as an excuse for the centralisation of acute services, sparking outrage in local communities. With the agreement on junior doctors' hours, which is now legally enforceable, the implementation later this year of the European working time directive, the impending fallout from the new GP contract and the new, expensive consultant contract, things may get worse before they can get better. Following the summer of centralisation, the Health Committee agreed to hold a major inquiry into NHS staffing and training, the details of which are being drawn up. I am glad that the Executive now realises that the issue is sufficiently important to warrant a debate in the chamber. However, I am concerned that the talk of building and supporting the NHS work force is code for trying to deliver patient-centred services by giving professional staff whatever they want—in other words, acceding to professionals' demands at the expense of the community's expectations. No right-thinking person would want to be treated by a tired, badly trained doctor, but that is not the same as saying that the interests of professionals and the interests of patients are always one and the same. Some might go so far as to say that on occasion they are mutually exclusive. For example, our communities want accessible health services in which they feel they have a stake. Our consultants want to work in massive teaching hospitals that reflect their specialist interests and they want to reduce their weekend working. Our communities think that they elect us to run the health service. The royal colleges, with their grip on work force planning, know that they run it. Of course, the issue of who runs the NHS is not a new one. Bevan famously said that he had to stuff the consultants' mouths with gold to get them into the NHS in the first place. That takes us neatly to the issue of the new  consultant contract. We increased top consultants' pay from £70,000 to £80,000 a year in return for greater flexibility. Under the terms of the GP contract, which was debated in the chamber last night, we will again hand over money up front without guarantees of reform. Questions remain. How much has it cost and will it cost? What benefits are guaranteed for patients and when will they be delivered? I hope that we have not paid for a pig in a poke. We must ensure that we get value for the public purse in courage, innovation and change and that we challenge the vested interests that would prevent change. Until we tackle the reform issue, debates such as this about raw numbers will be fairly academic. It does not matter how much more money we stuff in or how many more people we employ—if we employ them in the same way, there will not be much change. If professionals do not work flexibly and we do not consider upskilling nurses or improving training, we will not reap any benefits. The vast majority of NHS staff want to deliver a first-class service for patients, to maximise their skills and to develop their careers. However, vested interests are putting barriers in their way. If we want to maximise the potential of NHS staff and to deliver the consequential improvements in patient care, those barriers must be brought down wherever they are found.

Shona Robison will have received, as we all have, the MSPs' update from the Scottish NHS Confederation, which makes the good argument that good management techniques are necessary to reduce bureaucracy. The update also says that good managers need to be in place to make the necessary changes. Does Shona Robison agree with the confederation?

I welcome the First Minister's statement, particularly given that constituencies such as mine face a sharp decline in population and the consequences that follow from that. The statement certainly outlined the opportunities and demonstrated the benefits. Does the First Minister agree that if we are determined to make Scotland a destination of choice for young talent, it is vital to understand what attracts young people here and what pushes them away? Where better to start such a dialogue than at IBM in Greenock, which employs 1,000 foreign nationals? Those people, who are all expert in information technology and have language skills, are bridging the skills gap. Will the First Minister come to talk with some of those workers and extend a personal invitation to them to stay in Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

Would not the Scottish Socialist Party's policy of banning alcohol advertising on strips  worsen the situation for clubs? The Tennants Scottish Cup and the Bells Scottish Football League are all sponsored in that way.

Intelligence does not need to be sophisticated. People in my community tell me—I am sure that people in Michael Matheson's community tell him, too—about the drug dealer who lives up their close, about the taxis that stop every 15 minutes and about drugs users lying unconscious in the common close, but where is the action? They want action on those issues and they want it quickly.

If we increased police numbers without interference, which the member has said is unnecessary, how would we ensure that those extra police officers were used effectively in the community?

Communities want the police to tackle vandalism, ned culture and so on. It is clear from their actions over the past decade and from their recent evidence to parliamentary committees  that the police feel that that is not their priority. There is no guarantee that an increased police force would be used in those areas.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive what its response is to Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education's follow-up inspection report on Inverclyde Council. (S2O-1102)

The minister will be aware that the inspector's damning report slates Inverclyde Council for scrapping an £80 million school building programme, which would have got all local children out of their crumbling classrooms. I hear what the minister says about the council's responsibility, but how much longer will Inverclyde Council be allowed to prevent the Executive from fulfilling its partnership agreement promise to deliver the largest-ever school building programme in Scotland's history?

They say that when it comes to sex there are those who do it and those who talk about it. I am not quite sure what that says about those of us who have been in the chamber today, or whether it sheds any light on what our colleagues who are absent from the chamber are up to. As we have heard today, talking about sex is central to any sexual health strategy. We need to get around our natural—some would say ingrained—embarrassment if we are to communicate the messages effectively. One consequence of HIV and AIDS was that we were forced to discuss issues such as contraception. In the olden days it was different: using protection meant using a bus shelter and safe sex meant ensuring that our parents did not find out. When we were forced to face up to the reality of AIDS, when we started to see condom adverts on television and Government information campaigns about practising safer sex, a significant step forward was taken. We should acknowledge the role of the Conservative Government of the day in breaking down some of the taboos around sexual activity—although the Conservatives would not like to see themselves cast in that role today. The debate has made it clear that work remains to be done. We have read that one in four young people has sexual intercourse before they are 16 and many of them regret it. Given that more than 50 per cent of parents do not talk to their children about sex and sexual health, that sexually transmitted infections are on the increase and that the teenage pregnancy rate in Scotland is among the highest in western Europe, the case for communicating a clear message on sexual health is strong. We can argue about exactly what that message  might be. For example, I might want more emphasis to be placed on the importance of relationships and on helping young people to raise their self-esteem and self-confidence, but someone else might want more emphasis on the mechanics, an issue that David Davidson spoke about. We can discuss such issues as the consultation continues, and continue it must. We need to get this right. In the remainder of my time, I would like to make the case for communication—especially with younger people. I acknowledge at the outset that not everyone agrees that that is the best way forward. There is resistance, even to the issue of communication, never mind to the difficult issues that arise during that communication. Some people, for the commendable motive of wishing to protect their children's innocence, feel that the more we educate children about sex, the more likely they are to become involved in under-age sex. I am not sure about that argument. Pupils in Inverclyde get about six hours of sex education a year and about five hours of maths a week. If that argument is correct, we should have more mathematicians than young mothers. I suspect that other factors may be at work. I do not accept that there is a proven link between sex education and increased under-age sexual activity. Rather, I believe that arming young people with the information that they need to make good choices, and giving them the confidence to exercise those choices, will give them more protection than they would otherwise have. That said, it is wrong to think that all communication should be left up to schools. Parents must and should play a role. There must be a partnership between the classroom and the living room. We cannot leave that too late. We have more chance of having meaningful dialogue with Beagle 2 than with a 16-year-old about the facts of life. I will conclude with this point: if we do not communicate, someone else will. If we do not give our kids the facts, they will seek them out elsewhere. I hope that the strategy will, with the good will and support of the Executive, ensure that, if nothing else, our young people no longer need to resort to that.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Given that this is the first meeting of the Parliament after the new year, is it appropriate to wait until the rest of the SNP group turns up before we take the vote?

Will the next meeting of the Cabinet discuss the continued downturn in the electronics industry? Does the First Minister share my regret at yesterday's announcement of 250 redundancies at Sanmina-SCI UK in my constituency, and will he ensure that those who have been made  redundant will receive the appropriate support? Moreover, will he confirm that an area such as Greenock and Inverclyde, which has higher than average levels of unemployment for Scotland and has also suffered disproportionately from the decline in the electronics industry, will benefit from specific measures to strengthen the local economy?

Will Christine Grahame give way?

Given that Christine Grahame is convener of the Health Committee and given that the SNP health spokesperson made the same statement earlier, does she agree that one of the  big problems leading to the shortage of consultants and doctors, which has a tremendous impact on the services that we can deliver, has been brought about by the European working time directive and the reduction of junior doctors' hours, which all parties supported.

Six minutes into Shona Robison's speech, we have had criticism of Labour Party policy and criticism of Tory party policy—flawed though it is, at least it is a policy. When are we going to hear about the SNP policy?

Will Shona Robison take an intervention?

I am sure that Donald Gorrie's announcement that he is his party's spokesperson for walks will send a shiver down the spine of certain organisations in the west of Scotland, but we will see how that plays. David Davidson's speech not only reminded me of my aversion to exercise but recalled unpleasant memories of physical education at school. I remember running up muddy hills and swimming past the icebergs in the Battery park pond, while the technical teacher had a fag and threatened us if we did not get in there—if we survived hypothermia, we were doing very well. I remember being forced to play something called rugby—a game that was as alien to us west coast boys as attending the chamber is to the SSP. Not that that mattered too much, because we got plenty of exercise away from school. We chased buses, sugar lorries, ice-cream vans and milk motors. We all used to play street games—do members remember them? We played enduring favourites, such as football and rounders; those that have not stood the test of time, such as ring-bang-skoosh; and those that would get us in trouble with the politically correct police, such as cowboys and Indians—or western imperialists and oppressed indigenous persons, as we would now call it. Even watching television kept us fit. We lived in the bottom flat, with our TV aerial in the tenement loft. Every time we lost the picture, I was dispatched up four floors to hang from the skylight, performing gymnastics, in an attempt to get "Joe 90" in focus. The received wisdom is that we had a far better diet back then. Coke was what we put on the fire, and going for a McDonald's meant buying eggs from the local farmer. But times have changed, and we have to recognise that. Children these days are more likely to be managing Brazil on the Xbox than kicking a ball outside in the street. They are more used to being driven to school in the family car than running for a bus. It is more common for a child today to learn about brain trauma from the kids' science channel than to go into a boxing ring. The thing that I do not get, though, is why if my contemporaries were all so rosy cheeked and full of natural goodness back in the wholesome 1950s, my generation is dropping down dead with heart attacks left, right and centre? We have to remember that point today. As politicians, we have used creative avoidance in this debate and when we talk about physical education, we all  immediately talk about schools and sport and children—it is good for everybody apart from us. Principally, we are in this situation because we did not follow it through. As soon as we did not have to go to sadistic physical education classes at school, when chasing girls was more interesting than chasing vans, and when we lost the jobs that kept us physically active, no other exercise was built into our daily lives. That is known in the medical profession as the Derek Johnstone syndrome. The consequences are all round us. That is why the minister—with whom I regularly keep active on the golf courses of Lanarkshire—is right to be increasing access to sport and to fitness facilities for those of us who might be a bit set in our ways. I wish him well in a difficult job to change the culture of the people of Scotland, and support the initiatives that have been announced today, on the basis that it is never too late to begin and continue to exercise.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Further to the disruption of First Minister's question time, is it in order when such incidents occur for members in the chamber to applaud and congratulate those who are causing the disruption? Is it not the case that such antics from members encourage those who seek to disrupt the democratic process? Do you now believe that it is time to take effective action against members who conduct themselves in that way?

I note from the minister's statement that the most significant problems arise in areas of deprivation. How will the measures that he has announced ensure that we address that specific issue?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I might be mistaken, but did Christine Grahame refer to a copy of the minister's statement? I would like to make the point that copies were not made available to other back benchers.

I take that as confirmation that the minister did not give the statement to Christine Grahame. I do not have any great objection to the statement's going to Christine Grahame, as she is the convener of the Health Committee; however, it may be that every member should have been given a copy. We certainly were not.

The point is that Christine Grahame did not get it after the minister sat down. She had it and had been given privileged information. That needs to be looked into.

Thanks to the capital investment from the people's network, libraries throughout the country now provide many valuable new services. Does the minister agree that it is vital that local authorities meet their responsibilities to provide the necessary revenue funding to ensure that such services can continue?

Will the minister assure the chamber that she will uphold the human rights of young people, under article 5 of the ECHR, on the security of person, and the human rights of pensioners, under article 8, to respect for their homes by cracking down on those selfish neds—I repeat selfish neds—in whom Patrick Harvie and other politically correct romantics seem to be more interested?

I congratulate Scott Barrie on securing tonight's debate. Along with other antisocial behaviour measures, an effective children's hearings system is an important part of protecting vulnerable children. I am sure that we will be forgiven for being late at the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets reception across the street tonight. Ofgem wants to educate us about its priorities and objectives for the future, but what is new about that, given that this is what we do all the time? We might be at a school on a Monday, at a committee taking evidence from experts on a Tuesday and on a Wednesday we might be at a parliamentary debate such as today's debate on changes in general practitioners' contracts. The events that we attend are such that I learned a bit more about the children's panel system during one lunch time when I—I think back in June—along with other members, met the chair of my local children's panel. For me, that did wonders in dispelling the popular misconception, which I think I shared with others, that the hearings system was only about dealing with young offenders. We have concentrated on that a bit tonight, but I learned then that that is only part of the job. The panels also exist to look out for kids who need care or protection. It was explained to me that a child can be referred to a panel for many reasons, from being the victim of an offence to misusing alcohol or drugs. It is up to the hearing to  decide what is in the best interests of the child. As has been made clear in the debate, the unstinting work of the panels, which consist of unpaid trained volunteers, is what has made the hearings work and endure over the past three decades. People give up their time to take part and in an age when people say that volunteering and community spirit is dead, the panel members contradict that wonderfully. I was delighted to learn that Inverclyde children's panel boasts 58 members. Good as that is, when one considers that the panel deals with 1,000 referrals a year and holds five hearings a week, it is understandable that the panel wants to boost numbers further. As the three panel members who make up a children's hearing may not all be female, the panel is particularly keen to recruit more men. Making the right choices for children is a huge responsibility, but we must send out the message that panel members do not need to be child care experts or top lawyers. As I discovered when I dropped into a training session one Sunday morning, children's panel members come from all walks of life. Although people were committed for a whole day, the place was packed. We can all argue in support of children's panels, but we need to convince people, such as those in my area who may not be in employment but who have skills that they have built up over many years through working with apprentices, and who are blessed with common sense, that they can care about their community and kids. We should encourage them to become panel members.

The member might also mention that BMA representatives led on that issue. They led the committee to believe that there was a problem with the regulations.

The fact that I am the second elected representative from Greenock and Inverclyde to speak today on the subject of antisocial behaviour speaks volumes. A matter of hours ago, my Westminster colleague David Cairns told the Labour party conference some home truths about antisocial behaviour. He was the warm-up act for David Blunkett, who reminded us that we are best of all when we are in touch with the people. That is appropriate today. I will probably be followed by another five-minute bleat about the poor misunderstood souls who instil fear and apprehension into our neighbourhoods and communities. Some of the contributions that we have heard from SNP members have a serious contradiction at their heart. We all agree, I think, that it is a small minority of young people who cause a disproportionate amount of damage to their communities. We also agree that young people are the biggest victims of that sort of crime. How can SNP members paint our determination to crack down on bad behaviour as a demonisation of young people? As Johann Lamont asked, do we demonise all men when we tackle domestic violence? Do we demonise Christians when we tackle sectarianism? Of course we do not. However, if I detained the chamber every time an SNP member put forward an argument that did not stand up to scrutiny, we would have to work a night shift. Let us look at the SNP's partners in crime. Colin Fox, from the Scottish Socialist Party, today denied his community a voice. Do not tell me that the people of the Inch in Edinburgh do not have their lives affected by drug dealing and violence. He toed the party line.

No. The member may come in when I have finished my point. Colin Fox put political correctness before public safety and he showed us the SSP's two colours as the neds' champions and the bams' buddies. The SSP has turned its back on every decent, hard- working family and young person in Scotland, to spread the myth—no doubt grown in some organic coffee shop somewhere—that antisocial behaviour is a menace that politicians have somehow manufactured for electoral purposes. That denies victims their experiences and it adds insult to injury. I have heard it said that a little knowledge—

I mentioned Colin Fox, so I give way.

We must tackle the issue. Significantly, someone brought to my attention the fact that when Colin Fox mentioned all the public services this morning he omitted—perhaps intentionally—the role of the police. That signifies the SSP's thinking. When we talk about housing federations and others, we must determine whether it is the tenants who are speaking—as they are speaking to me—or whether it is the directors of those organisations. I say to Stewart Stevenson that there is no debate in Greenock about what is or is not antisocial behaviour. Anyone who has ever experienced it knows what it is. It is the repeated smashing of an elderly constituent's windows just because he did his civic duty and testified in court. It is the gang violence that results in young people being unable to use their own community hall—a lot has been said about them in this debate. It is not all in their minds. It is not all on the telly. They are certainly not faking it to get me a few more votes.

No. Sandra White had the opportunity to make a speech. It was obvious that she had not written one. We do not have to rely on anecdotal evidence. Over the summer, Scotland's decent, hard-working communities spoke through their contributions to the consultation on the forthcoming antisocial behaviour bill. They left the ministers of this Parliament in no doubt about the truth. Just look at what the people of Greenock  and Inverclyde had to say when they were asked for their views. Ninety three per cent said that it is very important for the Executive to bring forward new antisocial behaviour laws. Only 7 per cent did not want electronic tagging extended to under-16s. When asked if parents should take more responsibility for their children, 86 per cent agreed strongly, 14 per cent agreed, none disagreed, none disagreed strongly and not a single person did not know. That is the real story. That is what our communities are saying to us. It is our duty as elected representatives to act. Mistakes were made in the past. The reason it has taken a whole Parliament even to get to this stage is that when we knew there was a problem, when we saw it in our own communities, when we had constituents telling us how their lives were being made a misery, we listened to the wrong people. We have heard more of that today. We have listened too long to the housing officer who could not do anything. We have listened too long to social workers. We have listened too long to elements of the police who said that there was no problem, or that existing legislation was sufficient to deal with the problem. Well, no more. Let us listen to the people who know what they are talking about. As the Minister for Communities considers her response to the consultation, I ask her to examine closely what people with first-hand experience of antisocial behaviour are saying, rather than the thoughts of the apologists who just read, write and talk about it.

I agree that we face certain challenges and that smoking is not a desirable pursuit—in fact, I quit smoking about 20 years ago. However, when the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body considered the issue of smoking recently, Robert Brown was not of the Taliban tendency. He recognised that politicians cannot ban things, although that does not mean that we should not encourage people to stop smoking and to lead a healthier lifestyle. In my earlier speech, I was sounding a cautionary note for politicians who  seem to think that the solution to all problems is simply to ban something. That is not the case.

Thank you.

We have heard from politicians today and in the past who, in true Taliban style, desire to ban smoking, drinking, eating Happy Meals and probably, for all we know, sitting on the couch watching the telly. By 2045, according to my figures, such a move would reduce the incidence of ailments such as heart disease, strokes and cancer to virtually zero, principally because no one would live long enough to develop them, as people would die of boredom in their early 20s. To be fair, the idea that health improvement is the cure for all the national health service's ills has been advanced not only by the Taliban tendency in this Parliament, but by some serious politicians. Fifty-six years ago, the architects of the NHS assumed that once the NHS was in place, ill health, and hence demand, would reduce. Their naivety is touching today. Post-war politicians had no idea about impending advances in medical science, new treatments, the rise in care standards and the rise in expectations, which have led more people to seek more health care for more illnesses.

I do not diminish the idea that smoking is bad, but I disdain the idea that politicians can ban everything that they dislike. Today's politicians do not have the excuse that their predecessors had. We have only to open a newspaper to see how medical science is galloping ahead. A cursory glance at the census data shows that our population is becoming older. To continue to argue that to sort out the long-term structural issues that face today's NHS, we need more hours in the public baths and fewer hours in the public bar is, at best, little more than well-intentioned rhetoric. If we are serious about delivering a national health service that is fit for the 21 st century, we must examine the situation more deeply. We must consider the barriers to delivering the modern patient-centred service that we deserve. A host of issues that have been mentioned, such as staff recruitment and retention and accreditation, must be properly addressed. However, I fear that those matters are sidestepped when decisions are taken about the shape of our NHS. That leads to illogical and short-sighted decisions. A case in point is the Rankin maternity unit in my constituency. Other members have described  similar experiences. It is almost universally accepted that a range of factors, such as junior doctors' training, junior doctors' hours, Europewide staff shortages and the application of clinical standards, are contributing to massive pressures in the NHS. However, as the minister knows from his meeting with me and local campaigners yesterday, when those pressures forced Argyll and Clyde NHS Board to review maternity services, it ducked every issue. The result was a crackpot plan to centralise consultant-led in-patient maternity services for the whole health board area at the Royal Alexandria hospital in Paisley. That move could affect a quarter of the Scottish female population. It could concentrate consultant-led in-patient services for more than 800,000 women and children in two hospitals—Paisley's RAH and Glasgow's Southern general hospital—that are a few miles apart. The plan not only threatens the Rankin unit's future, but represents the beginning of the end for Paisley's RAH. Would any pregnant woman from Greenock, Largs or Tiree travel to a consultant-led unit in the RAH when she could give birth in a university-led unit a few minutes up the road? It is only a matter of time before Paisley's underused consultant-led services are closed and moved to the Southern general. The Health Committee should conduct a major inquiry into the deep-rooted issues that have an impact on service planning in the NHS. I have no wish to pre-empt a committee decision, but I will explore the role of a strong factor in unacceptable health board decisions—artificial health board boundaries, which are the Berlin walls of the NHS. Each party sits on its own side, pretending that the other does not exist and deluding itself that it can function as a self-contained unit. Thanks to health board boundaries, neighbouring boards—Argyll and Clyde NHS Board and Greater Glasgow NHS Board—undertook two reviews and decided to put two identical services on two sites that are side by side. If we are serious about rising to the challenge of improving Scotland's health, we must not be afraid to tackle the big issues. Of course, that will not be easy. However, if we return to the healthy living theme, anything less would be like ordering a can of Diet Coke with a black-pudding supper: a well-intentioned gesture, but a gesture nonetheless.

Is the minister aware that, as a result of the European working time directive and the reduction in junior doctors' working hours, Argyll and Clyde NHS Board needs to recruit 25 consultants and a similar number of junior doctors? Does he accept that those issues must be understood in order to address recruitment and retention in the health service?

The issue that we debated at this morning's Health Committee meeting might not have changed, but some of the faces have. However, Mr David Davidson, Mike Rumbles, Carolyn Leckie and I are again debating the issue. I see that Mr Tom McCabe is on the front bench for the debate. I hope that his involvement in ministerial duties does not restrict too much the active lifestyle that he has developed on Lanarkshire golf courses over the past six months. I congratulate Shona Robison on her elevation to the SNP front bench. Why her party thought that her predecessor was not an ideal spokesperson on matters relating to the caring professions can be left to members' imaginations. However, justice's loss is Shona Robison's gain and I wish her well. One thing that strikes me about the motion is how unremarkable it seems. At first reading, some might venture to complain that phrases such as "wider public involvement" being "at the heart of a modernised NHS" and  "ensuring public involvement in health service reorganisation" are so non-controversial and bland as to be little more than platitudes. However, the idea that putting patients first is so obviously correct that it hardly merits a mention is the most interesting point in the debate. Historically, the NHS has never been particularly good at bringing to the fore the needs of its core market—the paymasters—who are otherwise known as patients. We could all recount the story from the olden days about the neighbour up the stair who was taken into hospital for a kidney stone and came out with a wooden leg, but who never dreamed of pointing out the error because that would only bother the doctor. Besides, her leg might have needed that treatment in future so she would be grateful that she had it done anyway. Thankfully, we have moved on since then. Examples such as that seem to be ridiculous today. However, not all in the garden is rosy.

That was in the days of yore. Members—including Stewart Stevenson—will hear constituents' accounts of their bad experiences in hospital. We have all felt ill informed about a treatment, been patronised by a GP's secretary, or intimidated by an overbearing surgeon. Many of us will have been frustrated and at times enraged by NHS bureaucracy. It seems that services can be put under threat by little more than the stroke of a bureaucrat's pen. Maternity services in my constituency have been under threat for some years and have already been subjected to a supposed public consultation. That consultation was run so badly that its report had to be downgraded and the exercise started again from scratch. I therefore welcome many of the proposed measures outlined in the partnership agreement and elaborated upon by the minister today. I am particularly interested in the new duty on NHS boards to co-operate with one another. I hope that that will reduce the impact on changes to service provision of external circumstances—the working time directive and junior doctors' hours—and the consequent pressure to centralise services. I would argue that there is room to go further. First, the minister will be aware that our colleagues, Bill Butler and Paul Martin, have proposed member's bills to require direct elections by the public for the majority of places on health boards and to require boards to consult when  proposing to change the use of health service premises. Both those measures merit some serious consideration. I therefore ask the minister to consider closely in the coming months how the main provisions of those bills could be incorporated into the forthcoming NHS reform bill. Secondly, if we are considering making health boards more efficient and responsive, why should we not also look at other unelected bodies that hold sway over the delivery of our health services? [ Interruption. ] I think that the next page of my notes has been put in upside down to trick me. For example, what about the royal colleges? Who decides their guidelines? How can the taxpayer challenge them? Who monitors their policies on supply and demand? Who do they have to consult when they are making decisions? To whom are they accountable? Let me return to the example of my local maternity unit. If it is deemed not to have reached a fixed level of births, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists could decide not to accredit that unit for training. That would have—and has had—an impact on the training of junior doctors and on their accreditation. It will result in the need to recruit junior doctors every six months and lead to a continued crisis in management, demoralisation and the ultimate doomsday scenario of closure. All of that will take place with no consultation and no real public involvement. We are right to go after heath board bureaucracy, but if we are to make today's warm words a reality, and if we are to effect a step change in the way in which the NHS is run, all areas of outmoded working protectionism and vested interests must be challenged.

Or a new chief executive of the SNP.

Does the minister accept that the implementation of the European working time directive, the reduction in junior doctors' hours and the training regime for junior doctors are having a serious and detrimental impact on patient access in my constituency of Greenock and Inverclyde and throughout Scotland? When can we expect a co-ordinated approach from him to that problem in favour of patients?

I have been as fortunate as many of the MSPs in the chamber today—and as Pauline McNeill said, it is a good part of the job—to be allowed to celebrate young people's achievements in our schools and constituencies. Like Fergus Ewing, after discussions with young people I am constantly left impressed by their maturity and hard work. We have had a constructive debate today, but I warn members that I am about to ruin that. Peter Peacock's motion is constructive and forward looking and members have made positive contributions. However, it is not all good news. We cannot deny that there is good and bad in all sectors of society; we should not pretend that there is no bad. We all know and are all frustrated by the fact that good news does not travel fast and bad news travels faster. We hear too little about the achievements of young people and today will probably be the same. This morning, the airwaves were dominated by a motion from some MSPs that we should ban the word "ned" and not be allowed to use it, rather than by today's debate and the celebration of young people in Scotland. In the terms of that motion, it is "hurtful" to describe the delicate little souls—bless them—as neds. What are we supposed to call the gangs who hang about the streets? Track-suit ambassadors? Should we rename shoplifters retail stock relocation operatives, or drug dealers independent pharmaceutical consultants? I look forward to the committee debate when that subject comes up.

No one said that and I will not allow the member to put words in my mouth. They are there and they are a reality in our society.  Whether an MSP should be spending his or her time on such issues is a matter for public debate. I am always wary of politicians—as young people should be—whose response to every ill is to ban it. It is not so easy. Murder and theft have been banned since the time of Moses, but they are hardly a thing of the past. The only serious way to tackle problems is not to ban their effects but to examine their causes. The way to stop adults referring to some young people as neds is to stop some young people behaving like neds. We should be honest and challenge unacceptable behaviour and have the courage to take action. If that means extending antisocial behaviour orders and tagging offenders, so be it. If that means asking parents to take more responsibility, so be it.

I am castigating bad behaviour. We must recognise it and face up to it because it is a problem that faces us all. I am not here to demonise young people and to introduce some sort of old fogey's charter. Young people have enough reasons to resent politicians. Tommy Sheridan wants them to have free healthy school dinners and replace the Happy Meal with three doses of cabbage in the school canteen. Rosie Kane wants to stop computers being put into schools by private companies. The SSP wants to ban whisky advertising, horse racing and dog racing—life would be pretty grim. The SSP has a higher tally of bans than the Taliban. I am not saying that the Labour party will be any more popular. Ours is the party that has promised more police and teachers so we are hardly likely to be popular either. Having a go at youth crime is not synonymous with having a go at young people. As I said last week and as I will continue to say in future—

I took two interventions, Presiding Officer, one of which was nearly as long as my speech. As every young person can tell us, the main  victims of young people's antisocial and criminal behaviour are other young people. It is young people whose education is disrupted by violence, who are bullied, who are effectively excluded from community resources by gang violence and who are robbed and assaulted in the streets. It is young people who tell me that we have got to take action against criminal behaviour in the street. I will cut my speech short at that. When the ministers come to act, please will they remember that it is young people who are the real victims of youth violence and whose life chances are dramatically affected by that violence?

I wish the minister well in his new job. Will he initiate a departmental inquiry into the continuing and unacceptable three-year delay in the construction works that are necessary on the A78 West Station bridge in my constituency?

I am pleased to support the programme for government and to take this opportunity to congratulate our Liberal colleagues on signing up to a partnership document that so faithfully reflects the Labour manifesto. I am sure that the constituents of Greenock and Inverclyde will be encouraged by the pledge that they will benefit from the economic growth in which all Scotland will share. I look forward to delivering, through the agreement, the planned regeneration of "communities where there are persistently high levels of unemployment." I hope that we take advantage of the opportunities that lie along the A8 in my constituency. It goes without saying that the measures to crack down on crime and to build safer, stronger communities cannot come soon enough for the decent, hard-working families that it is my privilege to represent. I look forward to the publication of the proposed legislation to tackle crime and antisocial behaviour. I ask the critics and doubters to understand the fear of the elderly who are frightened in their home and are frightened to go outside.

Many councils throughout Scotland have found it difficult to use antisocial behaviour orders. That is why we will make it easier for them to use the orders and we will extend the orders to cover under-16s who cause problems in our communities. I ask the critics and doubters to understand the  anger of hard-working people who have had their property vandalised. Finally, I ask the doubters to give proper consideration to the real victims of youth crime: young people who have their education disrupted, who are bullied, assaulted and robbed in our streets. I will focus the remainder of my remarks on the health service. I welcome much of what the programme has to say. It is good news that—as the coalition document states—the Executive wants to "devolve power to the lowest level." It is good news that national health service reform and the establishment of community health partnerships are on the agenda. It is also good news that community-based centres and hospitals are to be supported and that artificial health board boundaries will be able to be examined where necessary. Taken together, I hope that those measures signal a commitment from the Scottish Executive to halt the march towards centralisation of services in the NHS. That is not an easy task. We must address several factors, which I have been trying to address over the past four years. The impact of the European working time directive, the agreement on junior doctors hours and the move towards sub-specialisation are making it difficult, if not impossible, to deliver services in hospitals in my constituency and throughout Scotland. That limits local access and forces people to travel further for treatment. Although I am in no way against improving working conditions for staff in the hospitals, I ask myself what other business or public service would cease to provide a service based on rules, guidance or agreements with the work force. I can think of no service that would do that.

I am sorry; I have almost finished. In my constituency, the Rankin maternity unit is under continued threat because of junior doctor cover. Although sterling efforts are made to plug gaps, such problems are being used to centralise services. If we do not tackle the issue, with the royal colleges and others, I fear that our ambitions for the health service in Scotland will not be realised.

No. Scott Barrie is next. I am still writing my speech.

Thank you.

On a point of order, Deputy Presiding Officer. Have you received a request from the leader of the Scottish Socialist Party to make a personal statement apologising for that party's official spokesperson's crass comment in The Scotsman that: "The war is bad for the Iraqis but good for our votes"? If not, can you advise me how the Parliament can formally disassociate itself from those remarks and send a strong message to the servicemen and servicewomen who are risking their lives to free Iraq that that comment does not reflect the view of the vast majority of members?

I am pleased to hear the First Minister express his confidence in the Scottish Enterprise network. Does he agree that too many areas of Scotland, such as my area of Greenock and Inverclyde, have long-standing above-average levels of unemployment and low levels of economic activity? Does he agree that that requires a cross-cutting, co-ordinated approach from the Executive? Will he meet me to discuss how we can address those issues in my constituency?

The motion seeks to bury the past. It ignores the impact that the Conservatives' policies had on our communities, it turns a blind eye to the destructive days of the last Tory Government and it refuses to accept the long-term damage that the Conservatives and their policies inflicted on Scotland. The Conservative party is the party that took shipbuilding out of Greenock. It closed the Glen yard, Lithgow's yard, Cowal Engineering and the Inchgreen dry dock. The Conservatives might not like listening to the list of closures, but it was harder to live through them. The Tories also closed the Cartsdyke yard, Scott's Shipbuilding, Scott's engine works and Kincaid's engine works. In spite of that, we hear Tory spokesmen bemoaning the decline of the manufacturing industry. The Tory party was the party that took "working" out of "working class" and gave my constituency 23 per cent unemployment. Although unemployment there is still high—it is about 6 per cent or 7 per cent—it is much better than it was. The Tories replaced skilled, stable jobs with low-paid, low-skill contract work, crushed my community's confidence in the name of right-wing ideology and had the cheek to tell us that that was a price worth paying. We will never forget and we  will never forgive. Brian Monteith is smiling again. He thinks it is funny. Members should not just take my point of view, as I have a right to be bitter on behalf of my community. They should take someone else's view.

No. Brian Monteith has already taken up a lot of time of people who do not even want to be here. "Businesses went to the wall, we broke our pledge on taxes, there was negative equity in homes, the public felt hurt. Then we lectured them, and we seemed arrogant. We said it was all your fault, not our fault—you are the problem, not us ... They still remember that we were in power, and that is what we left them with." That is a pretty accurate rundown by none other than Mr Iain Duncan Smith in The Sunday Telegraph of 6 October 2002. All the accusations and all the bluster cannot hide the legacy that the Conservatives left. From what we have heard this morning, it seems that nothing would change: cuts of £250 million in the enterprise budget and 20 per cent cuts in public spending. For cuts in red tape, read a retreat on rights for part-time workers, and a retreat on employment time regulations and rights to holidays. Those rights were all introduced by Labour and are in danger from the Conservatives. They clearly have nothing new to say. This morning, we see the enemies of devolution on both sides of the chamber come together again. What pains them most is that this Labour-led Executive is making devolution work successfully and picking up the pieces of the Tory wasted years. Labour looked on as John Major and William Hague marched the Tory party to the cliff edge. On today's performance, under Iain Duncan Smith or David McLetchie—members may take their pick—they are about to take a great leap forward. We should wish them well, and vote against the amendment.

Own goal again, Mr Swinney.

I welcome the minister's statement and its attempt to tackle bureaucracy and give patients a greater say. The minister will be aware that Argyll and Clyde NHS Board is creating a single board structure and that staffing difficulties are creating a pressure to centralise services, especially maternity services. How can the minister reassure my constituents that the reforms that he outlined in his statement will give patients a real say in the NHS and halt the march towards centralisation of services?

Will the member give way?

I suppose that the law of averages dictates that, in such a long motion, Mary Scanlon was bound to make a good point sooner or later. She is right that we need to get the record amounts of money that we are spending on health to the front line as quickly as possible. She is right that a modern NHS must, in the words of the motion, respond to "the real needs of patients" and, like many of my colleagues and me, she is right not to be convinced that the centralisation of services will deliver that. However, it is beyond me how a Tory could speak to those points with a straight face. The Tories have been unable to keep a straight face this morning. I wonder whether any other members choked on their cornflakes when they read in yesterday's business bulletin a Tory motion extolling the virtues of "the NHS's fundamental values of high-quality healthcare available to all, irrespective of their ability to pay". Although I could go on at length about 18 years of Tory neglect—and would be justified in doing so—attacking the Tories' record on the NHS is like shooting fish in a barrel, as my colleagues Malcolm Chisholm and Janis Hughes showed. The motion deals with impacts on service delivery. That is a fundamental issue, whether the Tories realise it or not. There are many answers to the question, but I will focus on what affects service delivery in my area. We have guidelines from the royal colleges, European working time directives and a reduction in junior doctors' hours. The working time directives and the reduction in junior doctors' hours mean that, in the Argyll and Clyde NHS Board area alone, we need to recruit 25 consultants and even more junior doctors.

The member has had a full morning's debate and I have limited time. That level of recruitment is necessary not to extend the service, but simply to maintain it. Those major challenges must be addressed. The guidelines focus on certain disciplines and address risk in very small areas. Striving to reduce such risk means that we constantly chase the impact on the other services, which pushes us towards more centralisation. In practice, that has meant that, in Argyll and Clyde, we have witnessed the closure of the maternity unit at the Vale of Leven hospital, for the  want of paediatric cover. That closure, which took place without consultation with the local community, has forced mothers and young babies to travel further for care. That has happened in spite of the massive amount of investment that we are injecting. Like many hospitals outside the cities, the Rankin maternity unit in my constituency has found it difficult to recruit appropriate staff numbers. It has to compete with university-led services in the cities. That is another example of the push towards centralisation that we must resist. Despite the fact that the number of consultants at the Rankin maternity unit has increased, there is once again a shortage of paediatric cover, which has threatened the unit and put it only days away from closure during the past year. Finally, I want to mention health board boundaries. Lines on a map are not recognised by my constituents or by many others. We do not see a sufficient amount of working together among the health boards. I contend that only by using common sense and by applying flexibility will we ensure that the massive investment that we are putting into the health service improves and is seen to improve patient care.

I want to pursue the issue of voter participation. Why is it expected that, despite proportional representation, the turnout for the next Scottish parliamentary election may be below 50 per cent?

I realise that you have already been generous with these questions, but could you also make it clear that all the parliamentary representatives on the corporate body confirmed their position on the quality of the service that we receive from the Royal Mail and have asked for reports to be brought to them? We are all interested in the security and employment issues that arise from the dispute. Any inference that we would take a contrary view of the situation, or take a view in secret and not take account of the views of our colleagues, is utter nonsense.

I thank Gordon Jackson for giving us the opportunity to discuss the regeneration of the Clyde. The Clyde does not begin at Glasgow, nor does it end at the Erskine bridge. It will not surprise members to hear that I will talk about the lower Clyde, particularly Inverclyde. Anyone who has ever driven west into Inverclyde will have seen the spectacular scenery that hits them the instant that they pass Langbank, where the Firth of Clyde opens up—a beautiful sight—and they will recognise the extent to which the River Clyde has influenced our history and is essential to our future. As we have heard—and as we will hear again later in the debate—the Clyde is a great natural asset. For us in Inverclyde, the breathtaking scenery is the key to attracting people and businesses, so helping to rebuild our declining population. Over the years, the Inverclyde area has suffered terribly with the decline of traditional  industry. This year, the area has suffered a disproportionate impact from the decline in the manufacturing sector, and we need to develop what is a very important asset to the benefit of that community and the whole of Scotland. The waterfront is an ideal location for the sort of housing that today's families want. There is also a wealth of untapped waterfront leisure opportunities, from sailing to selling. The river itself could form part of an improved transport network, offering fast ferries into the centre of Glasgow without a single traffic jam. As Annabel Goldie said, that is why it is important to have co-ordination of the development of the Clyde. A decision that is made for one area should not prevent decisions from being taken on others. We hope that the transport hub that we wish to develop at Gourock will give us a gateway into the Highlands and access to and from our new Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park. Regeneration is not just economic, and it does not just concern transport links and flood prevention. It is about people being involved in those matters; about good schools and good housing; and about the good public services that are needed in support. The lower Clyde's needs are linked clearly with those of the Clyde regeneration strategy. Unfortunately, that strategy is not in place, which is a barrier to us. It is beyond question that we need more than Government plans. Communities, local businesses, elected representatives and Government agencies need to work together in effective partnerships that can realise the potential of our River Clyde.

I welcome the Deputy First Minister's statement. In complete contrast to those who argue that the dispute would be resolved on the streets are those who argue that banning the right to strike would resolve the dispute. However, does the Deputy First Minister agree that imposed solutions—whether proposed by John Prescott or John Swinney—would be doomed to failure without the full participation and agreement of the firefighters and their trade union? Will he assure the Parliament that, in the talks that are soon to be held between the Government and the FBU, he will press for an early resumption of negotiations so that we can resolve by agreement this prolonged and damaging dispute?

Although we all agree with the First Minister that future strategies for manufacturing are absolutely essential, does he consider that specific measures are required now to address the disproportionate impact that manufacturing decline is having on communities such as my own in Greenock and Inverclyde?

To ask the First Minister what  action the Scottish Executive will take to minimise the impact of job losses in the Inverclyde electronics industry on workers, their families and the wider economy and community. (S1F-2391)

I welcome the First Minister's response. Does he agree that the relief that we all feel that the worst of the speculation about IBM in Greenock did not come to pass should not mask the fact that hundreds of workers from another two Inverclyde companies—Fullarton Computer Industries (Gourock) Ltd and Clairemont Electronics Ltd—lost their jobs on Monday? I am glad to hear the First Minister say that those workers need our urgent help and assistance. Does he agree that we need to show that the smart successful Scotland strategy can work in areas such as Inverclyde? Can we be assured that the Scottish Executive will work in partnership with the local authority and other agencies to broaden, strengthen and modernise our local economy?

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Executive will take to help Argyll and Clyde NHS Board to build on the findings of the support team report into the effectiveness of the board's health systems. (S1F-2367)

I welcome the First Minister's reassurance that the Executive will support the swift and decisive action that is necessary. Does he agree that, despite our problems in Argyll and Clyde, we have a considerable strength in our committed medical and ancillary staff, who have continued to deliver under difficult circumstances? Will he confirm that appropriate support will be available to ensure that the current financial difficulties are not allowed to affect patient services in areas such as Greenock and Inverclyde, which already have a poor health record?

Is the amendment not sheer opportunism by Nicola Sturgeon? Committee members have made that point many times this morning.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I draw to your attention the edition of The Scotsman from Monday 2 December, in which Mike Russell stated that he would use First Minister's question time today to demand assurances from the Executive on theatre funding. [ Interruption. ] I am trying to make a serious point.

Unless Mr Russell is now operating under the title, "Mystic Mike", how would he know that his question would be selected for today? Will the Presiding Officer give us an assurance about the criteria for the selection of questions and will he assure us that there was no prior agreement to select Mike Russell's question for the First Minister today?

I am glad to have the opportunity to say a few words in the debate today. Tom McCabe, as the Finance Committee's convener, highlighted some of the sensible recommendations that are to be found in the report, out of which I have selected two that appear to me to be headline recommendations. The first of those recommendations is that PPPs have made a valuable contribution to bringing about major public sector capital projects such as schools and hospitals. The second is that public bodies should consider the impact of PPP on employees so that workers' core employment conditions are protected. I will concentrate my remarks today on the latter point. We can understand that employees in the private and public sectors become insecure when they hear talk about their transfer to another employer. Public sector workers, particularly blue-collar workers, have a right to be cynical about that process, as their experiences have been more than difficult. Compulsory competitive tendering equalled longer hours, less pay, and the loss of holidays and trade union rights. It is therefore essential for all those concerned in PPP projects that the work force is reassured that its interests will be protected. A new building can be shiny and high tech but, without the commitment of skilled staff, service  improvements are unlikely to be sustained. People really matter in the process. I am glad that the committee believes, as it sets out in paragraph 25 of its report, that "the improvements in service delivery that can be attributed at least in part to PPP should be secured in a way that does not impinge on the core employment conditions of workers employed in those projects." I am also glad that the committee recognises and commends the Executive's commitment to getting rid of the two-tier work force, and I join it in that. The announcement by the Minister for Finance and Public Services of 26 November, that workers on a local authority contract will have statutory protection of their terms and conditions, is welcome. It builds on the protocol that has been agreed between the Executive and the trade unions to end the scope for a two-tier work force in all future PPP projects in Scotland. Now, anyone who works for the council and is transferred to a private company will have their terms and conditions and pension protected, based on and better than the regulations on transfer of undertakings and protection of employment—TUPE. As well as recommending the protection of workers' terms and conditions, the report argues that employees and their trade unions should be consulted at an early stage, given PPP's potential impact on staff. If we agree with the Minister for Finance and Public Services that we need to work with people at the front line and that their support and hard work is crucial, constructive consultation with the unions is essential. It is especially essential if we want to have in-house teams to bid against private companies, particularly in sectors such as catering and cleaning. I am confident that the trade unions will use the influence to the benefit of their members and to ensure the effective delivery of public services. We need to recognise that good customer service and good terms and conditions for staff are not mutually exclusive. Local authority employees do not only deliver essential services. They live in their communities, and I am confident that they would want to bring about not only secure employment, but improved public services for themselves and their families.

I thank those who have signed the motion and those who have stayed behind for tonight's debate. I am confident that the fact that many members have remained in the chamber is testimony to their genuine interest in the issue and has nothing at all to do with their trying to avoid the cold callers who night after night interrupt their tea with promises of untold riches if they change their gas or electricity supplier. I hope that they find attending tonight's debate slightly better than doing an impression of the poor woman in the advert hiding in a cupboard under the stairs because she is frightened of the doorbell ringing. However, the lengths to which we will all go to avoid utility companies' sales agents suggest how low the utilities market has sunk in the public eye. I make it clear at the outset that there is no doubt that people, particularly those on fixed incomes, can benefit from competition in the energy market. However, given some of the underhand doorstep selling tactics that are being used, it is no wonder that the industry has been brought into disrepute. We have all heard stories of aggressive, high-pressure selling, of sales agents tricking people into signing transfer agreements and of salesmen sitting in the public library with the electoral register filling out their forms. Such stories have understandably turned people off. I have also heard stories from the other side of the doorstep. One former salesman shocked me with his account of the sharp practices that he was forced to employ to cajole customers into switching suppliers. He made a number of serious  allegations, including that he was given, without any police vetting, a fake identification card. I demanded that those allegations be fully investigated and I am thankful that the minister has informed me that his office has contacted the industry regulator and that the company in question is now under investigation. Many in the chamber tonight could recount horror stories. It is easy enough to do that, but the key question is what we can do about the problem. I suggest the endorsement of three points. First, the industry watchdog, energywatch, as many members will be aware, is calling for the introduction of automatic minimum compensation payments for all cases of mis-selling and erroneous transfer. I back that measure. After all, if the energy companies are, as they say they are, in no mood to tolerate mis-selling and are driving it out of the industry, how could they possibly object? What better way is there for the companies to rebuild trust than by putting their money where their mouth is? Secondly, I welcome initiatives such as EnergySure, which for the first time officially recognises and accredits energy sales teams. However, to concentrate on individual salespeople, however abusive or unscrupulous they might be, misses the bigger point. Earlier, I touched on the fact that some sales agencies that are subcontracted by the bigger power companies put their employees under intolerable pressure to hit targets. It is reported that such pressure can include telling employees to exaggerate or even lie about projected savings or encouraging them to sneak past wardens into sheltered housing complexes and to knock on doors after 8 o'clock, in breach of industry rules. An employer who treats workers in such a way is hardly likely to be concerned about an employee losing his or her job. Of course, when things go wrong, all the parties can blame one another. Therefore, I call on the power companies to take the next step, to recognise that the protection of the customer is paramount and to move away from using arm's-length agencies towards having accountable, in-house sales teams. That is the least that they can do. Finally, we should consider what direct pressure we can apply on the power companies. Power companies are the partners with which we are delivering important anti-fuel-poverty schemes in Scotland, such as the warm deal and free central heating. How to square a company that works to reduce fuel poverty on the one hand and manipulates and exploits those on low incomes on the other hand is beyond me. Gas and electricity companies have an obligation under condition 25 of their licence to produce information and advice on energy  efficiency. I suggest that, if they put information and advice at the forefront of their advertising campaigns rather than use discredited doorstep selling, perhaps they could repair the damage that has been done to their reputations. If we cannot trust them on the doorstep or on the telephone, how can we trust them on any energy efficiency advice that they give? How can we trust any scheme—even schemes that are run by the Executive—if companies that use sharp practices are involved? Mis-selling risks undermining the Executive's groundbreaking policies on fuel poverty. I ask the minister to demand that companies stop undermining the Executive's work and face up to their licence obligations. Restoring faith in the energy market is in all our interests. If we hear nothing but horror stories about people being transferred without their knowledge or being bullied into signing a form that they have not read, who in their right mind would think about changing a supplier? That image of the industry will not only make it harder for energy companies to attract new customers, but discourage consumers from using the market to find the deal that is right for them. It is high time that all interested parties—the power companies, the consumer groups, the Executive and others—got round the table and made a concerted effort to drive out underhand sales practices once and for all. The industry needs safeguards and the public demand action.

Does the Deputy First Minister accept that the firefighters' dispute will not be resolved by the nationalists' scaremongering or by the Tories' war rhetoric? As in every dispute, there are two sides to the argument. [ Interruption. ]

This gives me the opportunity to say once again that I have been heckled by boilermakers and Tommy Sheridan ain't no boilermaker. There are two sides to any dispute. The dispute will not be resolved in the Parliament. The sooner that the two sides get together to resolve the dispute, the better.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will assist secondary school pupils in fifth and sixth year to strike the correct balance between work and school. (S1O-5857)

Is the minister aware of the recent study by Jim McKechnie of the University of Paisley that indicates that although a small amount of work can boost academic achievement, working more than 10 hours a week can bring down exam results? How will the Executive help students in the crucial fifth and sixth years to gain valuable experience of the world of work, while protecting them against overwork and exploitation?

Ask a question.

Does the Deputy First Minister agree that strike action must be regarded both as a failure and as a reflection on both sides of any dispute? Does he accept that the firefighters' job has changed over the years and that they require a pay formula that recognises the current situation? Does he agree that the dispute can be resolved only around the table and that firemen would be well advised to retain the public support that they have by possibly providing emergency cover in serious situations?

I am sorry, Presiding Officer, I thought that I was to speak later. There are those who would sneer at the debate because the idea of the Parliament talking about litter, dog fouling and fly tipping offends them. I agree that those issues might not be at the top of the political agenda in Edinburgh's coffee shops or broadsheet opinion pages, where people would rather talk about constitutional niceties or political philosophies. The issue is one on which the politicians and the people know better; they know that the railings and the palings matter. The debate even brought a lukewarm welcome from the nationalists today, so sensitive are they to political opinion. The environment matters to me and to my constituents, but we are concerned less about the hole in the ozone layer, genetically modified crops and having a sea that is safe for dolphins than we are about having streets that are safe for our daughters, neighbourhoods that are free from litter, walls that are free from graffiti and safe open spaces in which our children can play free from exhaust fumes, used needles and dog muck. Sadly, there are neighbourhoods in Greenock and Inverclyde—indeed, throughout Scotland—that do not come up to that standard. Despite the strenuous efforts of proud local residents to keep standards high, all too often that can seem to be a losing battle. Communities are entitled to expect support from the Parliament and from the law in  their efforts to safeguard their neighbourhoods. This debate should be a tribute to those efforts. The money that the Executive has allocated to tackle crime and vandalism is to be welcomed and the partnership that we have with local authorities and the communities that they serve is having an immediate impact on people's quality of life throughout Scotland. It is having an impact through free swimming lessons, anti-litter campaigns, improved roads and lighting, provision and improvement of play areas and through road safety measures. The list could go on. The announcement on fireworks will be particularly welcomed in the chamber today. The clear message from the street is for us to press on and make the difference; we are to press on with initiatives on youth crime and neighbourhood wardens and we are to reject the whinging of the nationalists. As a party, the nationalists exist to stop the Parliament and the Executive achieving and, in the process, to criticise all of our efforts. We must press on and make the difference.

He is behind the hedge.

Does the minister welcome the fact that Eaga has put in place a parliamentary officer who will be able to deal with complaints on behalf of constituents, rather than having them wait a month or more for a question to be selected here that would not help them?

I am sure that Mr Rumbles would agree that not all words of wisdom come from Liberal Democrat manifestos. If Mr Rumbles's son or daughter told him that they wanted to leave formal education at 14, would he be aghast or would he celebrate?

Answer the question.

Before addressing the motion, I would like to say a few words about the Tory amendment. The Tories propose to give children the right to leave school at 14 and study a wider range of subjects, such as chimney sweeping. The suggestion is certainly not new, but it is far more flexible than that party's previous policy of giving children the right to leave school at 16 and be forced into a youth training scheme.

I will take the member's intervention later, if he likes. During my time at school, leaving school at 14 and 15 was the norm for too many. We left, undertook apprenticeships and thought that we had settled in a job for life. However, a problem arose when the supposedly secure jobs ceased to exist. Too many of us had a narrow set of skills that were of no use in the labour market. The absence of a broader and more formal education meant that it took far longer for many people to  find work elsewhere or to retrain. That led to the loss of confidence, a fear of change in the work place and a resistance to returning to education and training.

I might support the amendment, but I would need an assurance that we will not see kids turned out on the streets and assurances from Brian Monteith that he has put his son's name down for a £1,000-a-week brickie's job. Perhaps then I would be more convinced that it was a good idea to leave school at 14. We see the legacy of what I have described in low productivity, low pay, low skills and dead-end, short-term contracts. That is the reality for people who leave school with no qualifications or at 14, 15 or whatever. I am uneasy that any attempt to turn the clock back 35 years could lead us to repeating such mistakes. I wonder whether any member would honestly be happy for his or her child to leave school at 14. The Tories are talking about other people's children. Would they resist their children leaving school at 14 or encourage them? I do not think that they would encourage them to do so. I would therefore welcome reassurances on the subject before I vote for the Tory amendment. I welcome the reference in the substantive motion to "new approaches ... to modern languages". That reminds me of a story that I once read about a Scottish director of a company who was doing business in Italy. He lifted the telephone in a crisis and had to speak to someone in Italy. Of course, he could not speak Italian. A woman answered the phone and told him that it was a public holiday in Italy and no one could help him. "Why can't you help me?" he said. She replied, "I am the cleaner." That would not happen in Scotland. For too many, languages are a speciality in Scotland. However, languages are rapidly becoming the soft skills that we need for the future. Our lack of language skills have long been a national embarrassment but, thankfully, action is being taken to sort out the problem, not least by IBM, which employs people in my constituency. About five years ago, IBM established a partnership with Inverclyde's schools. The aim was to address the national skills shortage in languages and equip school leavers with the business skills that they need to operate in an increasingly European environment. Students are mentored through their Scottish Qualifications Authority-recognised higher qualification in language for business by native speakers at IBM.  The scheme is also run remotely through online distance learning.

I campaigned for trade union membership at IBM and am pleased to say that there are trade union members at IBM. Some are my colleagues in the Labour party. At the end of the course, the students get the chance to spend a week at an IBM subsidiary in either France or Spain. More important, if they pass the course, they are guaranteed a full-time position at IBM. To date, 45 pupils have gone through the programme. I hope that the minister recognises such examples of local good practice. I ask her to consider how we can build on such examples so that all Scotland's pupils have opportunities that are at present available only to those who are lucky enough to live in Greenock and Inverclyde.

Glasgow's problem was an increase in demand.

A person does not need to be a brain surgeon to realise that Scotland, and the west of Scotland and my Greenock and Inverclyde constituency in particular, have a history of ill health. In my constituency, a typical man or woman will die earlier than their average Scottish counterpart. In addition, as Margaret Curran said, they will carry the burden of ill health and incapacity with them for many years before they die. Thankfully, trends are improving, but there is no room for complacency. Average life expectancy is rising, fewer people are smoking and more mothers are breastfeeding. The increased investment to tackle heart disease and cancer is welcome and popular, but there is still a massive job to be done. We will not win any popularity prizes by trying to encourage Scots to take more responsibility for their own health. Convincing people to stop smoking, reduce their alcohol intake or give up their pudding suppers is a challenge in a country that sometimes seems to be more interested in the health of its national football team than in the health of the nation. However, we must convince people to do such things, as prevention is better than cure. The programme for action recognises that ill health is the final insult to those who are forced to endure poor housing, unemployment and low pay. Only the Executive recognises that ill health cannot be tackled in isolation. Tackling ill health means improving housing, ending low pay, tackling unemployment and working together in the Parliament and with our Westminster colleagues to ensure that we can and will do better for the people of Scotland. That approach should be contrasted with the arguments of the nationalists. In Linda Fabiani's amendment and their speeches, the nationalists say that nothing is being done and that nothing can be done. The Tory amendment simply suggests that all that is required of vulnerable people is that they pull themselves up by their bootstraps—that is what the Tories mean. Thankfully, politicians in the Parliament came together as a coalition and put aside their political differences to ensure that the Parliament would deliver for the people of Scotland. I am proud to be part of that coalition and am delighted that, in the document, the Executive has committed itself to improving the lives of the most disadvantaged people in Scotland.

This week, as part of sign language awareness week, I attended an event at Garvel School for the Deaf in my constituency. I met parents and pupils who expressed their concern about future specialist provision. Will the minister assure me and my constituents that children with special needs will get their fair share of the extra cash that is being invested in our schools?

I thank George Lyon for giving us the opportunity to debate the issue, but I regret that I cannot support his motion. I cannot accept that transport links, in the shape of the transport interchange and the extensive redevelopment of the area around Gourock pier, which has received substantial Executive support, should be at risk. I seek assurance from the minister on that point. I share the concerns of George Lyon and others about the Gourock to Dunoon ferry service. Like George Lyon, I have a strong constituency interest in the matter and have had regular meetings with,  and briefings from, ministers for some time. Lewis Macdonald has been left in no doubt about my disappointment with the content and timing of the announcement to reduce the passenger service. It would be churlish not to welcome the continuation of the subsidy for the passenger service, but that is seen as a bit of a hollow victory and as one of those odd EU decisions, because a reduced service will be delivered for an increased subsidy. That is the sort of decision that brings the EU into disrepute. I share George Lyon's concerns about the restriction of the route to passenger-only services. Inverclyde needs effective, attractive and efficient transport links. I fear that reduction to a passenger-only service will cause a breakdown in the use of ferry services. The Gourock to Dunoon route that links the centres of the towns connects with the existing rail service at Gourock and forms a direct link to the west of Scotland, Glasgow airport and the rest of the world. As well as being a significant link between the two communities, the route is important for the local economies. The economic strategy of Inverclyde Council is to promote the area as a place of opportunity for substantial economic growth. It is keen to attract businesses, families and tourists. I understand that Argyll and Bute Council has similar initiatives. Therefore, it is important that the Executive makes clear its commitment to the future of the service over the longer term. I also have some local concerns. The present facilities at Gourock include the CalMac headquarters, which provides the area with a wide range of highly valued, quality jobs. We do not wish those jobs to be put at risk. George Lyon mentioned traffic congestion, which is already a problem for Gourock residents, with 110,000 cars and 9,000 heavy goods vehicles and coaches using its narrow roads. I concede that that existing problem will continue to be a problem irrespective of the decision that is taken. The problem is growing and must be acknowledged by Western Ferries at McInroy's Point. Proposals for services for foot passengers only raise serious concerns among my constituents. I hope that the minister does not have a closed mind on that matter and that he will treat my constituents' concerns seriously and consider all the proposals in order to ensure the future of this important service.

That is not a point of order.

Come on, John. Release your potential. [Laughter.]

We do not want to hear any confessions.

Welcome it, then.

I welcome the investment and the priorities, but does the minister recognise that barriers exist to the delivery of improvements? For example, work on the A78 West Station bridge in my constituency has been dogged by delay, which has caused great inconvenience to constituents and to business. Will the minister investigate that matter and bring it to a speedy conclusion?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Members of the Opposition did not observe parliamentary protocols in this morning's debate—they made their speeches and then left the chamber. That is becoming a regular practice and we might need to take some action.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive has any plans to recommend to the Parliament the use of revenue-varying powers conferred by the Scotland Act 1998. (S1F-2098)

I welcome that clear response, as I am sure will many hard-working families in my constituency. Does the First Minister agree that the spending review confirms the success of the devolution partnership? In the spirit of cross-party co-operation, will he join John Swinney in congratulating Gordon Brown on his budget, which will deliver benefits for public services in Scotland?

He has had more than seven minutes.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I ask you to take note of the continuing disrespect that the nationalists show for debates in the chamber. We saw only four of them turn up last week for the debate on the spending review and we saw their lead speaker today make a speech, which we all had to endure, and then leave the chamber almost immediately. Will you ensure that the member is aware of your disapproval?

Will the member give way?

Let me inform Mr Davidson that Mr Kerr is at a business meeting, which has kept him away from the debating chamber. I also point out that, when the minister made his statement, the SNP members left the chamber. They did not take advantage of the opportunity to speak to the minister.

I welcome the spending review announcement. I welcome it for my pensioners, for my young people and for those in my community who will be protected by a £270 million investment in front-line policing. I welcome it for my school kids, who will be taken out of crumbling classrooms as part of the largest ever school-building programme. I welcome it for the local national health service. There will be a doubling of spending on health improvement in my area, which is blighted by some of the worst heart disease and cancer rates in the country. I welcome the spending review for the young people who will not be branded as failures just because their first choice after school is not college or university. They will benefit from the expansion of modern apprenticeships. I welcome it for every man, woman and child in Scotland who is sick of litter in their streets, dog mess on the pavements and graffiti on the walls, all of which drag down their communities and neighbourhoods. I particularly welcome the announcement for my local college, which will receive a share of the additional £120 million for further education. That investment will allow a record figure of 500,000 Scots of all ages each year to reap the benefit of lifelong learning. Lifelong learning equals a highly skilled work force, which will close the productivity gap, will make our companies more competitive and will broaden and strengthen our economic base. The spending review is good not only for business; it is good for workers and for the acquisition of skills, which, as we all acknowledge, are a passport to a better paid and more secure  job. More money alone is not enough. We must get more bang for our buck. The investment that has been announced must be matched by change. To return to the topic of lifelong learning, there are several examples of how a bit of reform, co-operation and flexibility could deliver results by providing the sort of services that working lifelong learners want. In my constituency, there are many contract workers who work intensively.

I do not have much time and I would like to get through my speech. Those contract workers work intensively for six or nine months and do nothing for the rest of the year. Many of them want to use those three or six months constructively, to learn or improve skills. Introducing more flexibility into the traditional academic year could allow them to do that. There are also many shift workers who are disadvantaged because the colleges close when they are ready to study or because they cannot submit coursework online. All those issues are important and have been identified in the spending review. We cannot ignore the recurring theme of delivery. We all share the frustration of constituents who wait for buses that do not turn up and who cannot obtain a place in a residential care home. We need to tackle that issue effectively. I welcome the Executive's recognition that we need to work with the UK Parliament, the trade unions, business and local government to make the investment work for the people of Scotland. Let there be no mistake: we need to deliver. Political spin is another theme about which we have heard much today. The SNP has been working overtime.

No, I will not. That party fears good news more than Dracula fears the silver bullet. The nationalists have been working overtime to rubbish our investment in Scotland, but they are kidding no one. They will not kid the Scottish people. The best answer to the ridicule that the SNP has poured on the announcement all week is to deliver for the people of Scotland. We will deliver despite the SNP, not because of it.

I acknowledge the role of the police in the matter, but does the minister agree that we also have to tackle the strange belief in Scotland that the carrying of knives is acceptable?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It  would appear that the SNP members hate good news, and there is a lot of it going around this morning. Does that explain why there are only four SNP members in the chamber? Are they more interested in a headline than in the substance of Scotland's future?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made recently on the joint Scottish-Irish bid to host the European football championships in 2008. (S1O-5488)

I thank the minister for his response. Does he accept that having a healthier national game would stand us in better stead when we bid for such prestigious events? Does he further accept that grass-roots facilities are key to such bids? Will he come to my constituency to see the work that is being done by Gourock Youth Athletic Club which, with no Government funding, is working to keep 700 local kids off the streets, off their computers and off drugs?

It is right that at this time the Executive and local authorities should focus on introducing free personal care for the elderly. However, will the minister assure the chamber that he will also take a keen interest in the level of provision by local authorities of aids and adaptations? As he knows, those are vital in allowing older people to stay in their own homes for as long as they want.

So?

Will Richard Lochhead give way?

Does the member not agree that the only issue for the SNP is how to get itself out of a hole? The SNP has consistently opposed Sewel motions, even when they have benefited the disabled. Today the SNP is in a hole and is trying to get out of it.

Has the SNP faced those concerns?

Get to the constitution.

Where is Andrew Wilson?

God bless him.

I did not expect to get in at all at number 5. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Executive is taking to correct any funding mismatch in respect of six local authorities as identified by Professor Arthur Midwinter. (S1F-1907)

Does the First Minister accept that Professor Midwinter's report requires a response from the Executive and that a request from the affected councils for a meeting with the Minister for Finance and Public Services is reasonable? Will he assure me that that meeting will take place sooner rather than later?

I welcome the opportunity to take part in the debate. Like many others, I have recollections of images of the fire service and its impact on my life over the years. There were many fires and explosions in the Clyde shipyards. The abiding memory that I have is that, as we were running away from the danger, the professional firemen were running in. The debate gives us an opportunity to salute that professionalism. Many of the images of the fire service—whether of New York, arc lights or firefighters attending accidents or fires—are dramatic, but I would like to concentrate on some of the less dramatic aspects of firefighters' work. I welcome the renewed emphasis on fire prevention through work with the community, which the policy paper outlines. This might be a well-worn cliché, and it has been used already today, but prevention is always better than cure. I encourage people to swap their chip pan for a deep fat fryer or to renew the batteries in their smoke alarms, as it could be argued that such steps are equally as important as a fast response time to house fires. I welcome the policy paper's suggestions on how to develop fire prevention work. I note with interest that it proposes that fire services work with local authorities, the police and others in community safety partnerships to promote fire safety and that fire stations be opened up to act as a community focal point. I want to mention Trish Godman's station at Port Glasgow and Greenock. The crews there are certainly engaged in their community. They were at a plant sale last Saturday and are often at charity events. They provide access and work in schools—their work is very visible. Bob Wright, chairman of the Strathclyde Fire Brigade Preservation Group, told me that there is a combined fire brigade museum and community fire safety centre in Lauriston Place in Edinburgh. He argues—this is where the vested interest comes in—that the old fire station in Greenock could house a similar project for Strathclyde. He  suggests that it could be a focal point for fire prevention education, combined with a fun day out for children and young people, which would address some of the points that have been made. It could run practical initiatives for parents and sell smokeless ashtrays and discounted smoke alarms and provide advice about how and where to fit them. It could even start a chip pan trade-in scheme—who knows? As with all such projects, funding is the key issue, but Bob Wright argues that housing the projects under one roof with private and voluntary sector involvement would make the scheme viable. Such a scheme is an ideal vehicle for driving forward some of the commendable proposals in the policy paper. I am confident that the Strathclyde Fire Brigade Preservation Group will make submissions during the consultation period. I hope, and expect, that its views will be taken into consideration.

It will come as no surprise that I express pride in belonging to a party that faces up to the  responsibility of power and shares it with our coalition partners to deliver, for the people of Scotland, greater access to all levels of education, free personal care, and a massive investment in housing that goes directly to some of the most marginalised people in Scotland. We do not want to be complacent, because there is still much to do. We contrast our record—of parties working together to make the Parliament a success that delivers—with the failure of the SNP's basic mission.

No, thank you. The SNP has failed to progress the case for independence. The SNP has also failed as a parliamentary group, because it promised to make the Parliament a success but takes every opportunity to talk the Parliament down. The SNP has a failed leader who does not and cannot stand up to his detractors on the SNP benches; nor can he stand up for his loyal supporters who are being picked off every weekend and whose political careers are being ended. He says nothing in their defence. He gives no word of public sympathy and no word of condemnation when the cliques end the careers of our colleagues in the Parliament. The SNP is aware of its failure and realises that the people of Scotland reject anti-English rhetoric and the politics of grievance. Bulldog Wilson is not present, but the sight of him in an England top at the world cup will not convince people that the SNP has changed—as we have heard this morning, it has not. No communication strategy, however sophisticated, will convince people that the SNP has changed or seeks to make the devolved settlement a success. The SNP must put aside the constitutional arguments and the excuse that we cannot achieve anything unless we achieve independence. The SNP must work to make the Parliament a success. That is the only way in which it will gain the respect of the Scottish people and deliver for them.

John Swinney has said much about the past three years of the Parliament. Is he prepared to apologise to the Scottish people for his behaviour and that of his party over the past three years? They have gret and girned in the Parliament and talked the Parliament down.

I thank Cathy Peattie for giving us the opportunity of having this debate. International workers memorial day will be a time for reflection for people throughout the world; it will be a time to remember friends, workmates, and constituents, such as those who died in the Piper Alpha disaster; it will be a time to remember those who simply left for work early one dark morning and never returned home, leaving so much unsaid and so much pain in the family. The memorial day will also be for those who suffered from asbestos-related disease and had a painful, preventable and unnecessary death. We must remind ourselves that the memorial day is not simply a day to remember, but a day to give thanks for those groups who work with the victims of asbestos-related disease, and those groups, some of whom are in the public gallery, who give advice to workers on health and safety and employment rights. There are also groups, such as Phase 2 in my constituency, which deal not with the victims of old industry, but with victims of the electronics industry, one of the so-called new industries. Those groups provide a campaigning edge, but also provide vital support  and a network for the victims and their families. We must also remind ourselves that the memorial day is not simply an annual event. We, as elected representatives, have a responsibility to act on behalf of the victims. I do not say this out of self-satisfaction, but I am pleased that we have had the opportunity for such debates in the chamber over the past three years and that people have been able to meet and lobby ministers. I am also pleased with the hard work of the Justice 2 Committee on the asbestos petition. We have also pressurised the Health and Safety Executive and employers. Although many of those matters are reserved to the UK Parliament, I am pleased that they have been part of the work of this Parliament. Let me end on this vein: although we remember and give thanks, we must also act. I want to finish with a question for the minister. Will he give us an update on the £3 million that was promised for occupational health, which was to be particularly targeted towards small businesses? Such a service would raise awareness of health and safety issues in the workplace and would prevent workplace accidents and disease. Where is that money and how will it be spent effectively to meet those objectives?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Do you believe that it is now required that we should ask the Procedures Committee to examine equal time for people who are asking questions? I make that point seriously. Could the Procedures Committee also examine when a question is a question and when it becomes a speech, and when a question is acceptable or unacceptable?

There is nobody in, Presiding Officer.

This is taking up time.

rose—

I have a point of information. The issue of debates being brought forward was discussed in the Parliamentary Bureau, as the Presiding Officer described, and the conclusions were published. The Parliamentary Bureau also agreed that the business managers would inform members who lodged a members' business motion of the possibility of the debate being brought forward, so that they could contact organisations and so on. Perhaps Gill Paterson could inform us whether that action was taken in this case.

Given the result of the defence review, the First Minister will understand the great disappointment and concern that has been expressed by my constituents who travel to Faslane and Coulport every day. While we would expect and welcome action from the Scottish Executive, we need to ensure that the Ministry of Defence faces up to its responsibilities to the workers and communities who have served it well for a long time. Will the First Minister recognise that the impact of the job losses will affect many communities at the Tail o' the Bank and that any action plans should reflect that situation?

I welcome the significant investment of £3 million that has been allocated to the transport interchange plan for Gourock. Through her involvement in the area, the minister will know of the delays that have plagued the project. Will she tell the chamber what she has done, and what she will do, to ensure that the project goes ahead as soon as possible?

I thank Colin Campbell for giving us the opportunity to discuss regeneration. As he said, it is an issue that concerns many communities throughout Scotland, in particular communities that were formerly dependent on heavy industries. One such area is my constituency, Greenock and Inverclyde. That is hardly a surprise if we consider the speed of decline in shipbuilding there in the late 1970s and in the 1980s. James Lamont and Company of Port Glasgow closed in 1979; the Greenock Dockyard Company closed in 1980; George Brown and Company of Greenock closed in 1983; Scotts Shipbuilding and Engineering Company of Greenock closed in 1984; and Lithgow's of Port Glasgow closed in 1988—not to mention Kincaid's engine works. That industrial vandalism ripped the heart out of the community and left us with mass unemployment, widespread deprivation and precious few prospects. If Shakespeare will forgive my murdering of his verse, "I come to praise Inverclyde, not to bury it." Despite the collapse of traditional industry, progress has been made. The local work force has retrained and reskilled. We have achieved the status of manufacturing export capital of Scotland, and we made the transition from building ships to making microchips. Unemployment is low, and the number of employed is very high. Our educational attainment levels are, according to Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, among the best in the country. The number of my constituents who are in full-time higher education is now 2.4 per cent above the national average, and the number of people who are in further education is nearly 11 per cent above the national average. There has been a dramatic redevelopment of  our waterfront, as was witnessed by the 800,000 visitors to the area during the tall ships event. We have attracted such companies as One 2 One, as well as the Royal Bank of Scotland mortgage centre, to complement the more established major employers such as IBM and National Semiconductors. House prices in Gourock, for example, have risen by 69 per cent since 1991, and Wemyss Bay and Inverkip are growing so quickly that the local public services are having to work very hard to keep up. Despite that progress, the perception of decline remains. That perception plays a big part in one of the key challenges that Inverclyde faces today: a decline in population. We are making progress, and are looking for light whenever it is there. The most recent population projections have been revised upwards, with the figures showing that the rate of decline is stabilising. However, the challenges remain. The question now is how to reverse the trend. First, we must examine what pushes people away. There is no doubt that the jobs issue plays a part, but it is not simply a question of the number of jobs available, but of their quality. We cannot build and sustain communities on low-paid, low-skill temporary employment. We need to understand the needs of existing employers in electronics and in financial services, to convert some of our derelict land for inward investment and to realise the massive opportunities for tourism and leisure. Our successful James Watt College of Further and Higher Education will be a key player in that process. The regeneration game must take the form of a package deal. To make Inverclyde a place of choice, we need to create a pleasant and safe place to live. We need to provide affordable, high-quality housing across all sectors, and in areas where people wish to live. Parents need to know that their children will be well educated in a warm, comfortable classroom that is fit for teaching in the 21 st century. Our environment must be improved and our brownfield sites must be redeveloped. Crime and the fear of crime can push people away from a community. For that reason, it is important that we crack down on crime and tackle anti-social behaviour. We in Inverclyde will do our very best to ensure that permanent and terminal decline is not our fate.

Will the minister confirm that the letter is not signed by Alex Salmond, the former MSP who escaped to Westminster?

What issues would the member like to debate in the chamber?

Will the member give way?

The member spoke about robbing Peter to pay Paul. Will he confirm that he supports the policy—being promoted by some members of his party—to reallocate moneys from the budget to better-off areas at the expense of poorer areas?

Will the member take an intervention?

Mr Davidson has mentioned the budget and various people. Are we going to get something different from the Conservatives? Is he going to explain to us what cuts they would impose on the budget?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to support economic regeneration in Scotland in 2002. (S1O-4463)

I thank the minister for her response. The minister will be aware of the importance of the electronics industry in my constituency of Greenock and Inverclyde, and of the restructuring that is taking place within that industry, not to mention the impact that that restructuring is having on jobs throughout Scotland. For example, IBM is outsourcing desktop computer manufacture, which is presenting smaller contractors with many challenges and opportunities. What support and  advice can the minister offer to help such companies that are based in Scotland to meet those challenges and opportunities?

Will Nicola Sturgeon explain how the SNP's priority of holding a referendum on independence would solve the problem of bedblocking?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you give us an assurance that you will mention the absence of the Conservative front-bench members, who have left the debate? The Presiding Officer has made public his concern about members who take part in a debate and then leave. It is a disgraceful discourtesy to the Parliament and to participants in the debate that those members have left.

It has been very interesting up until now, but will John Swinney tell us when we will come to the bit about the SNP's priorities and how he will deliver them?

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has made to Railtrack following its decision of 5 December 2001 not to support four Scottish Executive-funded rail enhancement projects. (S1O-4290)

When the minister next makes representations to Railtrack, will he take the opportunity to clarify whether the company continues to claim that it has pulled out of the Gourock project because no signalling engineers are available? Will he advise Railtrack that the Strategic Rail Authority takes the view that there is short-term availability of signalling engineers? Will he take urgent action to get to the bottom of this issue?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate, given that the cancer rate in my constituency is 12 per cent above the national average. As a consequence of that high rate, my constituents and I know the Beatson unit well. Members of my family still speak of the day on which my grandfather left his house in Mill Street in Greenock for an operation in Broadstone hospital in Port Glasgow. The whole street turned out, not to wish him well, but to say goodbye—such was the low expectation of survival 60 years ago. Of course, the people in the street were right: it was discovered that he had stomach cancer and  he never left the hospital alive. Contrast the fear of yesteryear with the high expectations of today. Now, people rightly demand early screening, early diagnosis, early admission to the hospital of their choice and the best available treatment when they are there. For many in the west of Scotland, the focus for those high expectations has been the Beatson oncology centre, where much good work has been done, continues to be done and needs to be done. I am proud that the Labour party shares those ambitions. In our manifesto for the 2001 Westminster elections, we recognised that cancer care was a priority and we have put in place an overall strategy to treat, detect and prevent cancers. Early detection will be boosted by improving screening technology, which will in turn improve survival rates. Treatment will be improved by investment in new hardware, one-stop clinics, more specialist cancer posts, MRI scanners and cancer-imaging equipment in all the health boards. At the Beatson centre, where there is no denying the difficulties, hard work is being done by the minister to turn the situation around. I welcome, as does the SNP, the action that the minister has taken. The Labour party created the national health service, worked to raise excellence and confidence and is now working to tackle decline and meet the public's high expectations. Contrast that action with the rhetoric of the Scottish National Party. Its members have said a lot about cancer this morning, but its 2001 manifesto had sections on referendums, a written constitution and freshwater fishing, but not on cancer. The SNP's uncosted health policies have plenty of room for sections on a national health care commission, the regulation of the content of school meals and on cleaner hospitals, but no room for a section on cancer services. In this morning's motion, the SNP missed an opportunity to tell us—

I am challenging Ms White and her party to come up with ideas to solve the problems that she mentions. I find nothing in the SNP's policies to explain to anybody what the SNP would do.

Just a minute. Previously, Richard Lochhead suggested that we should take money from places such as  Glasgow and put it into the north-east, although that would diminish the share of the funds that Glasgow gets to fight cancer—that is what the SNP says on the issue. The SNP should rise to the challenge of improving cancer services and try to meet our vision. This morning, in a 10-minute speech, all Nicola Sturgeon could come up with was a suggestion that we should solve the situation by bribing consultants. "SNP" still stands for "Still No Polices". The minister has issued a challenge to the SNP to join Labour in the attempt to give the people of Scotland the cancer services that they require.

No. SNP members need to wipe away their crocodile tears, roll up their sleeves and get involved in ensuring that the people of Scotland have the cancer services that they deserve. Moaning and groaning don't solve nothing.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made with its school building programme. (S1O-4248)

I presume that the minister will be unable to comment on Inverclyde Council's plans to build six new schools and fully refurbish 26 others. However, does she accept that those plans are in the public domain and are of great interest to the parents and pupils of Greenock and Inverclyde? In the interim, what guidance will be issued to ensure that the parents and pupils who will be affected by the plan are fully informed, consulted and involved at every stage?

It does not surprise me that the minister knows more about the views of Inverclyde people than Lloyd Quinan does. Is the minister aware that the research to which he referred also found that 90 per cent of school board chairs in Inverclyde agreed that improving school conditions and the state of repairs in schools is important?

To ask the Scottish Executive what impact Railtrack plc going into administration will have on planned joint capital projects with public and private sector organisations. (S1O-4086)

I welcome the minister's response. She will be aware of the delays that face the joint project to redevelop Gourock waterfront. What particular assistance can she offer to ensure that Railtrack quickly prioritises sufficient technical resources for that project and that it also deals with the limits of the station regeneration budget so that they do not become another constraint to the project?

rose—

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether inspections carried out by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education on the education functions of local authorities will improve standards of education delivered in schools. (S1O-3908)

Is the minister aware of the excellent HMIE inspection of Inverclyde Council that was published on 25 September and which found that, of the 11 performance measures, Inverclyde Council was very good in seven and good on the remaining four? Does he agree with me that—given that Inverclyde Council continues to face the challenges of poverty and deprivation—the director of education, Bernard McLeary, and his staff deserve our special congratulations on the achievement?

Does the First Minister agree that, among all the horrific reports that we have received from America over the past couple of days, there is at least one heartwarming story? It is about Dr Hannay from Scotland, who was on holiday in America and who immediately made himself available to treat the injured. Does the First Minister also agree that that simple act of humanity is in complete contrast to the murderous actions of the terrorists?

Will the minister confirm that the error will not have wider implications? In particular, I refer to the West Station bridge in my constituency, for which there is planned investment. Will that go ahead? Will it be affected?

Does the minister accept that, as I said in relation to the Minister for Finance and Local Government's statement earlier today, there seems to be a real problem in getting the money that we allocate into front-line services? I was comforted to hear Angus MacKay say that he would do all that he could to ensure that that happened in future. Is the minister aware of the local review of maternity services? Will she confirm that it is the role of Argyll and Clyde Health Board to ensure that any review of maternity services in that area is compatible with the principles of the Scottish maternity framework, with its emphasis on the wider needs of the family, in terms of choice—[MEMBERS: "Speech!"]—continuity of service and accessibility?

I welcome the minister's statement, as will many of my constituents. The glum faces of the forces of darkness, represented in this chamber by the Tories and the Scottish nationalists, only add to my pleasure. How can we reassure the patients and the professionals that the additional money for the health service will directly affect front-line services and will not end up in some black hole of bureaucracy?

To ask the First Minister what further progress is being made in reducing disruptive behaviour in schools and creating a school environment where all children can pursue their education. (S1F-1164)

Will the First Minister confirm that, to help children to pursue their education, the provision of modern learning environments is vital? It will cost my local authority, Inverclyde Council, £60 million simply to keep its schools wind and watertight for the next 15 years. Will the First Minister confirm that local authorities throughout Scotland can expect the Executive's support in developing the educational infrastructure that our children deserve?

Yes, you do.

Given Norway's sky-high taxes and beer at £4 a pint—[ Interruption. ] If members give it out they have to take it as well. Given those points, does the minister believe that Norway offers an excellent blueprint for an independent Scotland?

I thank my colleague and friend Des McNulty for giving us the opportunity to have this debate. When we recently debated compensation for mesothelioma victims, we could not have expected that the situation would get worse. However, in life when one door closes, another one slams in your face. The provisional liquidation of Chester Street Insurance Holdings was a door slamming in the face of asbestos victims. As usual, asbestos campaigners rose to the challenge. MPs and MSPs were contacted, the Daily Record got behind the campaign and we had a successful rally in Clydebank. The fact that the campaign has resulted in this evening's debate gives us some satisfaction. However, in a sense we have come full circle. We are back where we were when we debated the issue previously. Victims must still prove their cases, with all the difficulties that that involves. We have heard some of those difficulties described today. The Parliament and the Executive have the job of influencing the justice system. We must work to remove the obstacles that cause delays, and we must make it easier for cases to be heard by juries, rather than by judges. The justice system needs to give consideration to terminally ill victims and it could, if it wished, review the powers of the courts to allow interim payments pending final resolution of cases. The debate also gives us an opportunity to pay tribute to the men and women who have campaigned on the issue in the past and to those who continue to do so. This is not the first debate on asbestos-related illnesses to take place in the Parliament. The campaign for a worldwide ban on asbestos products, justice for the victims, and medical research and specialist care for victims and their families will ensure that it is not the last. We wish the campaign well.

indicated disagreement.

I thank those members who have stayed for the debate and those who signed the motion. I am sure that we will hear a lot in the next half hour or so about the role that many different local newspapers play in communities throughout Scotland and about the contribution that they make to civic life. My local newspaper, the Greenock Telegraph , is as much a fixture of local life as the town hall or the River Clyde. I should perhaps declare an interest before going any further. I am a former employee of the Greenock Telegraph , and delivered the paper between '62 and '64.

No, no. I just look 63 now. Little did I know that the skills that I learned doing battle with furious dogs and lethal garden gates just to reach a rusty letterbox would stand me in good stead, particularly in the past couple of weeks, for delivering leaflets. One of the features that sets local newspapers apart from their national counterparts is that their stories have a direct impact on the lives of their readers. The "Greenock Tele", as it is called, acts as a focal point for community life. It chronicles the hatches, dispatches and matches in the church and on the football field, academic achievements, court reports and other public events. Local newspapers provide a level of scrutiny of local elected representatives, such as ourselves, that broadcast and other national media cannot provide. However much we rant and rave about how local newspapers cover a specific story, we  know in our heart of hearts that what they do is good for democracy and the political process. Local papers also help people who have left the area, and even the country, to keep in touch. I write a short column in the Greenock Telegraph every week about the goings-on in this place. The column has my e-mail address at the bottom and I am amazed by the number of e-mails that I receive from Greenockians working, for example, for IBM in America, for an engineering company in Canada or in the construction industry in Italy. They read the paper, seek my opinions and want to keep in touch with what is happening locally and in the Scottish Parliament. We have had relatives making inquiries and representations from Canada about the care of an elderly uncle. That was brought about by new technology and the local newspaper. It would be remiss of me—given that we have just discussed the Rankin maternity unit and given my involvement in the shipbuilding industry through its decline—not to mention local newspapers' campaigning role. They have the resources and local knowledge to run campaigns that bring matters of local concern to the attention of the public. Local papers have another crucial role: they are a window on their community. They give us a unique opportunity to present all that is positive within our area to a wider audience. That is assisted by Scottish Television's lunch time "Scotland Today" and BBC Scotland's "Newsdrive", both of which review local papers daily. I welcome that. It would be in everybody's interest if more of that was done, including a review of the many weekly titles in Scotland. The Greenock Telegraph was launched on 18 March 1857, at a price of 2d. It was originally published every Wednesday and Saturday. Two years later, the paper started to be published three times a week and the price was halved to a penny—newspaper wars indeed. In 1863, the paper became Britain's first halfpenny daily newspaper. That caused others, such as the North and  South Shields Gazette , The Evening Citizen in Glasgow, The Echo in  London, the Belfast Telegraph and the Paisley Express to follow suit, which did a great deal to bring cheap, reliable newspapers to the British people. For 144 years, the Greenock Telegraph , with its unique local angle, has reported many historic events: emigration from Scotland to the new world; both world wars; Greenock's blitz; the dark days when the yards closed; and countless general and local elections. When I looked through some back copies of the Greenock Telegraph, I found a public notice from the 1946 general election that may be of interest,  given that there is much discussion about apathy in elections. The advertisement invited members of the public to book their tickets, at 1s 6d a time, to hear Ernest Bevin at Cappielow park. Such was the demand that an overflow meeting was organised next door to be addressed by the local candidate, Hector McNeil. These are changed days indeed. When we read the more everyday stories, we get a real insight into how life in our community was all those years ago. For example, reading the court pages from those days, I was surprised at how many people were imprisoned for their beliefs: they believed that a night watchman was sleeping or they believed that the woman's husband was on night shift. There are some entertaining stories. Keeping pace with changes in technology, the paper is now printed daily and in colour. The figures show that—despite the challenges imposed by television, radio and the internet—Inverclyde people still turn to the "Tele" for their night's news. On the display board in the lobby of our office block, there is a quotation to the effect that an effective Parliament relies on informed people. Local newspapers are a primary source of news about how constituency or list MSPs are representing local people. If this Parliament is to be truly inclusive and accessible, we must ensure that local newspapers are fully involved.

I could not resist the opportunity to try to get into the debate. I thank Nora Radcliffe for lodging the motion that brought it about. I have some supporters—I hope that I can call them that—from St Ninian's Primary School in Gourock sitting in the public gallery. I want to make a plea on behalf of the local Rankin maternity unit. The St Ninian's Primary School pupils' presence is timely, as many of them will have been born in the Rankin maternity unit. They will surely verify the concern that exists in my community about the future of the unit and how much the unit is valued by the community. I welcome the establishment of Mothers for the Rankin. My colleague Trish Godman and I met some of its members on Friday. It is a powerful alliance of mothers who are not politically affiliated. We also met GPs, who outlined their demands, which are not the same as the consultants'. The consultants in their ivory towers have deemed that a maternity unit needs to have 1,000 births a year. If we accept that principle, we accept the centralisation of maternity services throughout Scotland—not just in Argyll and Clyde, in Greenock or Port Glasgow or in Gordon. That will inevitably drive us down the road of competition. I ask the minister also to consider the artificiality of health board boundaries. The fact that trusts and health boards are forced to consider maternity services within artificial boundaries has thrown up some massive contradictions. When Trish Godman and I spoke to Mothers for the Rankin on Friday, what mattered to them was access to quality care, choice and continuity of care. They said that they do not want super-duper maternity units that do not meet those criteria and that force them to give up their choice. I hope that others will, like me, take every opportunity—in the Parliament and with the health boards and trusts—to make that point forcefully on the mothers' behalf.

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Executive ensures that it works effectively with Her Majesty's Government. (S1F-1087)

I am sure that members will welcome Iain Gray's recent announcements on  how the Executive is tackling the drug menace in Scotland. However, as the First Minister knows, drugs and drug dealers know no boundaries. How will the First Minister ensure that we work effectively with our Westminster colleagues to tackle the evil of drugs in our communities?

When the First Minister next meets the Secretary of State for Scotland, will he take the opportunity to congratulate her and her United Kingdom Government colleagues on the agreement between the Treasury and the insurance industry which, we understand, will finally deliver justice for asbestos victims? Does  he agree that the agreement is great news for victims and their families in my constituency—Greenock and Inverclyde—and other shipbuilding constituencies? Will he join me in calling on the insurance companies that are involved in the continuing cases to act swiftly, pay up and bring the shameful chapter to a close?

Earlier in Lord James's speech, he made a point about the Executive's responsibility. Does he agree with his colleague, Ian Davidson—[MEMBERS: "Who?"]—who compiled the report that is available all members today, that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body has responsibility for the project and is the contracting client? Does he agree with the report produced by Ian Davidson—[ Interruption. ] It appears that David Davidson—that Tory person who is sitting over there—produced the report.

Much has been said today about the changes in the Scottish economy—changes that are self-evident. In my constituency, I am confronted daily by the reality of that change. The so-called smokestack industries have been replaced by the sunrise industries. We used to work on the banks of the Clyde; now we work in online banks. Seventy per cent of our manufacturing jobs are in electronics. We have shifted our dependence from shipbuilding to the electronic sector. However, the situation is more complex than a simple replacement of traditional employers with new, high-tech industries. They are dynamic industries, which continually change—faster than we can imagine. If that change is to be an opportunity rather than a threat, we need a highly skilled work force that has the ability to adapt quickly to change. If we refuse to learn from the past and do not bring about a revolution in lifelong learning, Scotland's high-tech industries will end up in a museum, next to shipyards, coal mines  and steel works. Much has been said today, from some strange quarters, about workers' rights. From the commitment of the early pioneers of the Labour movement to the important right of workers to free access to training, education and personal development, to the Executive's commitment to a revolution in lifelong learning, we have given Scottish workers the skills that can pay the bills.

I know—from listening to Mr Monteith's contribution to other debates—that although there is continual nit-picking about apprenticeship schemes, their cost, their failure rate and their success rate, we can have hour upon hour of debate about money for higher education, without any of that nit-picking criticism. I will judge the member on his performance now, not on the past. The benefit of education and training is not only to workers. It creates more job security, and in return for treating workers as an asset rather than an expense, management is rewarded with a confident, flexible, highly skilled and highly paid work force, which can give its company the edge in the global market place. However, if we consider the problem solely in terms of the work force, we will be guilty of an over-simplistic approach. We must also ask questions of the management. Is it up to the job? In a previous life as a trade union official, I equated weak, inefficient management with job losses, redundancies, low pay and no training for workers. Upskilling does not happen under management that has a blinkered, sweat-shop mentality. It happens only in partnership with ambitious, progressive, far-sighted companies. The benefits on both sides are clear, but the challenge is to convince employers and employees of those benefits and of the need to invest and participate in education and training. Today's announcement, the trade union fund, individual learning accounts, learndirect Scotland, more money to help vulnerable young people move from school into work, an extra £9 million to develop an all-age career service and £22 million to implement the recommendations of the Beattie report are all more than welcome. Yesterday's announcement about Bathgate hangs heavy in the air. It is at a difficult time such as this that we need to search for the positives. Some of us on the Labour benches remember the last time around at Bathgate, 20 years ago, when we campaigned with Jim Swan and others.  Unemployment was used as an economic tool against people in this country, with the side benefit of doing in the trade unions while they were at it.

The minister might also wish to note that in Greenock and Inverclyde the unemployment rate was 22 per cent in the mid-1980s under the Tories.

I am afraid that I must wind up. If the terrible event in Bathgate can have any positive effect, if it can become a driver for change in the attitudes towards workers' education, if it can teach us once and for all the value of education and training and if we can learn to learn, then all is not lost.

Does the minister agree that there have been some positive factors in this crisis? The recognition of the importance of tourism to Scotland's economy has been underlined, despite the fact that many of the jobs associated with that industry are dismissed as not being real jobs. The success of tartan day—despite the crisis—and the historical and economic importance of links with America have all been highlighted. Does the minister agree that we must look beyond the crisis and that we must build on those links with America? Is not it time that Scotland had its own immigration centre? Given that Greenock was the departure point for thousands of Scots, Germans, Poles and Russians, the town would be the ideal location for such a centre. Will the minister visit my constituency to discuss that idea and to view the site that has been earmarked for an immigration centre?

Alex Neil said that he was speaking on behalf of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee.

Right. So Alex Neil is not speaking on behalf of the committee.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

There can.

You can rule whether it is a point of order or not. [Interruption.]

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Have you changed the list of speakers at the insistence of the SNP whip?

I thank Des McNulty for securing an excellent members' business debate that gives us the opportunity to recognise the sacrifice of a generation who are now in their twilight years. The story of the second world war is one of individuals, families and local communities. How better can we take the opportunity to remember that on the 60 th anniversary of the Clydebank blitz, when those ordinary Clydeside men and women faced terrible adversity and overcame it, at home and on the front line? The fact that that generation  had the courage to stand up to tyranny and fight for what was right gave us the country that we live in today. Were it not for their sacrifice, everything that we take for granted would be a fading memory: freedom, tolerance, security and even the critical daily newspapers. Clydebank and Greenock had much in common: both were centres of heavy industry. It was only a matter of time before my constituency was on the Luftwaffe's hit list. The Greenock blitz began just after midnight on 6 May 1941, when 50 German planes scattered bombs indiscriminately over the town. Thankfully, damage and casualties were relatively light, but we were not so lucky the following night. Sirens sounded at 12.15 am, heralding the arrival of the first wave of bombers, which dropped incendiary bombs outside the perimeter of the town. That created a ring of fire around the target area. The second wave concentrated on the east end and the centre of the town. One of the first buildings to take a hit was the Ingleston Street distillery, which became a huge, flaming beacon for the rest of the bombers. A third wave of bombers flew in at about 2 am. This time they dropped parachute landmines and heavy high explosives, which caused widespread damage. Between 250 and 300 German planes took part in the attack. When the all-clear sounded at 3.30 am, most of the town was ablaze. Locals emerged to see that both sugar refineries had been hit by landmines, Rankin and Blackmore's foundry was badly damaged and several churches were left as shells. Out of 18,000 homes, 10,000 were damaged and 1,000 of those were destroyed. Surprisingly, however, the assumed main target—the shipyards—escaped lightly. Only Lamont's dry dock and Scott's head office were hit. Thankfully, the previous night's more sporadic attack had caused much of the population to leave the town. My father, for example, went to Inverkip. My mother was disappointed to be taken off the bus and home again by her father; I do not know what that told her, but that is what happened. Nevertheless, those two nights left 280 people dead and 1,200 injured. When we discuss the issue with younger people, they may say, "That was 60 years ago. What does it have to do with living in Greenock today?" It is manifest that Greenock has changed in the past six decades. The heavy industry has been replaced with high-tech manufacturing and the service sector. The shipbuilders are now chip-builders; the dockers are now data managers; and we have gone from working on the banks of the Clyde to banks online. However, there are still threats to our community—not from Hitler, but from heroin; not  from global war, but from global competition. If we are to meet those challenges and to defeat those threats and not to fall victim to them, we would do well to follow the example of those ordinary men and women of 60 years ago. The fact that they could hold their community together through the horror of the blitz and then build it again afterwards should be an inspiration as a testament to what the human spirit can achieve. Tonight's debate allows us to celebrate that generation's spirit and resolve in the face of adversity. What better example could those people have set us?

Where is the point of order?

Will the member take an intervention?

I will be brief. I thank George Lyon for giving members the opportunity to discuss this issue again. I echo John Farquhar Munro's positive approach to the challenge that we face, and I offer my support to the minister who is taking our case into Europe. I also welcome the £3 million award that was received as a clear sign of confidence in the Gourock-Dunoon run. However, that will not allay the natural concerns of many of the people who work in the CalMac headquarters in Gourock, and who operate the ferry from the terminals at Gourock and at Wemyss Bay in my constituency. However, there is another operator, Western Ferries, just along the road and also in my constituency that might take a different view on the matter. It is always good to stay for members' business debates after hours, in which Murray Tosh might talk about workers' rights. I was pleased to hear that today, but there are real concerns about such issues. We have heard about the dedication of the workers over the years, and I hope that they will be rewarded with a clear future. Many confused messages are coming out and some councillors in the Western Isles are encouraging people to put in private bids. I am sure that Bruce Crawford will take that message  back, as the messages that are coming to us through the networks are causing some concern. I can name the councillors concerned to him, in the hope that he can sort them out. I have outlined a number of issues that I hope the minister will address in her summing up, including Professor Kay's concerns about vessels and the trade unions' concerns about the way in which the process is being carried out.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Should not Mr Wilson declare an interest when he introduces the Sunday Mail ?

When the First Minister next meets the Secretary of State for Scotland, will he raise the plight of my constituents who are suffering from  asbestos-related diseases? As a result of Chester Street Insurance Holdings going into provisional liquidation, those people may be denied compensation to which they are entitled. Will the First Minister make it clear that it would be unacceptable for any of those victims—who have been treated disgracefully over the years—to be denied justice yet again?

As a former official with the GMB—which is the union for Scotland's estimated 38,000 home workers—I take a keen interest in measures to protect that vulnerable section of the work force. Those workers carry out a massive range of tasks, from envelope addressing to assembly work. Most of them are women—often black ethnic minority women—in their 20s or 30s with dependent children. I could recount at length the issues that home working raises for trade unionists. Only 9 per cent of home workers have a written contract; only a quarter get information about their tax or national insurance; and only a third receive an itemised pay slip. Many have no guarantee of minimum hours of work, and there are problems around maternity leave and sick pay, for example. Although I recognise the many problems in that sector, and although I will continue to campaign for home workers' rights, we are, as the minister said, talking about people who are exploited far more than genuine home workers are; we are talking about the victims of the outworking scams. That is not legitimate home working; it is exploitation and, thanks to this bill, it will soon become criminal. We all know how the scams work. Companies offer non-existent work—for example, kits that people make up but that are continually rejected because the company says that they are substandard, leaving the home workers out of  pocket. The bill will make it illegal for companies to demand upfront payments or to advertise bogus schemes; it will crack down on the unprincipled parasites that run those operations. However, do our colleagues and friends on the SNP benches care about that?

No—no they do not. That is the difference between us. Never mind that we will be protecting some of the most vulnerable people in Scotland; never mind that we will be clamping down on unscrupulous con artists who cynically prey on people in desperate circumstances; the SNP says, "No, let's have"—

Would Mr Russell sit down? We have heard enough of him today.

No. The SNP says, "No—let's have a constitutional debate. Let's all sit down and have a chat about the schedules to the Scotland Act, private members' bills and Sewel motions." That might be more important to the SNP, but it is not more important to me and it is not important at all to the people whom the bill will protect. The nationalists want to leave 38,000 vulnerable workers twisting in the wind while they carry on with their self-indulgent constitutional pontificating. Such a level of debate does not befit this chamber. I do not care who introduces the bill and nor do the people whom it will protect. Only the SNP members care about that—and it is all that they care about. I urge SNP members to think about what the bill will do, to grow up and to support the motion.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you take note that Mr Russell uses that tactic to get extra time on too many occasions?

As a former member of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee I appreciate the opportunity to speak, despite the fact that that opportunity arises because of the illness of my friend and colleague Marilyn Livingstone. Members of the committee will be sick and tired of hearing my line of argument. Throughout the committee's discussions, and in our debate in the chamber today, much of the attention has focused on higher education and support for university students. That should not, I suppose, be surprising, since many MSPs are from social  classes that traditionally send their children into higher education. Many sections of the media also belong to that group. The interests of higher education therefore have a powerful voice in Scotland and have been well represented in the debate. The unfortunate consequence of that focus, however, is that further education colleges have yet again been cast as the cinderellas of education: their problems, and those of their students, are all too often eclipsed by the problems of their more glamorous sisters. As someone who benefited from second-chance learning, I want to redress the balance a little by reminding the chamber, if I may, of the merits of further education, which, unsurprisingly, is an agenda that is close to my heart. I believe that everyone should have the opportunity to realise his or her full potential, regardless of social or economic background. The policy of widening access to further education so that it is no longer the preserve of the better-off must be a top priority. The need to widen access is clear. Although higher education expanded rapidly during the early 1990s, there continues to be a social divide. More than half the youngsters from well-off families go on to higher education, while only 10 per cent of youngsters from the lowest income groups do so. This is where FE colleges come in. If someone comes from a background where, as bright as they may be, going to university is more daunting than a trip to the moon, they need a stepping-stone to help them to keep learning. The lack of access to further education for working people represents a barrier to a modern and dynamic Scotland. If we are to realise our ambitions in government, the situation must improve. We cannot deliver economic stability and prosperity, social justice or a knowledge economy without developing the skills and abilities of our work force. Promoting FE colleges is vital to our social justice agenda and a vibrant FE sector is essential if our economy is to continue to grow. On its visit to IBM at Greenock, the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee witnessed a demonstration of that point. Although there is an international call centre there, we have to import people with language skills to staff it. The bill begins to address the issues that I have outlined. Students studying higher education courses in FE colleges will receive clear benefits. Higher national students will be exempt from paying the endowment. The anomaly of parental contributions for school leavers starting on a further education course in comparison to those for school leavers from the same background starting on a higher education course, which has existed for many years, is addressed by the alignment of further education student support with  that for higher education. All mature students, lone parents and students with a disability will receive their education completely free. How is that for opportunity for all? I welcome the bill as it will help to expand access to further education and thereby deliver economic and social benefits.

Is the minister confident that the trusts that represent the area are working effectively to  deliver a service that suits those who expect to use it? I have grave doubts about that, as Glasgow acute trust and Argyll and Clyde Health Board propose to base maternity services only four miles apart, with nothing thereafter between Paisley and Crosshouse hospital in Kilmarnock.

If my voice holds out, I will extend my congratulations to Janis Hughes and all those who helped to secure this debate. I acknowledge that the focus of the debate is on Glasgow, but we all know that acute service reviews are generating great concern across Scotland. For example, there is concern about services at the Rankin maternity unit at Inverclyde royal hospital.  The review has a direct impact on my constituency, Greenock and Inverclyde. We spend £35 million of our health board budget in the Greater Glasgow Health Board area and 24 per cent of our in-patient day care activity takes place in Glasgow hospitals. However, we have no real say in the Glasgow review. It seems that it is okay for money and patients to cross health board boundaries, but not for consultation or a real say to do so. Surely there must be greater co-operation across artificial health board boundaries. That would prevent us from being presented with proposals that mean that maternity services in Glasgow will be delivered in the south side and that, although Argyll and Clyde Health Board's specialist maternity unit will be four miles away, there will be nothing between Paisley and Crosshouse in Kilmarnock. That is complete nonsense and it is unacceptable to the people whom I represent. The lack of consultation and co-ordination, and the duplication that is required because of artificial boundaries, need to be addressed seriously. I call on the health board bosses to put their reviews on hold until we can be assured that the boards and trusts will work together effectively and in the interests of the people of the west of Scotland, who demand access to quality services.

rose—

It has been established that the problem with Fergusons is that it does not have the design capacity. Is it possible to use the good offices of CalMac to ensure that the steelwork capacity that is available at Fergusons is used, so that the required delivery time is met and the boats are put into service? Presumably, the design team  in Finland will require a lead-in time, which could delay the delivery of the vessels.

Why did Fergusons accept the order and then only in the last few days say that it could not complete it? Why did Fergusons take the order if there were all those problems?

We should not let Fergusons off the hook here.

Will the member give way?

I think that I am being misled by Bruce Crawford. Is he suggesting that it is the Government's fault that Fergusons took a commercial decision to hand back the order, as a consequence of which the order is going to Finland? I have never heard of such a situation in 30 years.

Will Mr Quinan give way?

Are you feart?

Will the minister say how the health plan will tackle health inequalities in deprived areas such as Greenock and Inverclyde?

Will Alex Neil give way?

What is news about that? Is that not what the Scottish people voted for? Is Alex Neil suggesting that the Scottish people voted for devolution not knowing what he has just said?

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Executive plans to promote Scotland in Europe. (S1F-713)

I welcome the First Minister's description of Scotland's developing role in the European Union, which is to act with strength as part of the United Kingdom. Would the First Minister agree that, to better understand and promote Scotland's best interests through the European decision-making process, we should have active dialogue with other devolved Parliaments across Europe and with our own MEPs? Would not such an approach be in stark contrast to the Scottish National Party's priority of pulling Scotland out of Britain and, as a consequence, out of Europe?

Could George Lyon remind Bruce Crawford that the then convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee is now the leader of the SNP—or did he forget that one?

Will the minister assure us that she will not be deflected from her major task by the continued scaremongering of the nationalists? Will she reaffirm her commitment to the continuation of services such as the Gourock-Dunoon ferry and will she ensure that CalMac remains within the public sector?

I am pleased to be debating this motion today. I appreciate the support that I have had from back benchers from all parties. Members will be glad to know that I will use the term "mesothelioma" sparingly, which will save me any embarrassment and spare the official reporters. However, I will use the term sparingly not only for those selfish reasons. Mesothelioma is a clinical and sterile term, which masks the true nature of a most painful and unpleasant form of cancer. That should not be hidden behind a word that is difficult to pronounce. Mesothelioma is a cancer of the lining of the lung. It is aggressive, painful and there is no cure. The victim is dead within 12 months. The members of Clydeside Action on Asbestos who are sitting in the public gallery know only too well that a clinical medical term cannot describe the pain and suffering experienced by the victims of this disease. Unlike other major Clydeside industrial illnesses, such as deafness and welder's lung, exposure to asbestos did not only affect the workers themselves. Asbestos fibres that were brought into the home on overalls and in hair also damaged wives and children. I am aware of a case of a woman who was a bus conductress, who took shipyard workers to and from work. She had never been in a shipyard in her life, but she contracted cancer from asbestos on her passengers' overalls. Mesothelioma is a huge problem. It affects more people than cervical cancer, and the death toll will double by 2020. Unfortunately, scientists believe that what they call the mesothelioma epidemic has not reached its peak.  Mesothelioma is more than a medical condition. On top of the pain and suffering and the anger and bitterness at having a terminal illness that could have been prevented, and on top of someone's guilt over possibly having damaged the health of their wife and children, there is a final insult that should be at the heart of this evening's debate: these cancer victims are being denied justice. I am not a legal expert, but I know that employers continued to expose their workers to asbestos long after the dangers of doing so became known. As a result, those workers are now dying an agonising death. In my book, there is a clear case to answer for that. Unfortunately, when the victims try to claim compensation through the courts, those who defend the actions—the employers and the insurance companies—prolong their agony on spurious grounds. In researching this topic, I have been given information about a past case in which the legal representatives of a former shipyard worker who died of the disease made detailed submissions on the circumstances in which he was exposed to asbestos. Those submissions describe which shipyard he worked in, which contracts he worked on, the dates of his employment and the names of the friends and colleagues who worked with him. In spite of the submissions, the defendants simply denied everything. They denied that the man was employed by them. They denied the existence of his friends and colleagues. They denied that the ships were built and even denied that the shipyards existed. In such cases, the victims are told that they never existed. What effect must it have on a person in the last few months of their life to be told that they never existed? Why should the legal representatives of the victims repeatedly have to prove to successive courts that the QE2 was built at John Brown's, Clydebank, in 1968? It sounds ludicrous, but that is happening in Scotland in the 21 st century. Of course, such spurious arguments can be disproved in a court of law, but that takes time and terminally ill people do not have time. I do not want to get emotional, but I suggest that—as a way of fighting back—we dedicate tonight's debate to Mr Lilly, whom members might have seen on the television programme "Frontline Scotland" recently. Owen Lilly was a former asbestos factory worker who suffered from mesothelioma. He died on Tuesday. His case was not scheduled to come to court until April 2001. What justice is there for Owen Lilly? That is the reality: that cynical sharp practice denies victims the right to a jury, to interim payments and to other expenses that are incurred through having a terminal illness. If we are to move towards real justice for the victims, their  cases must be resolved through the civil legal process as a matter of urgency and priority. We must remove the obstacles that cause delays and prevent such cases from being heard by a jury. The victims want juries, not judges. We must provide the victims with much-needed short-term assistance and review the powers and procedures of the courts, to enable them to receive interim payments pending final resolution of their cases. I am pleased that 44 back benchers from all parties have supported the motion and thank the members who have stayed behind to listen to the debate. I hope that the Parliament has sent a strong message to those involved in the justice system that the way that the system currently deals with mesothelioma sufferers is not acceptable to us and that we look forward to supporting them effectively.

Will the First Minister ask the SNP where unemployment comes in its list of priorities after its top priority, which is a referendum on the constitution?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what response it has given to the success of Scots Paralympians in the UK team in Sydney. (S1O-2451)

I thank the minister for his answer and take this opportunity to congratulate him on his elevation to the front bench. I wish him every success and look forward to hearing less about Puccini and more about Porrini. [Laughter.] Well, everybody else is doing it. Will the minister explain what steps the Executive is taking to build on the success of gold medal winners such as Gourock's Margaret McEleny—whose gold in the 50 m breaststroke was one of three medals she brought home—by considering how we can help more disabled people to become involved in sport?

Will the member give way?

How many?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Does Tommy Sheridan accept that Yuill and Dodds lorries picketing the TUC yesterday in Glasgow was a gross provocation?

rose—

rose  —

I am pleased that all parties welcome the bill, but they need to dampen down their enthusiasm. Fergus Ewing's typical attitude of looking on the bright side regularly cheers us all up. We must remind ourselves that 100,000 people will take advantage of this initiative to start off on their learning journey. However, it is quite clear that the bill is not just about payment for training. We must establish a learning culture in this country; the new measures will ensure that the partnerships, in the workplace and in the community, that are necessary to bring about that learning culture will be established. However, there are challenges. Members have talked about access. Whether or not someone is a shift worker or lives in a rural community, the college ain't open this weekend for people who work long hours—not much has been said about that. We must issue a challenge to our colleges to be accessible and to take advantage of the increased number of people who want education.

No, we hear from Nick Johnston often enough as it is. People need access to those colleges. If the colleges do not meet the challenge, there are  other providers that will meet it, so they had better get their act together. There is also a challenge for trade unions. Trade unions need to put training and education firmly back on their bargaining agenda. The bill gives them the opportunity to challenge those employers—the Conservatives have represented them for years—who have not provided the necessary training, education and time off that people need to escape low pay and dead-end jobs. I hope that employers will take advantage of the proposals and that many businesses will, for the first time, establish learning and training budgets in their companies. Fergus Ewing has criticised big companies for delivering training. Companies such as Scottish Power, which have established a great record of providing training, have been sneered at by Fergus, who says, "Ah, they will just use the budget"—

Yes he did. I hope that those companies will build on what is in the bill and that they will open up their resources to the families of their employees and to the wider community. I genuinely welcome today's initiative and the new rights that it will give people throughout Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what role it can play in encouraging better collaboration between oil producers and the oil fabrication industry in order to develop a long-term strategy for Scotland's oil fabrication industry. (S1O-2014)

I take it from the minister's response that he recognises the need to maintain our skills base and our production yards if we are to take advantage of any future orders. Is the minister prepared to keep the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee up to date about the on-going discussions with those various parties?

I thank those members who were able to stay for tonight's debate. I also thank the Morton supporters for their serious campaign to meet the challenge that the club faces. Some of those supporters are in the gallery this evening. [Applause.] However, they were beaten to it by members of the Argyll and Bute youth forum who at lunchtime today handed out leaflets from Cowal Morton supporters asking for the club to be saved. In 1874, the people of a thriving industrial Clyde coast town established their own football club. Now, after a century and a quarter, Greenock Morton Football Club faces its greatest ever challenge. It has no manager, a crumbling stadium, only four players and a majority shareholder who has lost the confidence of the fans. Make no mistake, the club is facing a serious crisis. However, the debate is not just about Morton, or just about football; it is about a community, its assets and our right to have a say in how those are run. The club is in trouble—that is not at issue. Only yesterday, a morning newspaper told us that the Scottish Football Association was ordering the club to pay the £19,000 that it owes Heart of Midlothian Football Club or face expulsion from the league. The books are to be opened and the majority shareholder has been invited to attend Tuesday's SFA executive committee meeting. I agree with the Morton legend, Allan McGraw,  when he says that, although the financial probe is welcome, expulsion would deal a severe blow to the club. Indeed, many fans have made that point in the past few days. The SFA must have regard to the best interests of the club and must not—whatever Hugh Scott may or may not have done—expel the club from the league. To do so might destroy the club for good. The bond of trust between the club and the fans has been broken—even to the extent that threats have been issued to close Morton "like the shipyards". That is a far cry from the 10,000-seat stadium and a team aiming for the Premier League, which the fans were promised when the current majority shareholder arrived. The irony is that, by welcoming inward investment and new opportunities, the local area has moved on from those dark days when we lost the shipyards. However, at Morton, it has been a case of broken promises and missed opportunities. Despite such problems, a great deal of good will remains towards the club. The fans in the public gallery and those who were here at lunchtime, who have made the trip from Inverclyde and beyond, all want to safeguard the future of this 126-year-old community asset. There is genuine feeling that something must be done. The Scottish Parliament is the appropriate forum in which to put that case. As one Morton fan said to me yesterday, "If politicians truly believe that local football teams are good for our communities, will they stand by while one man brings embarrassment and disgrace to this community?" I hope that the debate will send a strong signal to politicians that they cannot stand by and watch community assets be lost for ever. We all know how easy it is to bemoan the performance of those who are in charge of our local clubs—doing that is an art form on a Saturday evening—but if we are to move forward, we must propose constructive solutions. Before we can begin to work towards those solutions, we must recognise that community-based football clubs cannot be run as if they were supermarkets. If Rangers Football Club closed down tomorrow, the great and the good of Govan could not switch to Rangers' main competitor for their football. We cannot treat community assets such as football clubs as ordinary private businesses. Owners of such assets have a brand loyalty that would be the envy of many. That point was underlined in a report that I read yesterday from the Scottish independent supporters coalition, which said: "Supporters are the essential lifeblood of the game. They are more than just customers or consumers. They support their club almost from the cradle to the grave and will not take their support or 'custom' elsewhere even if the quality  of the team they support deteriorates. They aspire for success but their loyalty is not conditional on this. They are genuine stakeholders in their clubs and deserve to be treated as such. If supporters become alienated or excluded from their clubs, they will continue to support the club but will simply stop going to games and purchasing merchandise. As they will not—and indeed by definition cannot—go elsewhere, their involvement and spending power is lost to the game as a whole." Another point, made by Tony Higgins, the secretary of the Scottish Professional Footballers Association, is that football clubs are companies that receive funds from people other than those who pay at the turnstiles. People do not need to go through the turnstiles to put money into the chairman's wallet—if people have Sky television, buy a lottery ticket, or pay their council tax or income tax, they give money to football clubs. As a press release today confirmed, Morton has received £500,000 and has been offered another £600,000 in a package for further improvements. The football authorities must recognise that point about funds and modernise their articles of association to take account of it and protect our community clubs. Failure to make the distinction between consumers and other sources of funding has unfortunate consequences, of which Morton fans are all too well aware. Under the current system, Hugh Scott can basically do what he likes. If he is successful in closing down Morton, there are many other businessmen who could, and would, do the same thing to other clubs. Therein lies the nub of the issue: today, our local club is under threat from a hard-nosed businessman, but tomorrow it could be yours. If we accept that football clubs are different from other limited companies, how do we take the issue forward? It has been suggested that legislation should be put in place to prevent businessmen from chairing football clubs purely for financial gain. Others argue that it must be ensured that, in future, all community-based clubs are just that; local councils and Government must be involved, along with supporters and owners, to ensure that people such as Hugh Scott cannot do what they like. It is time to move to protect the interests of our community assets. If we are serious about protecting our community clubs, we must consider the safeguarding of supporters' interests. In the short term, however, we must address the situation at Morton. I have refrained, until now, from calling for the resignation of the majority shareholder, Hugh Scott, but he is proving to be a significant obstacle to progress. A leading supporter summed it up when he said, "Hugh Scott has upset and argued with the SFA, the Scottish Football League, the local council, local police, the local press, Hearts, Clyde, St Mirren and Dunfermline—not to mention the support."

I will finish; I appreciate that I have had lots of time. I do not say this lightly, but I feel that Hugh Scott's continued presence at the club is preventing us from arriving at a solution. Only if he stands aside can we begin to restore this community asset. Greenock Morton has served our community well for the past 126 years. It is time for us to repay that debt and to ensure that we have a further 100 years.

That was not yesterday.

Thank you. The second division—Fergus Ewing and I—are making speeches today, rather than John Swinney and others. [Laughter.] Anyway, I will press on. I need tell no one in the chamber that the Scottish economy has seen enormous changes in the past decade. I am confronted by that fact every morning in my constituency, where traditional industry has declined. We used to build ships; we now build microchips and the computers to put them in. My constituency is now the export capital of Scotland—I never miss a chance to plug Greenock and Inverclyde—and it aspires to become the e-business and e-learning capital of Scotland. We live and work in a global economy that is changing faster than ever before. The high-tech industry of today can easily become the museum piece of tomorrow. There is no single response to globalisation and modernisation—it cuts across large sections of our society and the economy. Our success or failure in the future will depend on our ability to adapt swiftly and effectively to change. Part of that strategy will depend on having a highly skilled work force with the transferable skills and flexibility that will enable it to adapt to market changes. We must also embrace the knowledge economy. I hope that that will allow us to take advantage of changes, rather than fall victim to them. To achieve the knowledge economy, we must  deliver lifelong learning. That must be done not only through schools and colleges, but through a much-neglected area—the workplace. ILAs provide a significant opportunity. The chief executive of SUFI, Frank Pignatelli, has said that there is an opportunity to make Scotland competitive through its people. There is wide recognition of the potential for ILAs to make a major contribution to the development of the culture of lifelong learning. There is, however, also recognition that there are issues about delivery. There are a number of potential barriers to access—I hope that we will address them during the passage of the bill—that can be addressed through personal contribution and a willingness to be involved. Some can be addressed through sponsorship, either by an employer or by a trade union. As has been mentioned—and as will be mentioned again—there are issues relating to those who live in remote areas. There are also issues to do with providing guidance and support for those who are not naturally inclined to return to education and training—people who find it practically impossible to do that because they are working long hours or shift-working, people with child care requirements, or people who simply do not have the bus fare at the end of the week. We must ensure that those least likely to learn get their share of the cash. We also need to address the issue of employers using the funds to subsidise existing training budgets. However, those are mere details. The principle of the bill—or lack of principle, as Fergus Ewing would have it—and its aims and objectives are important. I am sure that we will return at a later stage to many of the issues that I mentioned. Let us be positive. As the most positive member of the most positive committee in the Parliament—I do not know why SNP members are smiling at that—I say that we must reject the cynicism that leads people to dismiss SUFI as a phone-a-friend helpline. We must see this initiative as a catalyst for bringing about the partnerships that we need. ILAs are not just about payment for training. They can achieve far more than that, by creating partnerships in the workplace and the community, and by promoting the learning culture that is vital to our success. We must also convince employers and employees to invest and participate in education and training. We need to make it possible for them to do that. We need to increase the number of companies that offer training, education and personal development opportunities. Perhaps the debate on the bill will help us to achieve that. Rather than approaching the issue negatively, we should try to open up the best training initiatives offered by employers to employees' families and  to the wider community. We could give them more money to train more people. The goal must be to provide opportunities to people, so that they can escape low-paid, low-skill, dead-end jobs and start careers that increase their income and job satisfaction. The right to access is another issue. We must provide learning centres in supermarkets, workplaces and community halls, as well as in schools and colleges. We can use the bill to build and develop access. If we take a positive attitude, we can ensure that education and training do not end at the school gates and deliver lifelong learning for all.

Does not Tommy Sheridan share the regret of the Parliament that Alex Salmond and his Westminster colleagues did not take the opportunity to raise the issue where it belongs at Westminster? Did they not miss an opportunity?

Tommy—

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive what role it sees for information and communications technologies in actively promoting social inclusion. (S1O-1747)

Thank you. This morning, in Greenock, the Minister for Children and Education launched a joint project between local schools and IBM. It aims to promote social inclusion through IT by teaching information age skills along with e-business and lifelong learning. I am sure the Deputy Minister for Communities agrees that a true information revolution must be inclusive and not just for those who can afford it. [MEMBERS: "Question!"] It will come to those who wait.

Will the minister therefore agree that it is worth considering giving people in receipt of income support or jobseekers allowance a personal identification number so that they can have free access to the internet through public access points such as internet cafes, libraries and community centres?

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will make a statement about productivity levels in Scotland's manufacturing industry and any work it is undertaking in conjunction with industry to improve productivity in Scotland. (S1O-1691)

I thank the minister for his response. Does the minister agree that productivity remains the key to long-term stability and growth and that forward-looking companies recognise that investing in technology and the skills of their employees to boost productivity offers a more viable prospect for future stability than relying on favourable fluctuations in currency exchange rates?

To ask the Deputy First Minister whether there are any plans for additional joint ministerial committees. (S1F-305)

Following the historic vote in Parliament yesterday to reject independence and divorce, does the Deputy First Minister agree that working together through joint ministerial committees is an effective way of delivering full employment, wiping out child poverty, ridding our streets of drugs and rebuilding our health service?

Tell that to Margo MacDonald.

So the member was listening.

I must begin with an apology—not usually a good start to any speech—to a couple of old rockers in the Scottish National party ranks. I taunted those old rockers just after the national council, when John Swinney was going about like a Cheshire cat and Alex Salmond like a dog with two tails; they were really pleased with themselves. I put it to the old rockers that the battle for independence was lost and the union was safe. They told me, "You must be joking. Watch this space." That is why we are having this debate today. The issue has been decided; the battle to break Britain—between John Swinney's mods and Margo MacDonald's rockers—has been settled within the SNP. If anyone wants to know who won, they just have to ask Alex—not Alex Salmond, but Alex Neil; he will tell them who won and who lost. There is no doubt who is in charge on the back benches. Make no mistake—it is full steam ahead for independence; that is the only game in town. Let us take a look at the motion, on the "State of the Nation". It sounds a bit like Bill Clinton, until we read it—then it sounds like Victor Meldrew. The  motion has 168 words—regrets, but not too few to mention. The motion is written in the language of failure; it is a suicide note from SNP members. All that they have done, since they arrived in Parliament, is greet about manufacturing, moan about health, whine about local government, girn about education, and complain about public investment; they whinge, whinge, whinge.

No, I will not give way. SNP members open their mouths only to run Scotland down. If the motion is anything, it is a fair summary of the performance of the SNP over the past year. SNP members revel in the language of failure, delight in disaster and gloat over misfortune. Why? It has been said already—because they want the Parliament to fail. They need it to fail, and they are doing everything in their power to see that it fails. They have voted against more money for the national health service and for education; they voted against scrapping tuition fees. The motion is a sad reflection of the SNP's priorities. Independence is above everything else—above jobs, above schools, above hospitals and above crime. It is independence at all costs.

I am not letting anybody in. We have had enough of them. The SNP is more concerned about taking Scotland out of Britain than about taking drugs and poverty out of Scotland. But that should not be a surprise to us. Nothing has changed. Let us take an example from the SNP motion. Top of the moan list is manufacturing. It was the blind commitment of the SNP to independence that led its members—with the notable exception of George Reid—to vote against the nationalisation of shipbuilding, and to vote a Labour Government down.

That act gave the party of David Davidson, that friend of the shipyard worker, the opportunity to run our manufacturing industry and end our shipbuilding industry. It will never be forgiven.

The fact is that the Conservatives came to power, and as a result we do not have Scott's in Greenock, Lithgow's in Port Glasgow, Hall Russell in Aberdeen and the Caledon yards in  Dundee and Leith. Posturing has cost our shipbuilding communities dear. We are not surprised to have come full circle, because how does the SNP negotiate independence at the same time as it negotiates a share of the Ministry of Defence contracts for Yarrow's and Ferguson's in Govan? How can it do that? When push comes to shove, there can be no doubt. If it is a choice between the workers in Govan and independence, the SNP has made its case quite clear: it is independence, and to hell with the Govan workers.

To ask the Scottish Executive how the extra money given to further education colleges will promote lifelong learning. (S1O-1630)

Can the minister assure the Parliament that that money will be directed at those groups that find it difficult to access further  education? I am referring to the unemployed, contract workers and the low paid. If that is what he intends, how will he achieve it?

I thank Gordon Jackson for giving us the opportunity to have this debate and I totally support the motion. I welcome to the Parliament the shop stewards who are continuing the battle to ensure that we have a shipbuilding industry in Scotland—and, indeed, in the UK. I come from an era when not sticking in at school meant being threatened with a job in a shipyard. Scott Lithgow employed 200 new apprentices a year—that is almost inconceivable now. Throughout my working life, shipbuilding has been in decline. What is happening in Europe is rather different. I wanted to speak in this debate because my constituency has a proud tradition of shipbuilding, although it no longer has a shipyard. In Greenock and Inverclyde, I represent highly skilled workers who do not enjoy the job security that other highly skilled workers have. Increasingly, their jobs depend on a small number of large contracts. They stumble from crisis to crisis, but when trouble hits Harland and Wolff in Belfast, Ferguson at Port Glasgow, Ailsa-Troon, Govan Shipbuilders, UiE Scotland in Clydebank and even BARMAC at Nigg and Ardersier, unemployment rises in Inverclyde. We need to recognise that there is an impact  throughout the country. Looking across at David Davidson, I am tempted to look back at his party's role in the decline of the industry. However, this is a member's debate and a time to look forward. We need to do all that we can in this Parliament to convince our colleagues in Westminster that the work must go to Govan. We need to ensure that we maintain the skills and manufacturing base that is vital for an island nation. We can avoid a state of crisis after crisis. We need to ensure that the Ministry of Defence contracts are used to provide stability in the industry. The UK Government needs to work with and bring together the shipowners, the oil companies and the trade unions, so that we get to a stage where we can match the workers' commitment to the industry and its future. Together, with a strategic vision, we can save our shipbuilding industry for Scotland and for the UK.

I am aware of the time constraints, and I will rush through this. I feel as if I am intruding on an Ayrshire fight. I appreciate the opportunity to speak in this debate, because I think it impinges on what is happening in the rest of Scotland. A review is taking place in my trust area, which includes the Vale of Leven hospital, Inverclyde royal hospital, and the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley. We are told that this review is driven by clinical considerations, that it needs to happen and that it will create bigger units that will be safer. That would be all very well if we lived neatly in units of 50,000. However, that is not what happens. If reviews are to mean anything, they have to be open, inclusive and honest. A cloak and dagger situation, as exists in my trust area, only heightens the concerns about people having to travel distances, about whether safety or quality is—

No, I will not. Sorry, pal, but it is not on. We cannot move people around while that type of cloak and dagger operation is going on. I will cut to the chase. I am not asking for a boundary review because I appreciate that that might be difficult. However, we have artificial boundaries. One of the options for my side of the  River Clyde is that Inverclyde royal hospital would move to the Paisley hospital, or vice versa. I do not believe that we would be considering that option if the artificial boundary were not there. Next door and up the road to Glasgow we have the situation where Queen Mother's and Yorkhill hospitals will be based only four miles from the unit at Paisley, and west of there is Crosshouse hospital. That is a piece of nonsense—it must be challenged. It is understandable that constituency MSPs get excited about threats to local services. I am not saying that how things are organised is perfect and cannot be changed, but we must focus on the delivery of services and their quality rather than on imaginary boundaries. That is why health boards need to get together with the communities that they serve to deliver a service that can cover all Scotland.

rose—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it possible, given the encroachment on the minister's time, for his speech to be published?

I, too, thank Cathy Jamieson for giving us the opportunity to debate this motion. I welcome the report "The Scottish Safety Anomaly" and regret the apparent acceptance of the high incidence of accidents and industrial disease and the lack of investigation and prosecution. In a previous life, I was a trade union official. I think I have time to tell a story from that time. Because of the good value a local contractor appeared to offer, an employer got him in to do a wee paint job. The contractor used lead paints that invaded the integrity of the factory's safety system, creating a toxic mix. Forty-three people went to hospital. Almost every service was involved: the ambulance service, the police service, the NHS, the benefits system and, eventually, the justice system. The cost was enormous—for the people who were injured, for the company and from the loss of productivity. There was a substantial financial loss. I mention that case because it underlines the fact that industrial accidents and diseases bear a high cost—to the employer, to the individuals affected and to society. They are preventable and they have a considerable impact on the services that are devolved to this Parliament. I believe that the Scottish Parliament has a role to play in shaping the work programme of the Health and Safety Executive in Scotland, as the  type of employment in Scotland differs from that elsewhere in the UK. We have moved from the very obvious health hazards of the shipbuilding and steel industries to the less obvious hazards of the new so-called sunrise industries, which deal with chemicals. Women in my constituency are fighting for recognition of the effect of glycol ethers on their lives and their children's lives over the past several years. The workplace is changing and is different in different parts of the country. We should expect the work of the Health and Safety Executive to reflect what is happening in Scotland, and this Parliament should have some say in its work programme and priorities. The debate is not just about the HSE's funding; it is about what we add on. We should not expect the HSE to take full responsibility for health and safety in Scotland. We need to graft on a role for health boards, trade unions and the community. The Health and Community Care Committee may also have a role. Last week, the Minister for Health and Community Care told us that the Executive is to invest a great deal of money in prevention. People in my constituency are still paying the price for what went wrong in the shipbuilding industry in the past. We are footing the bill for problems with asbestos, welder's lung, beat knee and noise-induced deafness. If we want to avoid that in the future, the Health and Community Care Committee must consider health and safety issues. I know that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee is busy and will not thank me for this, but it could look into why prosecution rates are low and why, when we prosecute, we fail to get successful results. It could also consider the levels of compensation in Scotland as compared with those in England. I welcome the standing commission as a way of moving the process forward and ensuring that this issue and its impact across Scotland are accorded greater recognition.

In the light of the present difficulties of the Holyrood project, does the First Minister believe that there is a case for moving to a fixed price for the remainder of the contract?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being taken to ensure the viability of day care facilities such as crèches and playgroups. (S1O-1435)

Does the minister agree that the maximisation of the local authority rent and rate-free space that the Executive encourages for after- school clubs would assist the wider delivery of affordable day care for many more Scottish children?

Christine Grahame may be only a few minutes into her speech, but she and her party glory in failure, and they underline it. They do not want new homes and new hospitals for the people of Scotland. They want this Parliament to fail.

Girning, girning, girning.

To ask the Scottish Executive what impact increased access to credit unions will have on communities that currently have no access to low-cost financial services. (S1O-1365)

I am aware of successful credit unions, such as Tail O' the Bank, which has 3,000 members in my constituency and receives 20 new members every week. I am also aware of the Glasgow pilot project. What plans are there to expand that project into areas of Scotland where there is a high demand for low-cost financial services?

Will the member give way?

Is Fergus Ewing referring to health and safety regulations, which many people in the Federation of Small Businesses, which he purports to represent, seek to have repealed? Are those regulations included in his agenda?

Many of those small organisations have campaigned against the minimum wage, the working time directive and the rights of part-time workers. Would Brian Adam describe those as burdens on business as well?

He should look behind him.

I will refer to the lower reaches of the Clyde. I support George Lyon's motion. Everyone here would agree that the river is a great natural asset to the communities that lie on it. It was the basis of my constituency's past success, and it could be the basis of its success in future. The potential benefits of regeneration are clear. A boost would be delivered to the economy of the west of Scotland by fast and regular passenger links from Ayrshire to Gourock, on to Greenock and the waterfront, and then to Port Glasgow and Paisley. I apologise to Lloyd Quinan for the fact that all those places are on one side of the river, but I did not have time to think about them. A river link between Greenock and the airport at Paisley would broaden the transport base of the lower regions of the Clyde. Better transport links would make it easier for businesses to locate away from the main centres of Glasgow and Edinburgh, and would open up Argyllshire. To realise those benefits, we need to consolidate the current unsatisfactory services. The continuation of the Gourock-Dunoon service is important to us. Major new developments are being built around that transport hub, so that service is integral to the project. We can do a lot more. John Farquhar Munro is not here, so I will get this point in, because he did it to me last week. I am sure that members will agree that the headquarters of Caledonian MacBrayne must remain in Gourock. He will read that in the Official Report tomorrow. If we look to the future, I believe that the benefits will be realised only if we work together and that has already started. Argyll and Bute Council, Inverclyde Council and quangos are looking at the issue. There is a responsibility on the Executive and on the Parliament to take that point on board and to move this matter forward. The potential is great, and we look forward to making progress.

Would Mr Sheridan accept that the income question might be difficult for some people to answer? Mr Sheridan, for instance, would have to detail his annual salary, which is way in excess of an MSP's. Would he answer the question truthfully or would he forget to fill in the form?

I would like to take a couple of moments to take part in this debate from a personal perspective. From a west of Scotland housing estate I entered the male-dominated, and sometimes brutal, world of a Clydeside shipyard. Coming from that community, and having been shaped by that environment, it will come as no surprise that I have no close gay friends—at least none that I know of. I have no connection with the gay community, but I recognise discrimination when I see it. While I have no close gay friends, I would not wish them to be excluded, stigmatised or bullied. I take heart from the constituency letters and representations that I have received and the fact that 90 per cent of them accept and support that view. On the one hand they do not want homosexuals to be victimised; on the other they have expressed genuine concerns that we must respond to. There is great apprehension that the repeal of section 2A would lead to the promotion of homosexuality, or classrooms being filled with sexually explicit material. People are afraid that their views are being ignored and that their children are being put at risk for the sake of political correctness. Do they believe that the parents and grandparents in this chamber will vote for something that would promote homosexuality or fill classrooms with pornography? Of course we would not. Like most of the grandparents who have contacted me, I would vigorously oppose any measure that placed our children at risk. I welcome this debate, because it reminds us all that we have a long way to go before the final vote on the ethical standards in public life bill. I welcome the Executive's commitment to consult on the safeguards and to establish a working group—which will include parents, teachers and Churches—that will review the package of safeguards, including current teaching materials and support for teachers in relation to sex education. We will have the opportunity to debate that package of safeguards. As Donald Dewar said during First Minister's question time last Thursday: "The answer is to get a package of safeguards that reflect the values of family, marriage and stable relationships and which offer . . . children security . . . and, hopefully, happiness."— [ Official Report , 3 February 2000; Vol 4, c 776.]

I am never one to miss an opportunity to present my constituency and its people in a positive light. I would like to take a couple of themes from the minister: the need for change and partnership in human resources. On Monday, I met a shipyard worker—not an undertaker—who is now a highly trained nurse in a new intensive care unit in the local hospital. My favourite story is about the shipyard labourer who teaches computer studies at James Watt College of Further and Higher Education. There is even a boilermaker in the Scottish Parliament. Because of the highly flexible nature of the community and work force of Inverclyde, we continue to attract new investment. Derelict shipyards have been turned into mortgage centres and jobs and opportunities have replaced unemployment and degeneration. Although I present that positively, I cannot say that we entered into that process freely as those changes were caused by the collapse of traditional industry. We need to create the conditions in which we can overcome the fear of change. How do we escape the trauma and avoid some of the disasters? How do we retain and expand our businesses? How do we convince employers and employees that they have a common agenda and that, to succeed, they need to create a business environment together that allows continual change and allows people and companies to upgrade their skills, increase their productivity and improve quality? How do we overcome the fear of change, which is very real in people's minds? I have experience of partnership agreements, which offer a model. I assure members that partnership agreements—some may say they are just sugary words—work and deliver results. Partnership agreements between employers and unions have achieved many of the goals that I  have described by establishing a learning environment at the workplace. How do we encourage that practice? The Employment Relations Act 1999 established a partnership fund. How is it being used in Scotland? The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service in Scotland already does a lot of good work encouraging partnerships and learning agreements in the workplace. How is it doing? What are its plans for the future? How can we call on its expertise? How can we confirm the work it is doing and establish it in that role? Rather than resolving disputes, how do we give it a more creative and positive role for the work force? Do we require co-ordination to oversee work-based training, to ensure standards and to ensure access is maintained throughout Scotland? Finally, can we ensure that education and training does not end at the point of employment and that the right to work-based training is extended beyond 16 and 17-year-olds?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether Scotland's manufacturing industry is in a competitive position in relation to its domestic and main export markets. (S1O-989)

Will the minister confirm that Scottish manufacturing is a success story? Does he agree that the shipbuilding and electronics industries that are important to the local economy of my constituency—and indeed to the whole of Scotland—need our support, and that the greetin and the girnin that comes from sections of the chamber only serve to undermine that success?

I welcome the opportunity to have this debate and to speak as a member of the Scottish Parliament not for a dreary little shipbuilding town or a miserable rainy backwater, but as a representative of—

Shall I start again?

That is okay. We all make mistakes. As I was saying, I am here not as a representative of an old shipbuilding town, but as a representative of the export manufacturing capital of Scotland. Some people find that hard to believe, but I can assure them that it is true. In recent years, Inverclyde in general, and Greenock in particular, have overcome many of the problems that were the result of the decline of the traditional industries.  We are now beginning to recover. We used to build ships; we now build microchips and computers. We continue to succeed in attracting major high-tech investment—IBM has its base in Greenock, and One2One and National Semiconductor are also there, to name just three. They have all invested heavily in Greenock. Empty shipyards have been turned into mortgage centres; derelict docks have been replaced with the college campus; and unemployment and degeneration have been replaced by new jobs and fresh opportunities. When I look at how far we have come, I am proud of our achievements. We have begun to reverse the decline and have taken the first real steps along the road to sustainable prosperity. However, I feel apprehensive. I am concerned that all the hard work of the people of Greenock could be for nothing, and that we could end up back where we started. The reason can be summed up in a single word—water. It seems that every time we have heavy rain in Greenock, transport links are cut and we become Scotland's newest island. That poses a threat to our local economy and is simply not good enough for the export capital of Scotland. The significance of that cannot be overplayed. Let us be absolutely clear what we are talking about: this is not a debate about a few minor roads in a housing scheme being closed, as inconvenient as that might be, and as real as the problems might be to constituents; we are talking about the A8—the only route in and out of the area—being impassable. That raises the stakes. Rather than bemoaning a hindrance, we are talking about a real threat to investment, jobs and continued regeneration. Last summer, approximately half a million visitors attended the Tall Ships event and saw with their own eyes the giant strides that our community and our area have taken. They saw the new Inverclyde and went away with a positive image, which put us on the map as a tourist and leisure area. But what would have happened if we had had a wet weekend? Only a fraction of those visitors would have been able to attend, denying us all those benefits. Many parts of the constituency are affected by the problem. We will shortly have an improved and expanded marina at Inverkip, which will address our niche market of sailing. How can we maximise that development's potential and convince those who might wish to use it to berth their yacht when we cannot even guarantee that it will be open 52 weekends of the year? There has also been a huge expansion in housing in the Wemyss Bay and Inverkip areas. Those houses are essential to address the long-term depopulation that damages Inverclyde's  economic viability. Isolating those new developments would leave hundreds of people stranded. It would keep workers from their place of business, pupils from schools and would-be consumers from the Oak mall and the Waterfront complex. Gourock is a transport hub with connections to Glasgow and the islands. What future will the exciting new developments at Gourock have if we do not get the transport links sorted? Greenock is also hard hit. People who work in courts, schools, the emergency services, businesses and many other places all suffer extreme inconvenience and financial loss. I will return to those issues later. Not only the roads are affected. Water running down from the hills to the sea has caused railway stations to close and has risked undermining the track. If Inverclyde is cut off, the damage to commerce is significant. Every day, 10,000 people commute from Inverclyde and 7,000 come in—so 17,000 people are on the move twice a day, yet the road link is not secure. That figure excludes non-commuter commercial traffic. Deliveries to and dispatches from various businesses must also be made daily. At the moment there are several semi-derelict sites that are crying out for redevelopment, with the potential to deliver jobs and to attract investment. How can we attract companies to a site that is rendered inaccessible every winter because of flooding? I am full of admiration for the invest in Inverclyde campaign, but selling an underwater business park is beyond even the talents of those who run the campaign. Furthermore, the threat to the retention and expansion of investment is not the only issue raised by the flooding. Local businesses, public services, emergency services, councils, official bodies and others are subject to inconvenience, disruption and financial loss. I must admit that on the morning on which I was stranded I had no appreciation of the number of agencies and services that must be mobilised in such situations. However, as I sat, stranded in my car, on the morning of Tuesday 30 November—the day of the last severe flood—I saw police officers, firefighters and workers from the local council and West of Scotland Water all striving in abject conditions to alleviate the problem. I feel that it is necessary to put on record that this debate is in no way a criticism of the efforts of those workers. I congratulate them on their efforts. Indeed, I only missed a couple of meetings, while they struggled with the elements. The police have confirmed that 40 police man hours are wasted in setting up diversions and roadblocks every time the A8 floods. That is 40 hours that would be much better spent fighting  crime. Money is being poured down the drain. The local chamber of commerce has also expressed concern over the cost to businesses from part closures of the A8. Glenbrae Children's Centre was flooded not once, but twice during November. The first flood, on 4 November, caused £9,000-worth of damage and the centre was closed for a week. The second flood,.on 30 November, was more serious. The centre was closed down and the children farmed out to other accommodation. Have I run over my time?

I have tried to describe the effects of flooding on the community. When we have ice, rain and snow, preventive measures must be put in place. Similar preventive measures need to be put in place when Lloyd Quinan's former colleagues inform us that rain is on its way—that is very important. It is clear that many agencies and bodies are affected by flooding problems. Any permanent solution must involve partnership between those agencies, perhaps a strategic forum comprising officials from interested parties. We need to address the issue of planned maintenance and regular monitoring. That always seems to happen after the event, rather than in anticipation. In the longer term, it is clear that having a single route into the area is the real problem. Every time we experience flooding difficulties, we are completely cut off. If we had another road we could bypass some of the problems. Such situations might be inconvenient, but at least the community would not be stranded.

Will Mr Gibson take this opportunity to put on record the SNP's opposition to the extension of the right to buy to 40,000 housing association tenants?

Will Mr Gibson tell us, then?

To ask the First Minister what steps have been taken by Scottish ministers to support the bid to build up to six roll-on-roll-off ferries for the Ministry of Defence at BAE Systems' Govan shipyard. (S1F-17)

I welcome the First Minister's answer, and I am sure that my colleagues in the cross-party shipbuilding group will do so as well. As the First Minister said, the bid is important not only for people in Govan—many people in my constituency work there. This is a major contract, and securing it would mean three years of job security and would lay real foundations for a long-term future. Does the First Minister agree that it would be an absolute failure and a severe blow to the industry if the contract went outside the United Kingdom?

It is a matter of regret that the only pensioner to take part in this debate, Donald Gorrie, used the debate for other motives.

I have been heckled by boilermakers, sir, and you ain't no boilermaker. Before Donald Gorrie makes such statements in the chamber, he should ask his Cabinet colleagues who attended and who chaired the meeting that day. There has been much talk this morning about poor pensioners. Unfortunately, some members raise their eyes to the public gallery and see votes rather than pensioners.

It is a shame. When we talk about poor pensioners, I see parents, relatives and friends, all on low pensions and without any additional income. That is my experience of poor pensioners. It is wrong to suggest that we should treat all pensioners the same. There is a difference between pensioners living on the margins and pensioners living in Marbella.

That is the truth. We must make the distinction. I want pensioners on the margins to benefit from the Parliament's work. To suggest that we do not care about the lives of our pensioners, given Labour Governments' long record of commitment to pensioners over the years, is complete and utter nonsense. We are delivering and will continue to deliver across the board for our pensioners. We deliver warm homes while the Opposition delivers warm words. We offer a stable economy, low inflation and a growing income; the Opposition offers boom and bust and increased taxes for pensioners. We offer safer communities; the Opposition opposes our measures to tackle crime.  The Opposition's description of the lives of pensioners is a patronising insult to pensioners who have campaigned for years for some of the things that we have delivered. There has been no mention today of the work of those campaigners or of the issues on which they have won. There has been no recognition of the minimum income guarantee for pensioners to tackle pensioner poverty.

No, thank you. There has been no mention of the campaign against fuel poverty. The pensioners who campaigned against it should be given credit. [Interruption.]

Those pensioners are winning their campaign because we are delivering on their calls to tackle fuel poverty through winter fuel payments, cuts in VAT and the warm deal programme, as well as providing free eye tests and free TV licences—all measures which the Opposition has spat on this morning.

The measures that I mentioned are in place because we have a Labour Government at Westminster and a Labour partnership Executive in Edinburgh. [Interruption.]

We will continue— [Interruption.] I am nearly home, I think.

Go on.

Absolutely. I can confirm that. We will continue to work in this Parliament for our pensioners. I look forward to working with pensioners and campaign groups, particularly on the issue of concessionary travel where this Parliament can make a difference. Thank you for the opportunity to speak.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to bring forward proposals to replace multiple surveys with a single "seller survey" in the residential property market. (S1O-592)

Through the press I have become aware of internet-based schemes. Does the minister agree that such schemes, delivered by a single company, would be difficult to access throughout Scotland and would leave the buyer ultimately liable for the cost? Would not a single survey that is paid for by the seller be a fairer and more cost-effective method of helping people to pay for surveys on homes that they will never buy?

The merits of establishing a Scottish university for industry are not in doubt. We all agree that we live and work in an ever-changing global economy. We have rejected the low-pay, low-productivity sweat-shop vision of the Tories in favour of a high-value knowledge economy. There is broad agreement and common ground between employers and the work force that we must move on. Why is it, as Elaine Thomson said, that access to in-company training in Scotland compares badly to that in the rest of the UK and internationally? Why do substantial amounts of money that are spent pre-employment stop when someone starts their first job? It is a sad fact that access to training in Scotland is a lottery. It depends on which company someone works for and where they live. Is it any wonder that skill shortages are starting to appear in vital sectors of the economy? Here is some information for Mr Monteith, who, unfortunately, has now left the chamber. Only a third of the 300 exporters in Renfrewshire do business on the internet. That is frightening. Of that 300, only two have a multilingual facility. That gives us an idea of the scale of the problems that we face. The success of any company increasingly depends on the quality of its human resources in a world in which, in many ways, people create their own job security—if they are not learning, they are not earning. Why is it that we must convince employees and employers to invest and participate in good-quality, work-based education and training?

Be brief please, as I have not got much time.

I have sympathy with that point and I will mention some of those issues in my speech. That is the negative side of this matter. Many good initiatives are taking place. From a previous life, I am well aware of the successes of the partnership agreements in the whisky industry, which have training, education and personal development initiatives at their core. The workplace learning centres and the grants for employees provide unskilled and semi-skilled workers with opportunities to escape the dead-end, repetitive work that they are asked to do. The centres allow them to increase their earnings and their job satisfaction. For employers, there is the reward of increased commitment from the work force, increased productivity, improved quality, and success and growth in place of demoralisation and decline. Recently, there was a very important initiative in my constituency. IBM, in partnership with others, is tackling the skills gap. It is a partnership for action. Young people can access IBM, a world-class company. The initiative focuses on information technology and language skills. I have three wishes—

I will finish there. I am sorry that I let Mr Swinney intervene.

The real question is where the money will come from. Does Mr Swinney agree with increasing tax for hard-working families in Scotland?

On a point of order. Is it appropriate for someone who has not participated in the whole debate to come along and make an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to introduce traffic calming or other measures to protect pedestrians on the A78 trunk road from the IBM plant to Inverkip. (S1O-403)

Is the minister aware that 48 accidents were reported on that stretch of road between 1 January 1998 and 31 July 1999, including two fatalities? Is he also aware that the pedestrian bridges that are to be built along the road, at a cost of £200,000 each, have been described by the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents as an expensive second-class alternative to reducing the speed limit? Will he assure me that a representative of the appropriate department will meet the parties concerned to discuss the problem?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that enhanced powers to seize the assets of organised criminals, similar to those of the Criminal Assets Bureau in the Republic of Ireland, would help the fight against dealers in illegal drugs. (S1O-365)

I welcome the minister's answer, as I am sure the families and communities throughout Scotland who have suffered as a result of drug-dealing activities would welcome such powers being available. I understand that, under the current system, the proceeds from assets of convicted drug dealers—

I know that you are going to be strict today, Presiding Officer, and I am coming to the question.

The proceeds from the assets of convicted drug dealers, like fines, go into a consolidated fund. Will the minister investigate whether those assets could be returned to the communities from which they were taken? That would be a welcome boost for local drug prevention groups.

I am not a known supporter of Tommy on many matters, but he has been here all morning and others who arrived late have been allowed to speak. That is an issue which needs to be resolved.

On a point of order. When Sir David Steel opened the debate, he said that those who were not here while the minister was making the statement would not be called in the debate. Now Mr Raffan has been called. Will you please give clarification?

I thought that it was a risky strategy for the Tories to lead on this motion this morning. Their defence of it today at least has been commendable— [Applause.] However, as Kenny Gibson said, what a brass neck. Before the Scottish Parliament election, the Tories apologised for all their mistakes, but there was no apology this morning to those pensioners who cannot take a bus to church on a Sunday or visit their relatives in hospital at the weekend, and there was no regret for those who cannot get a bus after 6 o'clock at night. There was no word of concern for those who cannot get to work for early shifts within the Renfrewshire area, including Greenock and Inverclyde, which I represent.

No, we have had enough tosh from the Tories today, and I will have my say. There has not been a word of regret for low-paid workers who are forced into taxis to take them to work in the morning. The fuel escalator affects those temporary workers in my constituency who are forced to hire buses to take them to and from work. The price of the bus is fixed, so they have to watch their fares increase week after week—the number of passengers has declined because people have been laid off. The price of their transport has doubled.

No, I am going to press on. I apologise for that, but I need to make a couple of points.  No word of concern was expressed for Mr Dempster, whom I met at Greenock West station this morning, when again the train did not turn up at 6.30. He faxed me to say that he supports our integrated policy. I will tell him that no comfort came from the Conservatives this morning with regard to getting him from Greenock to Motherwell to work. The only comfort in this chamber this morning is the strategy that has been put forward by the Executive. When I get back to my office I will tell Mr Dempster that I am supporting the amendment and that everyone in this Parliament should do the same, because the only people who can offer a solution to the crisis that we face in our public transport system are the Executive. I hope that the Parliament supports the amendment.

Will Fergus Ewing inform us what the SNP's position is on the penny rise in tax that it proposed?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will make a statement on support for local community involvement in regeneration through citizens juries. (S1O-279)

I welcome the minister's response. As I have already referred in the chamber to the serious problems of crime, ill health and poverty in the Greenock and Inverclyde district, I also welcome the fact that the first citizens jury in Greenock will take place at the end of October. Ordinary people will be allowed to discuss key concerns in the community. Given that there are 30 citizens juries in the United Kingdom and six in Scotland, does the minister agree that they are a well-tried and trusted method of canvassing the views of communities? Can she assure me that the Scottish Executive will take seriously the views of those citizens juries? What other ideas does she have for further consultation with communities?

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept that the best way in which to tackle poverty is to provide people with jobs?

Will Alex Neil also accept that we now have the lowest unemployment figures in Scotland for many years?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will congratulate Inverclyde Council and its partners on the staging of the recent tall ships event in Greenock. (S1O-204)

The event was such a success that we made a video and there is a free copy for Sam at the end of question time. For everyone else, it costs £11.99 from Inverclyde District Council.  Does the Executive recognise that while event-based tourism such as the tall ships race boosts an area's image, confidence and self-esteem, long-term gains can be achieved only by supporting the Invest in Inverclyde campaign that seeks to deliver significant benefits by improving infrastructure and by sustainably developing tourism? Such measures allow areas such as Greenock to overcome serious problems that arise from the demise of heavy industry.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to make a statement on the  number of young unemployed who have benefited from the first full year of the new deal. (S1O-146)

I welcome the minister's statement, but does he agree that short-term unemployment is a growing problem in places such as Greenock and Inverclyde, where the electronics industry is a major employer? People have been asked to accept either short-term employment or long-term educational opportunities. We need to create local flexibility in the new deal to ensure that it works properly. One solution could be to count together periods of unemployment, which would allow people to qualify for the new deal if they had been unemployed for six of the past 12 months and were identified as needing extra support to compete more effectively in the labour market. That would ensure that Labour's new deal worked effectively for them.

As someone who was born and brought up in a shipbuilding community and saw the shipbuilding industry destroyed by representatives of the Conservative party-just as it destroyed the steel industry-I find that hard to take. Enough is enough. I do not want any lectures from David Davidson on jobs.

There has been a lot of discussion about the university aspect of the debate. I have not been to a university, and would like to remind people of the importance of further education colleges, which provide around 50,000 student places in Scotland. James Watt College, in my constituency, provides 1,400 of those places.  As members will know, further education colleges are an important gateway to second-chance and lifelong learning. As someone who benefited from that second chance, I can testify that it was never given free. People who went to night school paid to go there to get themselves out of the shipyards. People who went on plumbing, welding, car maintenance and other courses paid or got their employers to pay. Principles may be the experience of some members, but they are not the experience of many people I know, nor are they my own experience.

I think Colin Campbell must have misheard; I must have been talking too fast for him. I said that the experience of many people in further education colleges is that they must always pay; they either pay their own fees or employers pay them. That was my experience.  To get an angle on the issue and to get a feel for the debate, I tried to exclude myself from the accusations, bluster and confusion of the political debate. I visited my local college, not only to better inform myself about the debate, but to establish a link between this Parliament and the college, including those at the sharp end of the debate. I found out that 76 per cent of students who attend that college pay no fees, and that only 4 per cent pay the full fees-53 out of 1,444 students.

Wait a minute, Tommy, I am in full flow here. Ninety-six per cent of students at that college received either full or partial support for their fees.

I fully support a wide-ranging review and all the- [Laughter.] Well, I do, and I think that it is very important to have a review and an independent inquiry to discuss all the issues. Dennis Canavan alluded earlier to the fact that there is more than one thing at issue here, and that is what I am trying to get at.  As I said, I found the college in a period of investment and expansion. It is employing 12 new lecturers on a permanent basis. All those things are happening and we must take them into consideration.  To vote against the inquiry and support the amendment would not automatically create fairness. I do not see how it could; it defies my logic. It would exclude the students, management and unions from the opportunity to participate in influencing the decision-making process. I thought that was what we were supposed to be about.  Every action has a consequence. If we do not spend a bit of money on examining the issues, it could lead to poorer quality courses, fewer teachers and an end to the investment environment that we have now. We must, therefore, think hard and support the wide-ranging inquiry.

Will Dorothy-Grace Elder allow an intervention?

Does she agree that we are getting a real bargain when we compare Holyrood to the costs that she has just given?

I was anxious to speak today for a selfish reason. I do not know whether this is appropriate, but I would like to announce that, yesterday afternoon in Harrow, my daughter gave birth to my first granddaughter. She weighed in at 6lb 14oz-members can tell that she does not take after my side of the family. I felt that in this family-friendly Parliament, I could not miss the opportunity to make that announcement. [Applause.]  That applause has just spurred me on, so I will continue with an apology. I have never participated in or witnessed a public school debate and I have never been to Australia. However, I have been forced to debate my arguments and present my case in shipyards on the Clyde, in the bottling halls of Dumbarton and in the mills of Falkirk and Grangemouth. There were no formal rules, but if people made personal attacks on others they were more likely to get a black eye than a debate. That rarely happened, although sometimes people got a sore nose. The basic rule was that if someone was talking nonsense, they were told that they were talking nonsense. Much nonsense has been talked-or has been reported-during the past few weeks. I think that we all feel relief today that we are now reaching a sense of purpose about the business of the Parliament and are getting down to it.  The First Minister's statement set out a programme that we can all support and that understands the power of education. We should all rally behind it, as I hope we will. The programme will raise expectations-rightly so, because the expectations of the people whom I represent are extremely low.  I hope that, as was said this morning, the programme will support the regeneration of our economy. Some people say that we need a bill before Parliament to discuss unemployment or to tackle the problems of redundancies and jobs. However, we did not need a bill or a debate to send a task force into Govan, which the workers were discussing this morning. I hope that the task force will bear fruit for the more than 200 people in my constituency who depend on the Kvaerner  Govan yard for their livelihood.  I welcome the First Minister's stated priority of targeting heart disease and cancer. Greenock and Inverclyde have a high incidence of disease and ill health, which needs to be fought relentlessly. I also welcome the priority of building strong and stable communities that are not overshadowed by the fear of crime. We do not need to have legislation in place to attack drugs, but drugs are the big issue on the streets and we must get a grip of the situation. We know that drug-related crime is up and that drug-related deaths are on the increase.  Against that background, the need for action cannot be questioned. A lot can be done through education, as Trish Godman said, and by providing rehabilitation centres where there are none for people who want to come off drugs. I say to Phil Gallie that where there are no places in a rehabilitation centre, people come through your back window. The issue needs to be addressed urgently. If we address it and some of the other issues, I am confident that my constituents will support the priorities of the Parliament and the programme.