I thank all members—particularly Opposition members—who supported the motion, which has allowed the debate to take place. That has given the Parliament the opportunity to discuss what is a worrying issue in Scotland and, indeed, across the whole of the United Kingdom. It is an issue that I would much prefer not to discuss, but we need to do so. I thank the Trussell Trust, Barnardo’s, Oxfam, Nourish Scotland and Citizens Advice Scotland for providing briefings prior to the debate. I welcome representatives from the Trussell Trust, who are in the public gallery. The commitment and dedication of the volunteers at the Trussell Trust and at other emergency food providers are to be whole-heartedly commended. I also thank everyone across Scotland who volunteers their time in their communities, whether in food banks or in other activities, to provide support for those in need. It is important to put on the record the work of food banks and what they are. A food bank is a place where, after referral, people can go to obtain food. The Trussell Trust’s food banks provide a minimum of three days’ worth of nutritionally balanced emergency food; they also support people in crisis. Clients cannot obtain unlimited food—they may redeem up to three food bank vouchers in a row. More than 90 per cent of the food that is given out is donated by the public. I saw that at first hand when I took part in a food collection day before Christmas at the Tesco store in Port Glasgow. I was genuinely overwhelmed by the generosity of the public on that day. Every person who goes to a Trussell Trust food bank is referred by a professional such as a social worker, a welfare rights adviser, a tenancy support worker or a school liaison officer, and the food bank tries to work with the individual to help them to resolve the underlying cause of the crisis. Members who look at the scale of the issue will be shocked. In 2011, there was one Trussell Trust food bank operating in Scotland, but by October 2013, the number had increased to 43. There are more than 400 food banks operating throughout the UK, and the Scottish Government report, “Overview of Food Aid Provision in Scotland”, which was published in December 2013, identified 55 food banks and soup kitchens. However, many independent, community and small-scale providers are not reflected in the figures. A report that was published by Church Action on Poverty and Oxfam stated: “We estimate that over 500,000 people are now reliant on food aid—the use of food banks and receipt of food parcels—and this number is likely to escalate further over the coming months.” That is a UK figure. However, there are concerns that the figures reflect only part of the problem. Nourish Scotland is concerned that the statistics that show increased demand for emergency food provision are just the tip of the iceberg. In fact, Citizens Advice Scotland told me that, in January alone, Scottish citizens advice bureaux advisers referred more than 400 people to a food bank or other emergency support. That is the highest monthly figure that CAS has ever seen. Oxfam told me that visits to West Dunbartonshire Community Foodshare’s service have increased markedly. The service had 186 visits last October, 215 in November, 237 in December, and 358 in January this year. The increasing trend is affecting families, too: there were visits from 36 families in October, 64 in November, 123 in December, and 145 in January. Of the 1,967 vouchers that have been distributed by the Inverclyde food bank since it started operating in April 2010, 250 have gone to families and 266 to single parents. In total, those 1,967 vouchers have fed 2,571 adults and 974 children. More recent figures for Scotland estimate that somewhere around 55,000 or more Scots rely on emergency food aid. As Oxfam states, “No one turns up at Foodbanks because there is an opportunity for free food. They are driven there in sheer desperation.” The charity indicates that 34 per cent of those who turn to emergency food banks are experiencing some sort of benefit delay. Citizens Advice Scotland and the Trussell Trust put the figure at 30 per cent. Citizens Advice Scotland states: “Evidence from bureaux, and from food banks themselves, indicate that benefit delays and welfare reform are driving increased need for food parcels.” According to the Trussell Trust, “Since April 2013, welfare reforms have impacted many people and resulted in more referrals to foodbanks as a result of benefit delays or changes.” As we know, people on benefits usually have the lowest incomes, with no savings to cover unforeseen circumstances. Even a slight delay in receiving benefit can mean that they have no money to buy food for themselves or their children. One of the most alarming pieces of evidence from Oxfam highlights the depths of some people’s distress. Some people who use food banks have actually started handing back food, not because they do not need the food that they have been given but because they cannot afford to turn on the electricity to cook it. What does it say about our society when people cannot even afford to cook the food that they have been given? Despite all that evidence, the UK Westminster Government fails to act—and it is not just the coalition Government, as we are now in the middle of a Dutch auction between the Tories and Labour to see who can cut benefits the most. As if that is not bad enough, we heard the news this week that members of the House of Lords are complaining about the declining standards of their subsidised catering facilities, with one peer being “scarred” when his table booking was cancelled suddenly and his party were “unable to lunch elsewhere” because his wife was wearing a tiara. That surely proves that the Westminster elite is completely out of touch with the reality of austerity UK. However, there is an opportunity to change all that.

Not at the moment, thank you.

Monday’s Financial Times highlighted that Scotland is a wealthy nation, but our wealth is squandered by incompetence at Westminster, with a Parliament and an elite that care more about tiaras than folk who are in sheer desperation. Between 2011 and 2013, Scotland experienced faster growth in the number of food banks launching with the Trussell Trust than any other part of the UK. Food banks have helped 48,921 people since 1 April last year. According to Barnardo’s, Christmas dinner came in a food parcel for a “disturbing” number of children last year because of the impact of rising living costs and changes to the welfare system. I did not get involved in politics to mitigate anything, to welcome the increased number of food banks or to provide food parcels for Christmas dinner. I got involved to help Scotland and its citizens achieve all that they can be.

My colleague John Mason spoke earlier about minority sports and the legacy from the Commonwealth games for those sports. At the outset of my speech, I want to congratulate a minority sport that is not participating in the Commonwealth games—cricket. This morning, the Scottish cricket team qualified for the 2015 world cup. It is only the third time in the team’s history that it has done so, so I congratulate Cricket Scotland for a tremendous achievement. The Commonwealth games has already brought, and will continue to bring, major investment into the city of Glasgow; it will also provide a legacy further afield—it will touch all parts of Scotland. I will highlight a couple of areas regarding legacy 2014 and the work that is being done to achieve a long-lasting legacy that will touch many aspects of life in Scotland. The first issue that needs to be cleared up is what is meant by “legacy”. Legacy 2014 is about using the unique opportunity of the Commonwealth games in Glasgow to deliver lasting change across the whole of Scotland, both in the run-up to the games and in the years beyond. The legacy ranges from business and economic opportunities to sporting and cultural opportunities. I hope to highlight just a few examples of how the legacy can help to benefit not just the people of Glasgow, but the whole of Scotland. On the business and economic side, we have heard from other members about the investment in new facilities. Obviously, there is the potential business legacy of boosting the Scottish economy by building and maintaining the facilities. There is also the opportunity to promote a skilled Scottish workforce and to enhance their reputation both at home and abroad. The games will also raise the profile of Scotland as a place to do business, and as a welcoming host for many events—cultural events or sporting events such as the Ryder cup. It will help to promote Scotland as a distinctive brand, and it will showcase goods and services, develop relations with international markets and improve Scotland’s reputation as a good place in which to do business. I turn to sport. A range of programmes are either in place or being developed to build a lasting legacy from the Commonwealth games. They include programmes to encourage more people to get active and improve their health, and programmes to create plans to promote sport and exercise. There is a 10-year plan to adapt for Scotland key elements of the Toronto charter for physical activity—which makes the case for increased action on tackling physical inactivity—that links the charter directly to the Scottish Government’s legacy ambitions for the games. In addition, the Scottish Government and its partners continue to spread the word about the importance of physical activity by informing people through a range of websites about how and where they can get involved. Another legacy element of the games is provision of funding and support to local authorities and schools to help them to deliver physical education, physical activity and sport in the curriculum and in the wider community. That will help children and young people to develop the skills and confidence that they require to take part and to become more active. Community sports hubs have been developed as homes for local clubs and sports organisations; they are based in local facilities including sports centres, community centres and schools. Sportscotland is working with all 32 local authorities across the country to ensure that at least 150 sports hubs are in place by 2016. By working together, those clubs can benefit each other via shared facilities and funding applications, thereby creating a better outcome than they would normally achieve by themselves. Looking to the future, there is the organised workforce programme, which involves investment from sportscotland in sport governing bodies and affiliated clubs to support them as they develop, and to sustain a strong infrastructure. That work includes increasing the number and quality of sport coaches and volunteers, and it will involve additional training. There are wider cultural aspects to the legacy programme, including the Glasgow 2014 cultural programme, which is a nationwide celebration that will play a central role in how Scotland hosts and welcomes the games. Culture 2014 is the Scotland-wide cultural countdown to the games and what comes afterwards, and festival 2014 will transform the host city from 19 July to 3 August 2014. The minister mentioned the Queen’s baton relay, and other members have mentioned the opening and closing ceremonies of the games. Those events will be used as innovative platforms for promoting and celebrating Scotland’s culture, not only in Scotland, but in the Commonwealth and even more widely. There are other initiatives to widen the cultural aspect. One example is a celebration of dance across Scotland, which involves key dance organisations and brings together professional and amateur dancers of all ages to dance in public spaces in our towns, villages and cities, thereby ensuring that the games legacy widens its appeal. We should also welcome the celebrate venture, which is a joint venture that involves the Big Lottery Fund, Creative Scotland, the Heritage Lottery Fund and sportscotland. It is a £4 million fund that will provide opportunities for community groups across the country to mark the arrival of the games by holding an array of community-focused events—including events that have a cultural focus—to celebrate the people, places and culture of the Commonwealth. The celebrate venture offers grants of up to £10,000 to sports, arts, community and heritage organisations throughout Scotland. In music, the big big sing—which we heard about earlier—is a developing nation-wide celebration of singing that is being produced by the Glasgow UNESCO city of music initiative. It will inspire thousands of people to sign up and get singing in the lead-up to and during the games. The big big sing will provide a wide range of opportunities for participation. In addition, there is the 2014 new music biennial, which will involve the performance of 20 brand new commissions by some of the UK’s most exciting composers being performed across the UK. It will culminate with two special weekend events at London’s Southbank centre and in Glasgow to coincide with the Commonwealth games, and it is also part of the culture 2014 and festival 2014 programmes. There is no greater legacy than connecting with children. I tend not to talk about my family when I am speaking in the chamber or outside it, but my eldest daughter came home from primary school one Friday a few months ago and told me about Clyde, which her class was discussing that week, and the “Clyde’s Story” video that can be seen online. I thought, “She’s six and she’s getting involved.” She is being encouraged to learn a bit more about Scotland and the games. I thought that it was tremendous that my six-year-old came in and started telling me things. That was not the first time it has happened and I am sure that it will not be the last. However, I thought that what her primary school was doing was excellent, and it highlights where primary schools have such a tremendous opportunity, and that they are delivering on it. I suggest that another key part of the legacy is the sportspeople in our communities. I know somebody who unfortunately missed out on the Delhi games due to having sustained an injury prior to them. It is Jane Armour from Inverclyde, who had been picked for the Scotland weightlifting team. The team for the Glasgow games has not been announced yet, but I wish Jane and the others who want to participate every success and I hope that she manages to compete in this year’s Commonwealth games.

I would be grateful if the minister would say which local authorities in West Scotland he has met recently along with SEPA and Scottish Water to discuss flooding matters.

Does Kevin Stewart agree that the council tax freeze has been warmly welcomed across the country, and that the Labour councillors throughout Scotland who question the freeze must answer to their constituents and explain why they want them to pay more?

I congratulate Annabel Goldie on securing the debate and Jackson Carlaw on his speech. I wish Annabel Goldie well in her recovery. Towards the end of 2013, I went to HMP Greenock and throughcare support was one of the issues discussed. I was greatly interested by the project as the revolving-door syndrome has blighted the Scottish criminal justice system for far too long and action is required to break that cycle. I also know that no one-size-fits-all strategy will suit everyone. However, for any system to be successful, a number of factors must be in existence. One such factor is a prison estate in which overcrowding is at a minimum or non-existent. Locking prisoners in their cells for 23 hours a day is no good to them, the prison officers or society. I offer my thanks to the Scottish Government and the Scottish Prison Service for improving the prison estate, which has aided this particular project. I am aware that an evaluation event on the throughcare support project took place today. I was contacted after that meeting by an individual who had informed folk that they would be in touch with me. As part of the discussion, we talked about what one issue—what part of the system that needs to be improved—they would raise in this debate. The person suggested housing. Part of their email said: “We need to examine ways in which the process can be finally tuned to better meet the needs of returning citizens. This would involve better planning, resources being made available and a move away from the attitude that returning citizens do not deserve or need the same access to housing as others within the community.” That was a very important point. Jackson Carlaw rightly highlighted the project details, so I will not repeat what he said. However, I will highlight a few brief points. First, I commend all the staff who are involved in the project. They appreciate the necessity of intervention to aid people’s journeys, so that they do not return to prison. Secondly, the project initiation document is detailed enough while retaining flexibility to aid prisoners. The project is in its infancy, so regular scrutiny and evaluation of its success is critical to its long-term viability and in delivering for prisoners and society. Thirdly, in order for any multi-agency project to be successful, the delivery of the plans needs to be robust, which is certainly the case for the housing issue that I mentioned. I was informed about an example in which one person who was released—not from HMP Greenock, but from another prison in the estate—had various issues, including mental health issues. The project at that prison did not work for that person. The charity Positive Prison? Positive Futures stepped in to assist and it has ensured that that individual has remained out of the criminal justice system and prison. I whole-heartedly welcome the throughcare projects across the prison estate, particularly in HMP Greenock. Once again, I congratulate Annabel Goldie and Jackson Carlaw on the debate and I thank all those who are delivering for the project. We must always strive to deliver the best service that we can. I am sure that the initiative at HMP Greenock will continue to aid more prisoners and our society.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to provide next-generation broadband in the west of Scotland. (S4O-02769)

I recently carried out a consultation on a separate matter in the Inverclyde area in which a number of my constituents raised the issue of broadband capacity. Can the cabinet secretary provide more details on the roll-out of broadband for the rest of Scotland? When can areas such as Inverclyde expect to have improved broadband connectivity?

Will the member give way?

How can Gavin Brown justify the ever-increasing number of food banks and people going to them weekly to be fed?

Iain Gray’s comments took me back to the old adage that we are too wee, too poor and too stupid. I am more optimistic about Scotland’s future through independence, as all the evidence demonstrates that Scotland is a wealthy nation. Indeed, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development estimates that Scotland could be the eighth wealthiest nation in the world. Scotland’s wealth is also built on solid financial foundations, a diverse economy and substantial economic potential in the new industries, such as biotechnology and renewables, as well as current key sectors such as food and drink, tourism and gas and oil. Scotland’s economy includes £21.4 billion in construction, an industry that employs 170,000 people; £11.6 billion in tourism, which supports 292,000 jobs; and £39 billion turnover a year in manufacturing with a value added of £12.7 billion and 127,000 people employed. Scotland also has world-leading expertise in life science, world-class universities—five are in the world’s top 200—a multibillion-pound creative sector, vast energy resources, including oil, gas, tidal and wave, and fishing and agricultural resources. We also performed strongly as a location for inward investment and have a strong financial services industry. Scotland’s relative labour market performance has also strengthened. Scotland’s employment rate has been higher and its unemployment rate lower than in the UK as a whole for most of the recent period. Over each of the past 32 years, Scotland has contributed more tax per head of population than the UK as a whole. In 2011-12, Scotland provided 9.9 per cent of UK taxes and received only 9.3 per cent of total UK spending. That means that Scotland would have been £4.4 billion better off as an independent country last year alone. Our public finances have consistently been healthier than those elsewhere in the UK, giving us a strong platform on which to build economic success and maintain strong services. All that shows that Scotland can easily afford not only to be an independent country but to flourish with independence. With independence, we could do so many things. We could build a new taxation system that stimulates the economy, builds social cohesion and sustains Scotland’s public services. We could develop a new tax system to boost our economy as well as the key industries, such as our renewables industry where Scotland has 25 per cent of Europe’s offshore wind and tidal energy potential and 10 per cent of Europe’s wave power potential. We could also focus on the Scottish Government’s aim of reindustrialising Scotland. That could see economic, industrial and taxation policies combine to boost our manufacturing sector, pushing it towards the level of manufacturing that there is in Germany, where manufacturing makes up around 21 per cent of GDP in comparison with 12 per cent here. With such a move, we would not only strengthen our industrial base and provide a more balanced economy but generate thousands of jobs. We could also use the benefits of the taxation system to provide a better social security system—one without a bedroom tax and one that does not aim to be tougher than the Tories, which seems to be the Labour Party’s aim as stated by Rachel Reeves MP, the shadow Secretary of State for Work and Pensions. With independence, we can send a clear signal that Scotland is one of the most competitive and attractive economies in Europe, with tax rates designed to boost economic activity and support the fast-growing industries that already have a comparative advantage. Corporation tax rates remain an important tool for securing competitive advantage and for offsetting competitive advantages enjoyed by other parts of the UK, notably London. A debate took place in the chamber only yesterday on Scotland’s future. In the debate, we heard a confused position coming from the Labour benches. A party of so-called principles that once emanated from socialist ideals voting against free school meals highlighted to me everything that is wrong with the Labour Party. To add to its woe, the Labour front bench was on television last night questioning, as did Patricia Ferguson today, the small business bonus scheme that has been a lifeline to many small businesses up and down the country and, as a consequence, our economy. Thank goodness there is growing support in the Labour Party for the Labour for independence banner among people who know that there is a better way for their party and for Scotland. Although the economy is improving, there are ever-increasing numbers of people going to ever-increasing numbers of food banks as I have mentioned. Many of those people are the working poor and not just those who are unemployed. In response to Willie Rennie’s comments, I do not understand how that can be a positive. Scotland does not need to be like that. We are a wealthy country and, with power over all financial matters, we can work to alleviate the necessity for food banks. I urge everyone in the chamber to vote for the motion in John Swinney’s name.

I am pleased to have the chance to speak in the debate. I, too, congratulate my colleague Fiona McLeod on securing it. I encourage her to go along to the next meeting of the cross-party group on visual impairment, of which I am convener. The important topic of community optometry has been discussed many times by the group, both while I have been convener and, previously, when I was an ordinary member. It is only right that we should give credit where it is due. That is certainly the case with those providing such a valuable service to local communities. According to the latest figures, more than 180,000 people throughout Scotland have significant sight loss. That equates to about one in 30 people. As the motion states, that is set to increase, mainly due to the ageing population in Scotland. However, more than 50 per cent of sight loss can be avoided, and many older people are needlessly living with sight loss. Almost two thirds of sight loss in older people is caused by refractive error and cataract. Eye health checks provide quick and convenient access to an expert, allowing for rapid diagnosis and timely intervention for treatment and management of any condition. As with other conditions, most eye disorders respond better when detected early, resulting in shorter recovery time, less patient distress and a reduction in the overall care costs. Early diagnosis and intervention, and the provision of information to people and their carers at the point of diagnosis, is critical. That is why regular eye checks and the work of community optometrists are important. I believe that the service is also highly valued by the public. Community optometry plays a key role in primary care. Eye health checks reduce the burden on secondary care, retain people with minor problems in the community and improve the quality of referrals. The service has led to a 4.5 per cent reduction in referrals across Scotland, compared with an increase in England of approximately 23 per cent over the same period. It is also worth highlighting in this debate the role of the Scottish vision strategy, which we have heard about from one or two previous speakers. It sets out a blueprint for improvements in eye care services in Scotland, giving direction to the work in this sector. Key strategy outcomes include: awareness and understanding of sight loss; early intervention, timely treatment and access to early and appropriate services and support; and the full participation in society of those with sight loss. The Scottish vision strategy continues to enjoy the endorsement of a wide alliance of statutory, health and social care bodies, voluntary organisations, eye health professionals and individuals. [Interruption.]

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. The issue of electronic referral has come up more than once in the discussions of the cross-party group. People have come to the cross-party group to talk about how electronic referral has saved their sight. It is a huge step forward in eye healthcare in Scotland. It is true that free eye tests were introduced in 2006. I absolutely congratulate the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive on implementing that universal policy, and I congratulate the current Scottish Government on maintaining it. It has been a huge boost to eye healthcare in Scotland. The value of community optometry can be seen in the enhanced role that it provides in communities across Scotland, providing much-needed early intervention and detection of eye disorders. I am happy to support this motion and to recognise the value of community optometry and the work of Optometry Scotland.

Will Kezia Dugdale taken an intervention?

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on recent reports that shoppers in an independent Scotland could face higher food bills. (S4F-01758)

Does the First Minister agree that the no campaign’s reaction to the story is just a lot of nonsense and that it falls apart when it is subject to scrutiny from any politician or the public of Scotland? [Interruption.]

I will try to lighten the mood after Neil Findlay’s contribution. I am delighted to speak in the debate. The publication of the independence white paper and the debate that is taking place on it mark an historic moment for everyone who lives in Scotland. The white paper provides us with a comprehensive outline of the opportunities that await an independent Scottish nation. We need an honest, open and public debate on the referendum and on independence, and I believe that the public are up for that debate. Are the politicians from the no side up for that debate? A number of issues have already been raised, and many more will be raised. It is up to the politicians on the other side to put forward their case. Now that we have the Scottish Government’s white paper on the proposals for an independent Scotland, it is time for the other side to put up its proposals for staying part of the UK. When will that document be published? That very issue arose during the stage 3 debate on the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill on 14 November. In that debate, Tavish Scott, who I notice is not in the chamber, said: “I believe that the onus is on those of us who represent the best of both worlds—the continuance of Scotland within the United Kingdom—to make a strong case for more powers for this Parliament, as I have always done. ... I entirely concede to Bruce Crawford the point, which he has made to me on many occasions, that the onus is on those of us who make that case to come up with a plan. Personally, I am happy to accept that challenge.”—[Official Report, 14 November 2013; c 24527.] So far this afternoon we have heard no plan whatsoever from the no side.

I am sorry—the member did not let me in last week so I am not going to bother letting him in now. As far as this side of the chamber and the debate are concerned, we have delivered with the publication of the white paper, “Scotland’s Future”. The public deserve the same respect from the no campaign. Independence is the natural choice for Scotland and I cannot for the life of me think how a positive case for remaining in the union can be made given that, within that very structure, one in four children grows up in poverty and we have the bedroom tax and a rise in food banks. The benefits of independence are clear for all to see. We will be able to access our own resources; we will have an oil fund for future generations—which, I say to Mr Gray, will be paid for from oil and gas revenues; public services will be kept in public hands; we will get the Government that we vote for; and we will be able to remove Trident from Scotland’s waters. Those are just a few of the many many gains that independence will bring; we have already heard about others this afternoon and there will be more to come. As for Trident and defence, this is an issue on which Scotland can make huge gains and strides forward. The white paper makes it abundantly clear that Faslane will be kept open and will become the main naval base and joint forces headquarters in an independent Scotland. There will be no more weapons of mass destruction on the Clyde because Trident will be removed.

I am sorry, but no. Unlike the UK Government, whose short-lived Faslane annexation policy was decimated within hours and from which it was forced to backtrack, this Scottish Government provides a long and clear future for Faslane and its workforce. I accept that removing Trident alone will not be enough for some people to vote yes—although it might be enough for many—but the white paper is more detailed than that. Maintaining Faslane’s future is also a strong selling point for a yes vote next year. After all, one of the five key defence priorities is to reconfigure the defence estate inherited at the point of independence to meet Scotland’s needs. Retaining Faslane as a fully operational naval base and the addition of a joint forces HQ will sustain existing military personnel numbers at the base; moreover, civilian posts will be needed to support these operations and construction work will be required to reshape Faslane to the needs of a conventional Scottish defence force. As for another aspect of defence capabilities, the recent events on the Clyde involving BAE Systems indicate the importance of shipbuilding to not only the Scottish economy but the Scottish psyche. Scots still have a huge admiration for the industry and know that Clyde-built ships are still world-class ships; in fact, any nation would be proud to have the kind of ships that are still built on the Clyde. Page 248 of the white paper mentions the “procurement of ... new frigates”, while page 249 also talks about the procurement of “offshore patrol vessels”. Working where appropriate with other nations on joint procurement is an area where defence opportunities will assist the Scottish defence industry but the important point is that Scotland will actually have the choice of whether we want to do that or not. Moreover, page 243 of the white paper sets out a vision for “Defence capabilities after 10 years” of “15,000 regular and 5,000 reserve personnel across land, air and maritime forces”. That is the position that we will work towards after independence, and the transitional arrangements over the 10-year period offer a sensible phased approach to providing an appropriate defence force. Scotland has had to take more than its fair share of defence cuts. Defence employment has fallen from 24,680 in 2000 to 15,340 in 2013; defence spending in Scotland is £1.4 billion less than the £3.3 billion that we contribute; and I find it incredible that there are no maritime patrol aircraft or major surface ships based in Scotland, despite its being a maritime nation. This white paper is a blueprint for a nation reborn, a blueprint for an appropriately sized defence force and a blueprint for ridding Scotland of Trident once and for all. As Donald Dewar once said: “I like the sound of that.”

This is an important issue not just for the future of the defence industry in Scotland but for all Scotland. It is therefore unfortunate that it has been turned into a constitutional issue by members of the no campaign. Some issues can be above the constitutional debate that is taking place. Unfortunately, in this instance, some members of the no campaign cannot rise above that. [Interruption.]

Johann Lamont listed a number of individuals from the yards who have said that, if Scotland were to vote yes, shipbuilding on the Clyde would be lost. The men to whom I have been speaking over the past 10 days or so—men who work in the shipbuilding industry in Glasgow—understand that what the Labour Party has said up to now has been nothing short of scaremongering. They also know that the reason why work is going to Glasgow is the first-class workmanship, the excellent record and the better business case. If Scotland was to vote yes next year, type 26 orders could still come to Scotland.

I am saying that I have been talking to people who work in the industry—no doubt Iain Gray has done so, too. I can only inform the chamber of the discussions that I have had with individuals who work in the industry, which is the case for Mr Gray and Johann Lamont as well. The people that I have been speaking to know that what is coming from the Labour benches is scaremongering.

I could not agree more with Margo MacDonald. I want to focus on two issues. First is the role of the defence industry in Scotland today, with a focus on shipbuilding. Second is the potential that awaits shipbuilding and the rest of the defence industry in an independent Scotland. I will also touch on Faslane and its future. The motion before us raises some basic issues. We all believe that the defence industry is an important element of Scotland’s economy, but, although we on the SNP benches are prepared to stand by the workforce in the Glasgow yards to protect jobs, other parties qualify their support for the workforce, dependent on how it votes in the referendum. Ian Davidson, the local Labour MP for the area, even wants to take the jobs away from his own constituents, as he is calling for a break clause to remove the work if Scotland votes yes next year.

No; I am sorry—I have taken two already. The defence industry is important to Scotland’s economy and it provides many highly skilled jobs. Many of the companies involved are leaders in their field and rely on their well-qualified and well-trained workforce. Shipbuilding is a key aspect of the industry, and it is one that has a long history in Scotland. At one time, Clyde shipyards produced around one third of the world’s shipping tonnage. From its peak in the 1920s until as recently as the 1950s there were around 100,000 shipbuilding jobs in Scotland. After years of mismanagement of the economy and the industrial sector by successive UK Governments of varying political colour, by 2011 there were only around 6,000 shipbuilding jobs in Scotland. With the recent job losses announced by BAE, the numbers in the Clyde yards were reduced by a further 800 or so, leaving around only 2,300 jobs. The Guardian leader comment on Wednesday 6 November stated: “That’s what happens when a whole political generation fails to develop an industrial strategy. It’s another blow to the coalition promise to rebalance the economy.” Famous shipyards have been consigned to the history books. All that potential and all those jobs have been lost. The jobs went; all those shipyards are gone; all that industry has gone. The one yard that is left building ships on the lower Clyde is Ferguson Shipbuilders in Port Glasgow, and Garvel Clyde Ltd does ship repair in Greenock. The Scottish Government’s award of a £20 million order has allowed Ferguson’s to build ships again for the first time in five years, and that is very much a welcome addition.

No, I have taken two interventions already. Sorry. Incompetent UK Government ministers who had no industrial policy and politicians with a focus on the service sector—all of them have left us where we are now.

The Clyde yards are being retained by BAE for one reason: they are the best place to build warships in the UK. The workforce’s skills, abilities and experience have ensured that BAE sees a future for those yards. Politicians are still trying to undermine the contracts for the Clyde yards, despite the evidence to the Scottish Affairs Committee—evidence that it refused to publish in its reports—that there are no barriers to the MOD ordering ships from Scotland. When Vice Admiral Andrew Mathews, chief of the material fleet, was asked whether type 26 frigates could be built on the Clyde if Scotland was outside the UK, he said: “That's absolutely the case, it depends on the outcome of the referendum and the timing of the 26 order ... That is one of the options open to us.” I have another quick point, Presiding Officer.

The GMB union, in a letter of 5 March 2012, described the fact that the contract for the MARS—military afloat reach and sustainability—tankers went to South Korea as “an Exocet to UK shipbuilding”.

I whole-heartedly support the amendment in the name of Keith Brown, and I certainly support shipbuilding in Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am pleased to speak in the debate on this historic day for the Scottish Parliament. It has been a privilege to be a member of the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill Committee, and I pass on my thanks to my fellow members of the committee, the advisers, the clerking team and all those who gave evidence to the committee. An issue throughout the bill process has been the need for the approach to the bill to be beyond reproach, whatever the outcome next September. No matter which way members vote tonight, and no matter which way the electorate votes next September, the bill process has been transparent, inclusive and clear. Indeed, the briefing that we received from the Electoral Commission for today’s stage 3 debate states: “Our overall view is that the Bill as amended currently meets this standard and reflects many of the recommendations that we made”. The standard referred to is about having “absolute clarity on the roles and responsibilities of those administering the referendum”. Today, we will pass the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill. I welcome Labour’s commitment to vote yes tonight and I hope that I can encourage Labour members to vote yes next September as well. Tonight’s vote will take us a stage closer to the day when, I hope, the people of Scotland will choose to take responsibility for their own lives and for the future of Scotland. Like everyone in the Parliament, I will campaign for what I believe in while respecting the fact that others will have their own position, with which I may disagree but to which they are entitled. The challenge for both sides in the debate is to rise to the occasion, to engender debate, to foster a greater understanding of the political process and to take the opportunity to encourage more people to take part both in the referendum and in future elections. We all need to provide a clearer picture of what Scotland will look like in the event of a yes vote, or even a no vote, on 18 September. I look forward to the publication of the white paper on 26 November and I also look forward to reading the offerings from those campaign groups that will be encouraging a no vote. We need to know what the consequences would be for Scotland in the event of a no vote. On that point, I acknowledge the comments that Tavish Scott made earlier. The referendum will provide the people of Scotland with the choice to make history. There can be no bigger political decision for electors than to decide on their political future as a nation. I look forward to Friday 19 September 2014 and to watching the rebirth of a nation knowing that I have played a part in that—my six-year-old daughter will have assisted, too—and knowing that many friends and fellow nationalists have helped as well. I will also know that those who are no longer with us have done their part in keeping the independence flame burning through some tough times for the national movement. The phrase “standing on the shoulders of giants” can be utilised all too freely, but today we on these benches are standing on those shoulders. We have a responsibility to lost friends, as well as to our families and colleagues, to deliver our shared dream of an independent Scotland that can provide a better future and opportunities for our future generations. I will be delighted to vote yes tonight, and I cannot wait to vote yes on 18 September 2014.

Does the minister agree that there is an important constitutional issue here, as Westminster is looking to take back from the Scottish ministers and the Scottish Parliament powers over the renewables obligation? What does that say about the veracity of the no campaign when it talks about providing more powers to Scotland?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the medical profession regarding the casework of general practitioners. (S4O-02540)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that response. In relation to S4W-16841, I wrote to BMA Scotland questioning the impact on GPs of the United Kingdom Government’s welfare reforms. In the response that I received, BMA Scotland indicated that there is anecdotal evidence that the UK Government’s welfare reforms are increasing GPs’ workloads, as patients are very concerned and confused about health assessments that they are being forced to take. Does the cabinet secretary share my concerns that the welfare reforms from Westminster are having a damning and detrimental effect on the most vulnerable in society? Does he also agree with me that we need to continue to campaign against such reforms? Finally, does he agree that, with a yes vote next year, Scotland can have a welfare system that aids our people as compared with one that punishes those who are less well off and those who are disabled?

4. To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government will spend the £20 million that it announced on 11 September 2013 to help people affected by the so-called bedroom tax. (S4F-01572)

I thank the First Minister for indicating his clear position on the bedroom tax, certainly for next year. What further discussions or communications has the Scottish Government had with COSLA to ensure that the £20 million will be utilised as timeously as possible to help those who have been affected by the parties in the no campaign’s bedroom tax? Has the First Minister had any discussions with Johann Lamont regarding her position on the bedroom tax?

I declare that my wife works for Caledonian MacBrayne. She is based in Gourock. I commend David Stewart for bringing the debate to Parliament. I have never changed my opinion on the Gourock-Dunoon ferry route; for the record, I say that I would like a return to a vehicle and passenger ferry on the route, which is the solution that many people have been campaigning for for some time. I recognise that the process is not easy. My colleague Mike Russell MSP has been, and I am sure will continue to be, a strong voice in the campaign for a return to a passenger and vehicle ferry on the route. He is the member for the Argyll and Bute constituency, so I am sure that his support will be important as the campaign progresses. I want a return to a passenger and vehicle ferry on the route for a number of reasons. It would provide town centre to town centre vehicle access and it would provide competition on the Clyde. I am sure that it would also have an environmental benefit, given that carbon emissions in Gourock would be reduced if vehicles did not have to go through the town to reach the Western Ferries route. I am also sure that the bigger ferry that would be required for the route would be more reliable and efficient. The current vessels are not perfect and it is clear that the MV Ali Cat is not reliable, particularly in the harsher months. A vehicle and passenger ferry would bring economic benefits to both sides of the River Clyde. There might be an opportunity for a new ferry to operate on the route. Whether we were to get one ferry or more than one, as David Stewart proposed, and whether the new ferry was second hand or new, there would be advantages. The building of a new ferry or ferries would present opportunities for Clyde-based shipbuilders and others to tender for the work, which would bring even more economic benefits to West Scotland. I appreciate that we must, as well as addressing the longer-term issue of returning a vehicle and passenger ferry to the route, address the short-term matter of the MV Ali Cat’s unreliability. In the longer term, we must also address the issue to do with the EU, which has been going on for many years. In recent years there has at least been some movement to try to deal with the issue; in the past it has been sidelined and never fully taken on. I commend the hard work, dedication and determination of all the campaigners who care so much about the route. In particular, I thank the members of the Dunoon-Gourock ferry action group, whose drive and focus are helping to progress the issue. I also thank the current cabinet secretary and her predecessor Alex Neil for ensuring that dialogue on the issue has continued, and for attempting to find short-term and longer-term solutions for the Gourock-Dunoon route.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in the debate. This is an important issue, as it highlights the potential that Scotland has to move forward with independence. My speech will focus on a couple of examples that illustrate why the Parliament needs the normal powers of an independent country to help the Scottish economy. Two recent concerns show why Westminster is not working for Scotland. The first of those is the bedroom tax, which is also commonly known as the spare room subsidy. Frankly, the policy penalises those who are in most need. It punishes those who are on housing benefit and there are simply not enough one-bedroom properties to make the policy work in Scotland. It takes valuable income away from those at the lower end of the income scale as they struggle to retain their house. The policy will also end up costing the state more as tenants of social landlords look to the private sector for housing, even though such housing generally costs more in benefit claims. All the main unionist parties support the policy in one way or another. Labour introduced it for private sector tenants and the Lib Dems and Tories expanded it to cover the tenants of social landlords. It will be interesting to hear from Labour politicians, in their closing speeches, about their current position on the bedroom tax. Do we believe Anas Sarwar and Jackie Baillie, with their proposals to abolish it, or do we believe the leadership of London Labour, who said that Ms Baillie went too far and who have no plans to repeal the pernicious legislation?

I can certainly tell Mr Fraser that, when the bedroom tax was voted on in the House of Commons, the leader of the better together campaign decided to attend a better together meeting in Aberdeen rather than go down there to vote against the measure. Another issue that I want to raise is the privatisation of the Royal Mail. Margaret McDougall said earlier that she would talk about issues of importance to the people of Scotland. I suggest to her that the proposed privatisation of the Royal Mail is one such issue and I hope that she will support the First Minister’s comments about bringing the Royal Mail back into public ownership if the privatisation goes ahead. We in the SNP question why this privatisation is being progressed. Privatisation poses a real danger to the postal service’s universal service obligation, which is of huge importance to Scotland. A privatised postal service in a competitive market will undoubtedly put pressure on the Government to reduce the terms of the USO, as its competitors cherry-pick the profitable urban routes, with the result that there will be a reduced service in rural and less affluent areas. Given the experience of previous privatisations, there are legitimate concerns about whether the regulator will provide real protection to consumers on either price or service—a point that was raised time and again when I was a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, as Murdo Fraser will know. Some might ask why I have raised the issues of the bedroom tax and the Royal Mail’s privatisation in a debate about Scotland’s economy. Quite simply, the more money that people have to spend on items of their choosing, the better. If the USO is altered for a privatised Royal Mail, how will that affect smaller communities and the voluntary groups that utilise and sometimes rely on the Royal Mail to deliver services?

Sorry, I do not have time. If such groups need to decrease their service levels or stop altogether, what kind of negative effect will that have on the economy? Will more people feel that they are being left on the margins of society? Absolutely, they will. There are many and varied things that the SNP Government is doing and has done to make Scotland a better, more prosperous and fairer country. That includes our commitments to what could be described as the people’s policies, such as the council tax freeze, free personal care for our older citizens, no tuition fees for students and free bus travel for the over-60s, as well as many more such policies. However, a description of what the SNP Government is doing is perhaps best left to the comments of a former member of this Parliament, Lord George Foulkes, who stated: “The SNP are on a very dangerous tack. What they are doing is trying to build up a situation in Scotland where the services are manifestly better than south of the border in a number of areas.” When asked whether that was a bad thing, Lord Foulkes replied: “No, but they are doing it deliberately.” We know that Westminster is not working for Scotland and even Labour politicians accept that the SNP Government is making services better under devolution. How much more we could achieve with the full powers of independence. At least £222 million of the Scottish budget is spent trying to mitigate Westminster’s welfare reforms. That is £222 million that could be spent on investing further in the Scottish economy, the national health service, local government or even colleges. As the finance secretary recently highlighted, Scotland is a prosperous nation. We know that. We have paid more in tax per head in each of the past 30 years than the rest of the UK. With the full fiscal and economic powers of independence, the Scottish Government could do more to strengthen our economy and to create more jobs. However, the main gain from independence is that it will be fundamentally better for us all if decisions on Scotland’s future are taken by the people who care most about Scotland—that is, by the people of Scotland. Our economy can grow and prosper when the economic levers and decision-making powers are in this Parliament. I back the motion in John Swinney’s name.

It will come as no surprise to members to hear that I welcome the bill and hope that the people of Scotland will vote yes next year to take Scotland forward. Before then, we have a number of processes to go through. The bill is, of course, part of that work. I associate myself with the comments of the convener about the assistance of the clerks, the advisers and all those who have given evidence to the committee. All that assistance has been tremendously helpful. I thank my colleagues on the committee and I commend the convener for his handling of the committee and what is clearly an emotive issue, as we have already heard today. I am sure that his handling of the committee helped it to get to the point of recommending to the Parliament that the general principles of the bill be agreed to, which is recommended in paragraph 323 of the stage 1 report. Taking a co-operative approach from the outset with the signing of the Edinburgh agreement, right up to where we are now, is a positive sign. It has ensured that the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill will be made in Scotland, for the electorate of Scotland to decide on Scotland’s future. As for every bill that goes through Parliament, we received a tremendous amount of evidence. One key comment was from the Electoral Commission, which stated: “this is a strong piece of legislation”— as shown in paragraph 36 of the stage 1 report. Issues of visual impairment and disability and other equalities issues are mentioned in paragraphs 302 to 306 of the report. Those issues were raised to ensure that everyone who is eligible to vote can vote. I genuinely believe that that is vital for democracy. Whatever the outcome of the referendum, the process and the scrutiny thus far have been thorough and robust. I do not see how any side of the debate could use them as a mechanism for challenging the outcome if it goes against their particular wishes. We still have a few steps to take, but I have no reason to think that the level of scrutiny will differ from what has been brought to bear thus far. Today is yet another historic day in Scotland’s journey. In little more than 12 months, we will have a better understanding of where that journey will take us. There will be robust debate, campaign literature, adverts, billboard posters and television and radio broadcasts aplenty, not to mention the social media campaigning that Tavish Scott obviously loves so much. It is right and proper to have such a robust debate. We all have our respective positions and we will take an active part in the campaigns up and down the country. We have to work to inspire people to vote and to consider what they want Scotland to be like after the referendum. We must inspire the electorate to think of Scotland and what will happen if the vote is yes and if it is no. We have to inform the electorate what Scotland can look like after the referendum. I know that, in an independent Scotland, we can provide many and more opportunities for the people of Scotland, and that the Parliament needs to have the full economic powers to deal effectively with economic conditions and whatever comes its way in the future. I also know that the Parliament should be charting its own course to make decisions for the people of Scotland. It should not be concerned about developing rearguard action policies to deal with decisions from Westminster. The Scottish Independence Referendum Bill allows that opportunity to happen. By the time it passes through the legislative process, no one will be able to say that the creation of the referendum has not been fair. Indeed, as the policy memorandum says, the bill’s main objective is to ensure that the referendum next year is “a fair, open and truly democratic process which is conducted ... to the highest international standards.” I welcome the Deputy First Minister’s comments earlier and in the letter that we received regarding amendments at stage 2. In particular, there will be amendments to address the designation of the campaign groups, which paragraph 126 of the committee’s report deals with, and the issue of absent voters, which paragraph 65 of the report deals with. Those two amendments will be very helpful. Bruce Crawford spoke with his typical eloquence about how the debate should take place. Other colleagues have also talked about that. I could not agree more that there must be the utmost respect in it. When the nation wakes up on 19 September next year—obviously, some of us will not sleep as we will no doubt be up all night, but the vast majority of the nation will go to bed—Scotland will still be here, whatever the outcome. The SNP will still be in power at the national level and the make-up of the local authorities will not change. Scotland will still continue, but in what shape? Earlier, I used the word “inspire”. We on this side of the debate and on this side of the arguments have a positive vision for the people of Scotland, and we have inspired and will continue to inspire more people to decide how they want to live in an independent Scotland post the referendum. I am not sure how the no campaign can be inspirational about the bedroom tax, welfare reform, nuclear weapons on the Clyde, illegal wars and many more issues. We have the inspirational vision; the no side has a devastating vision. When the vote takes place next year on the simple question, “Should Scotland be an independent country?”, there really can be only one answer: yes.

Yesterday, I had a meeting with the food bank in Inverclyde, where I was informed that, since opening up last September, it has fed 2,500 people, including 750 children. Those figures are worsening, despite the fact that we have not yet felt the full effects of welfare reform. Can the minister inform me what discussions are taking place with the UK Government to inform it that its wider economic agenda is not working and that there are many people and families whose lives are being devastated as a consequence?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what recent assistance it has provided to creative industries across the country. (S4O-02312)

With the success of “Waterloo Road”, which is filmed in Greenock, and with RIG Arts releasing its latest film, “Dying Light”, which features young people who are unemployed and are now being given training and experience in the media industry, does the cabinet secretary agree that the media industry in Inverclyde is thriving and has even greater potential to provide more job opportunities, boost the economy and boost tourism? Does she agree that that highlights the talent that exists in the area? Will she agree to meet representatives of RIG Arts to discuss how they can assist the Scottish Government in working towards a greater level of social inclusion?

This is truly a momentous day. Irrespective of which side of the debate members are campaigning for, at decision time they will shatter the ceiling placed on 16 and 17-year-olds in Scotland. Next year’s referendum will allow 16 and 17-year-olds the right to vote and, as Donald Dewar once said, I like that. The doubters who suggest that 16 and 17-year-olds should not have the vote and those who have reluctantly agreed to the decision have had many chances to amend the electoral law that governs the whole of the UK. They have consistently failed to stand up for the voting rights of 16 and 17-year-olds, and I am delighted that the Scottish Parliament will, yet again, lead the way with that hugely important reform. Sixteen and 17-year-olds have the right to have their voices heard and their votes counted. Issues were raised on how best to deal with engaging and informing 16 and 17-year-olds about the referendum—that is, informing them about how they should register and providing them with information that is clear and unambiguous but not partisan to any side of the debate. The first issue to be dealt with is engaging with younger people to enthuse them about registering. All members anticipate a higher turnout than usual next year, but that will happen only if both sides try to engage and offer their own positive prospectus for the nation. Secondly, ensuring that information is provided to our younger citizens and that they have a role to play in the future of Scotland is, quite rightly, a role for the Electoral Commission. It is neutral and unbiased, and in what is already a hotly contested debate it can be the vehicle that provides clarity about not the politics or the rhetoric but the process for the people who will register to vote for the first time. During the committee’s deliberations, Rob Gibson talked about the need to ensure that the Electoral Commission develops, as we said at paragraph 137 of our stage 1 report, “a detailed delivery plan to promote effective joint working, to clarify what it expects from others, and to ensure an appropriate degree of consistency across Scotland.” Without a doubt, the Electoral Commission has a central role to play in working with other organisations to facilitate the referendum. I have confidence in the commission. The Scottish Parliament is maturing. We are ready and prepared to take the next step on our journey towards becoming a normal independent country, and 16 and 17-year-olds will play their part in that. Next year, 16 and 17-year-olds—and all Scotland—will have an important choice to make. Will we choose hope over fear? Prosperity over austerity? Responsibility in Holyrood over the irresponsibility of Westminster? I like that 16 and 17-year-olds will vote next year, and I look forward to the yes vote in the referendum.

This is a timely debate that examines the past, present and future of one of Scotland’s most valuable assets—a source of renewable energy that can help to combat the current problems of high fuel bills and fuel poverty in many of our communities. Hydro power is the oldest form of renewable energy in Scotland and has a proud history. It contributes about 12 per cent of our electricity needs, as we have heard. In 1930, Scotland had a mere 45MW of large-scale hydro, and the rest of the UK also had 45MW. In 2012, Scotland had 1,339MW of large-scale hydro, while the rest of the UK had 132MW. We currently have enough hydro power to provide almost 1 million homes with their electricity every year. Hydro has been a reliable source of energy for decades; today we celebrate 70 years since the passing of the 1943 act. In the race for cheaper, cleaner and renewable energy sources, it is too easy to forget the role of hydro power—not only in the past, but when we look to the future. There is potential for more than 1.2GW of smaller-scale hydro to be developed in Scotland, but some issues need to be resolved for that to happen. They include feed-in tariffs, which my colleague Rob Gibson touched on. Feed-in tariffs have been cut by a set amount every year, depending on the level of deployed capacity. Other issues include electricity market reform and delays in connecting new projects to the national grid. Many, if not all, of those delays are due to the slow pace of the Westminster Government. With independence, a Scottish Government of whatever hue could provide stronger support to that key industry, which could certainly provide renewable energy to tackle the scourge of fuel poverty. The report on the achievability of the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets by the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, which I was a member of until the report was drafted, highlighted that “the support the Scottish Government can provide to the development of the renewables sector is limited by the current constitutional arrangements.” It was also interesting to note that “The Committee does not believe that there is significant evidence that the current constitutional debate is undermining investment decisions regarding renewable energy.” That report also highlighted a number of issues that need to be addressed, including the transmission system and the charging regime. There is widespread concern that Scotland’s generators are being penalised for providing power while those in other parts of the UK receive generous subsidy. Although the committee report welcomed the recent decisions that have been taken to level the playing field for mainland generators in Scotland compared to the rest of the UK, there is still concern that the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets’s proposed improved incremental cost-related pricing does not go far enough, and that island generators remain at a distinct disadvantage compared with those on the mainland. I have touched on that point in previous debates. The situation will render many projects uneconomic—I expect that Liam McArthur will touch on that in his speech, as he is an Orkney MSP. Given the significant renewables resources that are located on and around Scotland’s islands, a fairer system must be found. The committee’s report also mentioned the empowering of communities either to generate their own energy or to gain the maximum benefit from developments in their area. Microgeneration provides the opportunity for householders, businesses and communities to participate in the low-carbon economy. The importance of community and locally owned renewable energy is also recognised by the target of achieving 500MW of community and locally owned renewable energy by 2020. I am aware of moves in West Scotland to create a community-led micro-hydro generation company. That would, I hope, provide hydro power to the grid and provide community benefits, much as similar community-led projects have worked with onshore wind farms. I genuinely believe that that is an exciting prospect for areas in West Scotland. The one that I know of is in Inverclyde, which as members will know has no lack of rainfall to provide the raw resource that is necessary to drive hydro power projects. A number of sites across Inverclyde are being looked at as potential locations for micro-hydro generation. It is hoped that they can be developed either in partnership with Scottish Water or as stand-alone community-interest companies. By following a community-led approach, such as has been used by the Neilston community wind farm, we could empower community groups to generate additional funding for their areas while they generate electricity for the grid. Such funding could be used to help to combat fuel poverty and to improve energy efficiency in homes, or it could be used for a range of developments that are aimed at improving communities. Inverclyde Council has been investigating the possibility of hydro power schemes being in council ownership or control, as part of its approach to renewable energy generation. It will certainly be interesting to see how those schemes develop and, I hope, combine to support communities in Inverclyde. It is of great interest to me that, in the past, much of the heavy industry in Inverclyde was powered by hydro power and that much of that infrastructure still exists. With a bit more investment, who knows what could happen? Another positive side to community hydro schemes is that they can help to address flooding, which would be greatly advantageous in Inverclyde. We need to make it easier for communities to come together with councils and businesses to form community interest groups to ensure that at least some of the profits of hydro power go back into those communities. For that reason, the Scottish Government’s decision to retain the level of support for the sector is significant. That will certainly be a boost to the smaller developments that are being looked at across the country. Such developments face more challenging conditions and higher risks, so maintaining of support—unlike what appears to be happening in the rest of the UK—is significant and will provide some stability for investment. Further support through streamlining planning consents will also encourage the future development of smaller facilities. In conclusion, hydro power has a long and successful history in Scotland. It provides a significant amount of clean renewable electricity. With the continuing support of the Scottish Government, there are good prospects for the future development of hydro power in Scotland—potentially on a smaller, community-led, basis.

Will Liam McArthur give way?

2. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met the chief executive of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02233)

Will the cabinet secretary assure me that, with regard to any future discussions he might have, the provision of maternity and accident and emergency services both north and south of the river will be given the utmost importance in any reviews that take place and that every single option will be considered in such reviews?

The debate is about an important issue: developing policies, plans and frameworks that will determine the future development of Scotland. As the topic is so wide ranging and our time for the debate somewhat limited, I will restrict myself to discussing a few key issues, including the regeneration of previously developed sites, the role of public involvement in the planning system, and the future of tourism as a growth sector in our economy. I thank the minister for his appearance at the Local Government and Regeneration Committee in May at which the national planning framework 3 and Scottish planning policy were discussed. Members of the committee, including me, were able to question the minister on key aspects of the future of the planning system in Scotland. During that evidence session, I was pleased to hear the minister state that he wanted a planning system that would “focus on delivering jobs and growth” and “facilitate investment in infrastructure”. That reflects the Scottish National Party’s 2011 manifesto commitment, which said that “a more efficient and effective planning system will be good for investment and growth.” I am sure that that approach will be welcomed by many here today. At the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, the minister also said that the Scottish Government is committed “to making a transition to a sustainable, growing, low-carbon economy ... the primary focus of” its “proposals for the third national planning framework.”—[Official Report, Local Government and Regeneration Committee, 22 May 2013; c 2151-2.] As part of that, there must be a focus on areas that were previously developed but which are now, in effect, economically challenged communities. Regeneration is vital for such areas. I was therefore delighted to hear John Pentland’s comments about Ravenscraig and his welcome for Ravenscraig’s inclusion as one of the national development areas. There are too many such sites in Scotland as a whole, and far too many in the west of Scotland in particular. I am happy that the Firth of Clyde area has been identified in the national planning framework as an area in which major change is happening or anticipated to guide the implementation of the national strategy. Regeneration is one of the key issues for the Firth of Clyde area; the others include green infrastructure and supporting investment in key economic sectors. As I said, there are far too many areas in the west of Scotland in which regeneration is an issue. We need to encourage investment and development in such areas to breathe new life into their communities. I hope that the focus of the new planning framework and planning policy on economic growth will result in developments in such areas that will stimulate their local economies and bring much-needed employment. It is good to hear the minister talk of removing barriers to planning to help the economic development of our country. I know that, as other members have said, in some local authority areas in the west of Scotland, those barriers have been significant. It is important that the public’s view is not ignored. I am pleased that the use of charettes in promoting early engagement and intervention is to be rolled out. I am sure that that will help to improve community involvement in the planning process, and I hope that it will ensure that those involved in the local economy and local elected representatives will have significant input in future developments that promote jobs and growth. We in the Local Government and Regeneration Committee started our regeneration inquiry today, and community involvement is a key issue that arose not only in our discussion today but when we have done other pieces of work. Rather than things being done to a community, we must ensure that the community genuinely has a full and thorough input into what is going on in its area. Without such input, communities will not fully progress. Public involvement in the planning system is crucial. Enabling local communities to have a say at the pre-application stage, through charrettes or some other process, will help to allay fears and will enable developers to adjust their plans so that local objections are minimised. Such an approach can help to make planning a more consensual activity than it has been in the past, when communities have felt that their views have been ignored. Tourism is an important element of the Scottish economy and there is scope for more investment and jobs throughout the sector. The main issues report explores how the framework can support sustainable tourism. I raised with the minister at the Local Government and Regeneration Committee the huge success of the cruise ship market. During the past year, more than £42 million came into the Scottish economy as a consequence of cruise ship tourism. In May, more than 10,000 cruise ship passengers visited Greenock, which demonstrates the extent of the tourism potential in Inverclyde. The industry plays a huge role in bringing in additional revenue to the Scottish and Inverclyde economies, but the port of Greenock will turn vessels away this year, due to a lack of capacity. Discussions are going on between the Scottish Government and the port’s owners and operators, to ascertain whether assistance can be provided. I welcome those discussions. I was pleased with the minister’s response to my questions, and I hope that there will be a successful outcome. I welcome this debate on the national planning framework 3 and Scottish planning policy, which will help to set the context for a modern planning system, with a focus on regeneration and growth. I am sure that that approach will be successful for Scotland.

I, too, congratulate my colleague John Mason on securing this important debate. I should put it on record that I have an RBS account. Store, factory and bank closures are always a matter of concern because they affect people’s livelihoods as well as their local communities. That said, although the bank closures that we are discussing will certainly have a negative impact not only on Glasgow Shettleston but on Gourock, the closure itself will by no means destroy Gourock’s fabric. Moreover, the motion focuses on RBS closures but it is important to note that other institutions are closing branches. For example, the Nationwide Building Society has closed a branch of the Dunfermline Building Society in Alexandria in the west of Scotland. A key element of a successful town centre can be the presence of a number of large high-street branded stores. That can bring comfort to localities, but I have to say that Gourock bucks this trend because, although there are larger chain operations such as the Post Office and a couple of bakers, many of the shops in the town are actually small independent traders. That augurs well for the future because the town already has a sense of resilience and pride. When I talk to people in the town about the bank closure, the message I get is that the people of Gourock will deal with this sad news and move on. Nevertheless, the decision to close the branch is disappointing. When I contacted RBS, I was told that the reason for the closure was, as has already been pointed out, that the number of people using the branch has fallen by nearly 30 per cent over the past few years. It is right that any business that experiences a drop in numbers needs to ask itself what it should do. However, before it gets to the position of closing, I suggest that it asks itself what more it can do to make its business busier and more relevant to its customers, former customers and potential new customers. I am not aware that any of those things has taken place in this instance. However, I am sure that after today’s debate I will receive some correspondence from RBS, in which it will tell me what it tried to do before it decided to close the Gourock branch. I welcome the agreement made with the Post Office to allow RBS customers to access their accounts, withdraw money and check their balances after the closure. However, that is too little, too late. Furthermore, given the westwards population shift that has been taking place in Inverclyde for many years, not to mention the development work that will take place in Gourock, I suggest that there was an opportunity to promote the branch more widely, as a means to keep it open. I accept that the way that people bank these days is different from that of, say, 10, 20 or 30 years ago. Much more is done online—I have an online account. However, many people like me do not want to do everything online, and many people who are IT illiterate will suffer from the closures. Many people commute daily from Gourock to work outside Inverclyde. Gourock is a gateway to Argyll for tourism and a tourism location itself. I genuinely cannot see how an RBS branch cannot exist in the town. Maybe a more imaginative opening-time structure would have meant that the branch could have been kept open. Maybe more promotion of the branch would have kept it open. Maybe—just maybe—the constant battering that the RBS has taken as a consequence of past reckless decisions is a sign of a lack of confidence in the institution. I know that the RBS is working hard to get back to a healthy financial position. However, I ask its management to remember that it was not its branches that took the bank to the brink. It was not the communities in our constituencies and regions that took it to the brink. It was others who were clearly out of touch with the high street. I am sure that a RBS representative will be listening to or watching today’s debate. I genuinely ask them to think again about this decision. RBS should stick by the people who stuck by it in its hour of need: the taxpayers.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what the West Scotland region’s economic input is to the oil and gas sector. (S4O-02172)

The minister will be aware of the numerous companies in the west of Scotland that participate successfully in the oil and gas sector, such as James Walker Devol and Jenda Energy, to name just two in Inverclyde. What support can Scottish Enterprise and Scottish Development International provide to manufacturing businesses from the west of Scotland to encourage more of them to take their first steps into the oil and gas sector, especially bearing in mind the huge economic success and future potential of the sector in Scotland?

I declare an interest in that my wife works part time for Caledonian MacBrayne, although she is not affected by the current dispute. I will focus my short speech on a couple of the issues that have been raised, which are pertinent to West Scotland. The minister’s amendment highlighted the £331 million of planned investment up to 2015. That figure takes into consideration many aspects of ferries policy, one of which is construction of ferries. The Scottish Government deserves some credit for the £20 million-plus that has been invested in the two hybrid ferries that have been built at Ferguson Shipbuilders Ltd in Port Glasgow. The first, the MV Hallaig, was launched in December last year and the second, the MV Lochinvar, is being launched tomorrow. Those orders have safeguarded 75 jobs and created around 100 new jobs and up to 20 new apprenticeships. That was a tremendous economic boost to the Inverclyde economy and saw the first ship in five years being launched on the lower Clyde. When the Scottish Government announced in November 2011 that those orders were to go to Ferguson’s in Port Glasgow, the news was warmly welcomed. The comments in the Greenock Telegraph online were incredible. One of them was: “Real jobs. Absolutely magnificent. Well done to all concerned.” It is important to highlight that those are the world’s first diesel-electric ferries and that they were designed in Scotland. I repeat: they are the world’s first. Everyone in Parliament can unite in celebrating that. The second issue on which I will touch is the pay dispute between Caledonian MacBrayne and some of its staff who are represented by the TSSA. Unfortunately, I could not attend the lobby that took place in Parliament last week, but I signed the motion in the name of my colleague Kenneth Gibson. As others have, I have been contacted by the TSSA on the matter and I wrote to Caledonian MacBrayne to establish its position regarding the dispute. It is disappointing that the dispute has reached the stage that it has reached. It is incumbent on Caledonian MacBrayne and the TSSA to continue their discussions. I note the comments that the minister made a few moments ago, but it is really important that the discussions continue until there is a satisfactory outcome. I do not imagine that any business would want to amend staffing contracts lightly, but I believe that attempting to do so is a retrograde step. I hope that Caledonian MacBrayne refrains from proceeding with its proposals.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate and at the outset I associate myself with the comments made by Bruce Crawford, the committee convener, and the Deputy First Minister regarding the assistance received by the committee thus far. We have heard a great deal on voting for 16 and 17-year-olds, which I will return to after I raise the issue of equality, which is discussed in paragraphs 139 to 141 of the committee’s report. Before I do that, I will make a comment about Tavish Scott, who spoke about the lack of positive commentary thus far in the referendum campaign. I suggest that he ask his colleagues in the better together campaign to put forward a positive narrative as to why Scotland should remain part of the UK, compared to what we want to see, which is Scotland becoming a normal independent country. Regarding paragraphs 139 to 141, the evidence that we received from the National Deaf Children’s Society was very welcome. It related to an issue that I raised in committee regarding the colour of the paper to be used for young people registering for the first time. I raised that issue because I chair the Parliament’s cross-party group on visual impairment and am a member of the cross-party group on dyslexia. A number of my constituents and a number of my friends are dyslexic, and on more than one occasion they have raised with me the point that when they access information, the colour of the paper is very important to them. I also raised the issue in committee because I genuinely believe that registering to vote is important for every single election. This referendum is a chance to fully engage with younger members of society. From representing constituents, I know that there are challenges in that regard, but if we want to make sure that young people who can register for the first time actually do so and feel that they are taking part in the process, we in Parliament must make sure that we do everything that we can to have a dialogue with them and make it easy for them to register. I also genuinely believe that if both sides of the debate want to fully engage with the people of Scotland we must ensure that not only the information that is issued but official documentation is available to all Scotland’s people. In that respect, I am keen to find out more about the testing process that the cabinet secretary mentioned earlier and which the committee touches on in its report. I whole-heartedly welcome the Deputy First Minister’s assurances about language, which was addressed in paragraph 140 of the committee’s report, but given the importance of the testing process to the referendum I would like to find out how that is going. As for the franchise itself, I, like other SNP members, believe that it is right to lower the voting age to 16 for the referendum; indeed, I would like that to happen in every election and the lowering of the age limit in the referendum is certainly another important step in taking that forward. In the many debates that I have had with 16 and 17-year-olds not only during school visits to the Parliament but outside the Parliament, I have found their general awareness of current affairs something to be proud of. In fact, I gently suggest that many over-18s could learn a thing or two from them. The Scottish Youth Parliament’s consultation has been mentioned. It received more than 40,000 responses, which I think indicates that 16 and 17-year-olds want to take part in the political process and determine their own future—and, as far as this referendum is concerned, Scotland’s future. I remember the first time I voted and although the outcome was—unfortunately—not the one that I wanted I can only imagine how huge a thing it will be for 16 and 17-year-olds to vote for the first time in next year’s referendum. Not only will it be their first vote but they will help to decide their future and the future of the country. I certainly associate myself with my committee colleagues’ praise of Emily Shaw MSYP and Andrew Deans MSYP, whose oral evidence was a lesson for everyone who is called to give evidence to the Parliament. I suggest that people go on to the Parliament website and examine what they said and how they said it. Finally, on individual voter registration, I have to say that I have no qualms about its introduction by Westminster being delayed and think that it is the right thing to do. However, I also think it right to give EROs the flexibility to start the process on or around 1 October in all parts of Scotland. If the Scottish Government stipulated that registration must happen on a particular day, it would be accused of centralising power and, as I have said, it is right to give EROs that flexibility. I look forward to the bill continuing its progress through Parliament. The people of Scotland have a choice: hope and aspiration, or austerity with the union.

I welcome the debate and thank Hugh Henry for bringing it to the chamber. I can agree with much of the motion, but I cannot agree with all of it. For that reason, I will not be able to support it at 5 o’clock. I am not convinced that calling for a commission would move the agenda on any quicker than it is being moved on. As we have already heard—this is noted in the minister’s amendment—cross-party work via the early years task force is already taking place. It is not only politicians who are involved in that; practitioners and professionals are involved in it, too.

I have just started, and I have only four minutes. I will try to let the member in later. The Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill is going through the parliamentary process. The big challenge for all of us in the Parliament is to scrutinise it and amend it where possible. I lay down that challenge to every member. I do not understand what a commission would do other than stall the process that is under way.

I have only four minutes, but I will try to let the member in. Surely creating a commission and stalling the current workstream goes against the sense of urgency that Johann Lamont indicated in her recent conference speech. I welcome the Government’s proposals to increase to a minimum of 600 the hours of free and flexible learning and childcare available to all three-year-olds, four-year-olds and looked-after two-year-olds. I know that that will be welcomed by parents in the west of Scotland and throughout Scotland. Around 120,000 children in Scotland will benefit, and families will save around £700 per child per year. That will help families throughout the country. I welcomed Johann Lamont’s comments when she highlighted the progress on childcare that Labour had made at Westminster. She raised that issue in her speech during Labour’s conference, when she made the point that child tax credits, paternity leave and extended paternity leave were Labour achievements. Labour was right to bring in those policies. However, as we know, such policies are reserved and the Scottish Parliament cannot improve them. The Scottish Government and Parliament have limited ability in that regard. Obviously, I disagree with many in the anti-independence campaign regarding the Scottish Parliament’s powers, but in Labour’s recent publication on a devolution commission there are no plans to devolve welfare if there is a no vote in the referendum next year. Surely welfare reform is central to the agenda of aiming to provide a holistic strategy for education. We all know that education is one way out of poverty, but given the Westminster cuts to Scotland of 8 per cent and the welfare reform that is taking place, I gently ask the Labour Party to reconsider its position on working with the Tories and to consider working with the Scottish National Party to ensure that the Scottish Parliament has the real ability to progress education and improve childcare provision in Scotland.

This is a very sad day for the Scottish Parliament. I congratulate John Pentland on securing the debate and I commend him for raising the issue. I have no hesitation in wearing the memorial ribbon. Workers memorial day was created in Canada in the 1980s and is now an international day of remembrance for workers who have been killed in incidents at work or by diseases that were caused by work. The need for such a day is revealed in the ILO’s figures, which show that more than 2 million women and men die every year as a result of work-related accidents and diseases. One worker dies every 15 seconds, world wide—that is 6,000 workers dying every single day. More people die while at work than while fighting in wars. Hazardous substances kill 440,000 workers annually, and asbestos alone claims 100,000 lives. I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests; I am an honorary member of Clydeside Action on Asbestos. The purpose of workers memorial day is twofold: to remember those who have died or been injured or made ill at work, and to ensure that that loss and suffering is used to reinvigorate the campaign for healthier and safer work for workers, for their families and for their children, who will become tomorrow’s workers. The most recent figures for Scotland showed that 20 people in Scotland died at their work. There is also the problem of illnesses that people contract at work, but which do not emerge until years later. The prime example is asbestos-related diseases, such as mesothelioma, which can develop 20, 30 or even 40 years after the initial exposure to asbestos. That is why I wear the badge of Clydeside Action on Asbestos. According to figures from the Health and Safety Executive, more than 2,000 people every year in the United Kingdom are diagnosed with mesothelioma, and a further 2,000 cases of lung cancer are likely to have been caused by asbestos exposure. The number of people who are diagnosed with fatal conditions is set to rise, and it is estimated that 1.5 million workplaces still contain asbestos. This Parliament has a good track record in supporting people with asbestos-related diseases. We legislated to overturn the disgraceful House of Lords decision in 2007 that blocked people who have pleural plaques from seeking compensation from negligent employers—successive Westminster Governments have failed to do that. It is appropriate that in debating workers memorial day we remember people who contracted asbestos-related diseases as a result of their employers’ negligence. The issue has scarred many communities, not just in the former industrial heartlands in the west, but throughout Scotland. Asbestos-related diseases are still with us and will remain so for years. It is important to use events such as workers memorial day to reiterate the need for greater health and safety in the workplace. Health and safety legislation should be applied as quickly as possible. Members will be aware of this week’s news about the Flying Phantom—the tug that sank in the Clyde in December 2007, with the loss of three lives. The loss of the tug was a tragedy for all concerned; three people lost their lives and their families were left devastated. It was not until Monday past, more than five years later, that it was announced that the companies involved will face prosecution under the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974. I know that the Crown Office spent a considerable time investigating the Flying Phantom tragedy, but the families have had to wait for a long time to see the case being brought. Too many families suffer the horror of a loved one going to work but never returning. It is important that health and safety at work legislation be taken seriously. Health and safety in the workplace is not an optional extra but a fundamental right for all workers. The motto of international workers memorial day is: “Remember the dead; fight for the living”. We have done that in this debate. I am conscious of time, Presiding Officer.

The Parliament needs the powers to ensure that we can do something, when we see what has been happening at Westminster.

18. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made on increasing employment opportunities in the west of Scotland. (S4O-02032)

Last week’s announcement that Scotland’s unemployment figures have fallen below 200,000 for the first time since 2009 is a welcome sign that the Scottish Government’s policies are playing their part in helping to deal with the tough economic conditions. Will the cabinet secretary inform me of any discussions that have taken place between the Scottish Government and local authorities in the West Scotland region that have been focused on reducing unemployment rates even further? Will he outline any action points that were agreed and say what progress has been made on them?

Only two weeks ago, I visited Bowling basin in West Dunbartonshire and saw for myself the huge opportunities that there are in regenerating the site and creating a wider economic return. How can the Scottish Government assist Scottish Canals in turning the Bowling basin into yet another first-class marine-based location on the River Clyde?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it will provide to maintain and improve the fabric of west college Scotland’s campuses once the merger takes effect. (S4O-01988)

West college Scotland already has a first-class campus in Clydebank and excellent facilities—although some have suggested that they are dated—at the James Watt College campus in Greenock and the Reid Kerr College campus in Paisley. Will the minister assure us that the Scottish Government will have discussions with the Scottish funding council so that, if a business case were brought forward either to invest in the fabric or to provide new facilities in Greenock or Paisley, it would be fully and thoroughly examined?

I am pleased to take part in this important debate and I commend and thank the ICI committee for bringing it forward. In my role as EU reporter for the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, I will highlight the potential impact on local government of changes to the EU public procurement rules. At this stage, it is not clear exactly what the final EU directives will include and what impact they will have on public procurement reform in Scotland. Although the directives completed their legislative journey through the European Parliament at the end of 2012, they are being negotiated between the Parliament and the Council of the European Union, as we heard. It cannot be denied that any reform to EU public procurement rules and other EU limitations on the delivery of shared services arrangements will be of significant importance to local government in Scotland, particularly given that more than 40 per cent of all local government expenditure in Scotland goes on procuring goods and services. Local authorities, other public bodies and partner organisations are continually trying to find innovative ways of working together to deliver the best possible public services. Indeed, in January the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities wrote to all the Parliament’s EU reporters to identify changes to EU public procurement rules and other EU limitations on shared services as key priorities for local government in 2013. Members will be aware that the Local Government and Regeneration Committee is undertaking the final strand of its three-strand inquiry into public services reform, in which we are looking at shared services and new ways of delivering services. In late February, the committee agreed to my proposal to seek, as part of evidence gathering for our inquiry, further information from COSLA on the potential impact of new EU public procurement rules and shared services limitations on local government. I have written to COSLA to request the evidence and I look forward to receiving it in due course. I will, of course, ensure that the information that I receive is shared with the European and External Relations Committee, the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee and the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, all of which will scrutinise the important aspect of public services delivery that we are considering. It has become apparent from the evidence to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee’s inquiry that the EU procurement rules are incredibly complex—Kevin Stewart touched on that. Although the rules provide necessary protections to ensure fairness and provide safeguards in relation to the spending of public money on the supply and purchase of goods and services, they appear to place fairly stringent restrictions on the ability of people who procure public service contracts to maximise contracts’ effectiveness and find local, flexible solutions, which are proportionate to need. On Monday, the Local Government and Regeneration Committee visited South Ayrshire Council and took evidence as part of its public services reform inquiry. Several witnesses talked about the complexity of procurement rules and guidance and the impact that complex rules and bureaucratic processes can have on communities’ ability to access funding streams and deliver public service contracts.

Linda Fabiani must have been sitting in on the committee’s evidence sessions, because those points have been made. The point about the need for a level playing field is valid and has been strongly made during our evidence taking. Community representatives from South Ayrshire pointed out that many of the people and groups who are involved in delivering vital public services to communities in Scotland are volunteers, who simply do not have huge amounts of time or indeed procurement expertise to dedicate to such complex exercises. I am sure that community and voluntary groups all over Scotland would echo that point. We heard examples of how the processes that are involved in procuring services make it difficult for local companies to compete for contracts. I acknowledge that appropriate protections need to be in place. However, reforms to procurement processes and rules that would make it easier for communities, local companies and the likes of social enterprises to access funding streams to deliver public service contracts, often in partnership, would be hugely welcome. In the consultation for the forthcoming procurement reform bill, the Scottish Government proposes to align the definition of “major contracts” in the bill with the definitions that are used in the EU procurement directives, which as a principle makes sense. In its response to the European Commission’s consultation, COSLA highlighted that it would welcome higher thresholds being set for all public works contracts, as it is important that procurement processes do not place disproportionate administrative and regulatory burdens on either contracting authorities or suppliers. The European Commission’s view of shared service arrangements in the proposed EU directive is also a concern that COSLA has raised in its response to the Scottish Government’s procurement reform bill consultation. Again, as the directive is still not finalised, it is not clear exactly what impact that view may have on local authorities’ abilities going forward. Whatever the final reforms are to procurement legislation and processes, it is crucial that the reforms support the delivery of best value in order to maximise the quality and effectiveness of contracted public service delivery in Scotland.

2. To ask the Scottish Government, in light of the possible impact on jobs and communities, what its position is on banks closing agencies and branches throughout the country. (S4O-01976)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that a number of banks have announced the closure of agencies and branches in the west of Scotland, specifically in Gourock in Inverclyde and Alexandria in West Dunbartonshire. That will mean that my constituents will have to travel a large distance, in some cases, to find a suitable branch. What further reassurances can the cabinet secretary provide to my constituents that the liaison that he mentions will continue, so that the banks that are closing agencies and branches will do so in a way that will have the most minimal effect on their clients and customers?

I have a couple of comments to make. I welcome Anne McTaggart’s amendment and am delighted that I dissented at stage 1 to keep the item on the agenda so that we could discuss it further at stage 2 and today. I have a question that I hope that Anne McTaggart will be able to answer in summing up. Can she provide any information about an increase in cases that might be covered by the amendment so that, when we discuss issues with our constituents after today, we can perhaps provide a bit more clarity on the cases that they have?

I lodged the original amendment that included section 31A in the bill because I thought that the five-year period would provide for a measured examination of the legislation. As Stewart Stevenson has said, much of the reasoning for the five-year period was to do with the definition of high hedges, because we were still deciding whether that definition should be widened. Stewart Stevenson is correct that events have overtaken this particular group of amendments. It is also worth considering that, if the amendments in this group are accepted today, members will be looking at the issue of high hedges again towards the end of this session of Parliament. I do not think that the public would want us to do that or thank us for doing that, so I hope that Margaret Mitchell will consider withdrawing her amendments.

Will the member give way?

I thank Margaret Mitchell for taking an intervention. Does she agree that, if the amendments were passed, the review would take place in this parliamentary session? Does she agree that that is probably not a good use of parliamentary time—to bring forward a bill, pass it and then have a review within the same parliamentary session?

I welcome the fact that the bill has got to this stage, and add my congratulations to Mark McDonald MSP and to the Scottish Government on assisting him in bringing it to the Parliament. Agreeing to the bill at 5 pm will be the start of the process. It will help many of our constituents across the country. From correspondence that I have received over nearly six years and from what constituents I have met have said, I know that high hedges blight the lives of many people. As a consequence, they also hamper relationships between neighbours. Christine Grahame touched on that. I am fully aware that the bill will not fix every situation—we were very much aware of that on the committee—but I am sure that the extension of the definition of a high hedge that has been agreed today will help many more households and constituents across the country. Those of us who are members of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee are fully aware that the main issue relating to the bill was the definition of a high hedge. We have heard today about the process that the Scottish Government undertook after stage 2 to further consult the local authorities. That highlights again the fully consultative approach and process that there have been thus far, going back to when Scott Barrie initially tried to introduce a bill to where we are now. I welcome the fact that my colleagues on the committee did not press some of their amendments at stage 2 to allow the Scottish Government to undertake that piece of work.

Thank you. I absolutely and whole-heartedly agree with Stewart Stevenson’s comments on the parliamentary process. I am sure that there is a debate to be had on that process and that the convener of the relevant committee will want to consider Stewart Stevenson’s comments. The stage 2 process in which we considered the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill was extremely helpful and useful. Another issue that has been raised is the review. I thank Mark McDonald for accepting my amendment to have a review within five years of the act coming into force. I also thank colleagues on the committee for accepting my amendment at stage 2. That amendment represented a measured approach to ensure that the legislation will be scrutinised in the future and does not fall off the political radar. Doing that within five years rather than sooner—we discussed that earlier today—allows for a reasonable period of time to let the act be introduced, to settle and to be fully utilised. I am therefore delighted that the shorter timeframe that was suggested in the amendments that were discussed earlier will not be pursued. Local authorities need to have the time to ensure that the act is working. As all the members of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee know, we heard evidence that there will be a large increase in the demand that is placed on local authorities in the first couple of years of the legislation being passed. That happened elsewhere in these islands, but things then settled down. It was not wise to press the idea of having a review in the midst of potentially high demand on local authorities. I am therefore glad that members disagreed to amendments 2, 3 and 4. To conclude, the bill is welcome. It will aid many of our constituents across the country. As a result, I certainly look forward to voting for it at 5 o’clock.

Will the member give way?

Ken Macintosh talks about uncertainty. Can he provide some certainty to the Parliament and tell us who the UK would use nuclear weapons against?

This is an important debate, particularly for the 80 per cent of Scots who oppose these weapons of mass destruction, as indicated in a recent opinion poll. Last week, the UK Secretary of State for Defence came to Scotland to tell us that an independent Scotland could not afford to defend itself. Perhaps he should have paid a bit more attention to the Ministry of Defence’s spending patterns, which, over the past 10 years, have resulted in an underspend of £7.4 billion in Scotland. In other words, we contribute more to the UK defence budget than we get back. The only time that Scotland gets more than the rest of the UK is when cuts are announced or when it comes to the siting of weapons of mass destruction. The defence secretary also attempted to pour scorn on an independent Scotland’s defence capabilities. He claimed that, if Scotland were to get a share of existing UK assets, it would get “half a submarine and under one Red Arrow.” Surely that poor excuse for an argument highlights the shockingly poor state of the UK’s current conventional defence capabilities. If the UK Government is relying on the Red Arrows to defend these islands, we have a major problem. Trident has been a constant drain on the MOD’s resources—so much so that the UK Government has cut back on conventional defence to pay for it. Currently, Scottish taxpayers pay £163 million a year towards the running of Trident. Furthermore, it costs £350 million a year to fund the design work for the renewal of Trident, which sustains 1,200 jobs. That amounts to £300,000 per job per year, which is a lot of money for one job. We have to ask ourselves what else that £300,000 per job per year could deliver for our communities. The voices that are warning about Trident renewal come from various sources and not just the SCND or anti-nuclear politicians. Professor Malcolm Chalmers of the Royal United Services Institute is on record as stating: “sharp increases in spending on Trident renewal in the early 2020s seem set to mean further years of austerity for conventional equipment plans.” That is because Trident will account for a massive 35 per cent of the MOD’s capital expenditure. Some Conservatives are against Trident. The former defence secretary Lord King has stated: “It is certainly not obvious to me that there is any longer a need for a major nuclear system based on 24-hours-a-day, seven-days-a-week availability.”—[Official Report, House of Lords, 24 January 2013; Vol 742, c 1243.] His colleague former defence secretary Michael Portillo is also on record as stating his objection to Trident. He said: “No—it’s completely past its sell-by date.” He continued: “It’s a tremendous waste of money. It’s done entirely for reasons of national prestige ... and at the margins it is proliferation.” However, the best argument that I can marshal against Trident today comes from an email that was sent to me by a constituent in advance of today’s debate, which states: “Dear Stuart McMillan, your party has an admirable record on consistent opposition to the immoral and obscenely expensive weapons of mass destruction sited at Faslane. Please do pass on my full opposition, don’t be fobbed off with pretended practicalities. If it is at all possible, get rid of them now! (Don’t even wait for independence!).” That came from the Rev David Coleman, the minister at the Greenock west United Reformed church. We are all aware of the Labour-led Scottish Affairs Committee at Westminster spreading fears and smears about defence and saying that the rest of the UK state would not order Scottish goods for its armed forces. We have heard that again today from Jackie Baillie. In one of that committee’s reports, we are told that no Royal Navy vessels would be built in Scotland. However, the report omitted the comments from Vice Admiral Andrew Mathews, who confirmed that the UK Government would keep the option to build such vessels on the Clyde if Scotland became independent. Who are we to believe—a partisan Labour MP protecting his Tory masters or a vice admiral of the Royal Navy? Furthermore, given that the UK has ordered fleet auxiliary tankers from South Korea, why would it not turn to Scotland, whose workers and yards build a world-class product? Why would a future London Government deny itself the best product on the market? Perhaps the ultimate irony is that, allegedly, a future London Government would not be prepared to order ships from Scotland but would be prepared to order Trident from the USA. Removing Trident would not mean that there would be no future for Faslane—quite the opposite, in fact. Scotland needs a defence base on the Clyde, and the SNP has given a commitment to operate conventional naval forces from HMNB Clyde following independence. We believe that the Trident weapons system that is currently based on the Clyde is not sustainable morally, strategically or economically. As the report that was produced jointly for the STUC and Scottish CND highlights, there is a future for Faslane and that report demonstrates that “the replacement of Trident will cost Scotland more jobs than it will provide”. Who knows, actually? As is highlighted in an article in this weekend’s Scottish Sunday Express, following research carried out by my colleague Chic Brodie, there may potentially have been 30 years of lost economic opportunity from non-Trident jobs. As the STUC and Scottish CND report stresses, the funding that is currently wasted on weapons of mass destruction could be directed to boosting the national and local economy, particularly in the west of Scotland. Have no doubts that independence will bring a positive future for the Faslane base, which will serve as Scotland’s main conventional naval facility. The funding that is being wasted on Trident will be redirected to boost local and national economic growth in industries that would benefit from the skills base that is currently at Faslane. The UK Secretary of State for Defence has said that the SNP’s plans are vague and lack credibility. Well, what is not vague are the cuts in welfare spending, such as the bedroom tax, that are paying for Trident missiles. If the supporters of Trident want certainty, as I challenged Ken Macintosh earlier, why do they not tell us who they are prepared to use the missiles on? There is absolutely no certainty—

The only certainty that we have today is that a yes vote in 2014 is the only way to remove these weapons of mass destruction from Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it has made regarding homecoming 2014. (S4O-01849)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that investment in infrastructure projects can greatly assist our tourism industry and help local economies to become more sustainable. Does she agree that the importance of homecoming 2014 in the current economic climate should not be underestimated and that the marine tourism opportunity in the west of Scotland, whether on the coast or in areas such as Loch Lomond, is a prime example of part of our economy that can deliver more? Does she agree that if any additional consequential monies come to this Parliament from Westminster, due consideration should be given to infrastructure and tourism projects in the west of Scotland that could link in with the year of homecoming 2014?

As EU reporter for the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, I thank the convener of the European and External Relations Committee for her acknowledgement of the omission from the report of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee’s EU priorities. I am confident that the Local Government and Regeneration Committee will play a key role in supporting the European and External Relations Committee’s scrutiny of EU policy, in the areas that are within its remit. Tomorrow I shall propose several EU priorities that I have identified for 2013 to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee for its consideration and agreement. Although the European Commission’s work programme for 2013 does not identify specific priorities for the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, there can be no doubt that many EU initiatives have a direct impact on the functioning of local government, and on delivery of regeneration work in Scotland. A number of on-going EU policies that are of significant importance to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee will complete their legislative journey throughout 2013: the multi-annual financial framework and the Scottish partnership agreement for 2014 to 2020, the future of European structural funds, and changes to EU public procurement rules. The Local Government and Regeneration Committee is currently undertaking two inquiries on which those EU policy areas have a direct affect. First, the committee is undertaking an inquiry into delivery of regeneration. The recent agreement by the European Council on the EU’s financial framework for 2014 to 2020 signals the first-ever reduction in the EU budget since its establishment. More worryingly, if planned changes to the framework for allocating structural funds take place, the UK could see substantial funding cuts to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, while England could be set for an overall increase. European structural funds play a crucial role in funding delivery of regeneration activity in Scotland, so a significant reduction in those funds could have a direct negative impact on our communities and on Scotland’s economic development. The recent indication from the UK Government suggesting that it has agreed to talks with the Scottish Government on how EU structural funds will be allocated is welcome; it will be helpful, because it is crucial that a constructive solution to the problem be found. It is well known that there was a demand by some member states for the overall European budget to be reduced, but a disproportionate cut to Scotland’s funding would be unacceptable. Tomorrow, therefore, I shall propose to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee that, as part of our inquiry into regeneration, we examine evidence on the potential impact of loss of European structural funds to successful delivery of the Scottish Government’s regeneration strategy. Secondly, the committee is undertaking the final strand of its inquiry into public services reform, which we will debate this afternoon. The inquiry is looking at shared services and development of new ways of delivering services. In January this year, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities wrote to all of the Parliament’s EU reporters identifying changes to public procurement rules and other EU limitations to shared services, and emphasised that that should be a key focus for local government. Tomorrow I shall propose to the committee that, as part of our public services reform inquiry, we write to COSLA seeking further information on the potential impact on local government of new EU public procurement rules and shared services limitations. I look forward to discussions with and, I hope, the support of my colleagues on the Local Government and Regeneration Committee on determining our EU priorities for 2013, and to considering important aspects of EU policy throughout the committee’s current inquiries. I certainly look forward to working with the European and External Relations Committee in due course.

Last week, when I visited Glasgow as part of the inquiry, a key point that was raised time and again was that folk felt that there was a top-down rather than a bottom-up approach to consultation. Does Kevin Stewart agree that, as we move forward with our inquiry, we need to probe that issue a lot further?

As I joined the Local Government and Regeneration Committee last September, when strand 2—on benchmarking and performance management—started, I will focus on benchmarking. I will then look at how we should keep an open mind on developing new ways of delivering public services. Finally, I will look at actions that the Scottish Government has taken. If I have time, I will touch on a couple of points that were raised last week, when the committee went to Glasgow. I thank past and present committee members and the clerks, who have helped me—as a new committee member and one of the few not to have a background in local government—to understand a bit more the processes that go on in local government. All parliamentarians and all politicians need to remember the purpose of public service delivery. The issue is not the structure but what our constituents require. Structures have been discussed today, but our constituents do not really care where services come from—they just want to know that the services will be delivered. The inquiry highlighted the fact that benchmarking has many definitions. We need a standard definition on which everyone can agree and buy-in from the organisations—and their staff—that provide public services. If we do not have that, no one will agree on what is to be measured or on what the measures mean, and the value of the process will be lost. We have heard about the buy-in from COSLA, which is welcome. Like my committee colleagues, I look forward to the publication of the benchmarking report in the next few weeks. The use of benchmarking should not result in identikit services; there should still be room for legitimate variations between councils that are based on their needs and preferences—Councillor Cook touched on that point in his evidence to the committee. We must balance the fear of the postcode lottery of services with the need to allow local democracy still to develop. We must remember that benchmarking is not by itself the sole solution to improving public services, as Dr Grace pointed out in relation to strand 2. He said: “Benchmarking is an arrow in the quiver of public services improvement”. It is a tool among others to help to identify and improve public services. We must keep an open mind in reforming public services. I was pleased that some initial responses for strand 3 came up with alternatives. It is too easy to develop a top-down model—I hope to touch on that later—that outlines key performance indicators, targets and even benchmarks, with the result that politicians, managers and organisations are chasing targets rather than meeting our service users’ needs. One respondent to strand 3 highlighted the approach of systems thinking—of putting service users’ needs at the centre of any reform—which has appeared to succeed in a variety of Scottish organisations, including the City of Edinburgh Council and Glasgow Housing Association. That might be something that we should investigate further. Reform should focus on delivering better public services for all and not simply on attempting to impose a one-size-fits-all approach. However, I do not suggest that benchmarking will impose such an approach; I do not believe that it will. I think that benchmarking will provide the opportunity for councils of similar sizes and with similar backgrounds to examine what is going on across the country and—I hope—to implement best practice. The SNP Scottish Government has already taken significant steps in the reform of Scottish public services. Following the Christie commission, the Scottish Government moved towards a decisive shift to prevention; greater integration of public services locally, driven by better partnership, collaboration and effective local delivery; greater investment in the people who deliver services, through enhanced workforce development and effective leadership; and a sharp focus on improving performance. The Scottish Government is also committed to preventative spending in early years and for the elderly. Although a difficult choice, it represents a new approach to the delivery of some services. It is not only a better approach for Government that ensures that more people living in Scotland can achieve their full potential in life; it also offers better value for money for the taxpayer in the long term. The use of change funds has supported public services in their decisive shift towards prevention. For instance, the short-term savings from investing in early years services and support from pre-birth to age five could be up to £37,400 a year per child in the most severe cases.

We must judge the importance of services by the difference that they make to people’s lives. In delivering public service reform, we should be bold enough to allow room for innovation but have processes in place to clearly indicate successes or, at least, the direction of travel. Kevin Stewart mentioned the SCVO submission that we received today, and I certainly agree with his comments on what the committee has heard about community engagement both in the past and going forward. I can assure the chamber that such engagement was one of the main issues that arose during last week’s Glasgow visit. Many community representatives felt that they are not listened to and that they are wasting their time. Our committee will continue to focus on that key issue in the strand 3 inquiry. The Parliament and all public services must focus on the wider issue of public service reform. I believe that that is happening and I look forward to the continuation of the strand 3 inquiry.

I am keen to hear Mr Pentland’s proposals for the right model to take forward. Does he propose a top-down approach from the Scottish Government or does he advocate the current arrangements, in which local authorities, not the Scottish Government, have the power to decide on the issues of importance to them?

Will the member take an intervention?

As a former member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, and one who took part in the inquiry up to the signing-off of the report, I will focus on some of the general findings as well as looking at how planning issues can impact on the Scottish Government's renewable energy targets. The report is the result of a lot of work not just by the committee members past and present but by the clerking team, which once again provided excellent support to the committee. I want to put on record my appreciation and thanks to my former colleagues on the committee and to the members of the clerking team for their efforts. I also thank everyone who provided evidence to the committee. As we know, Scotland has the potential to be a world leader in renewable energy, and it is in that context that we must look at the achievability of the ambitious targets that have been set by the Scottish Government. The committee’s report is positive and highlights that the targets are within our reach, even if we have some issues to iron out. One of those issues, which has been discussed already today, is the planning system. There was a concern that the pressure on the planning system is due in part to the high number of renewable energy applications. However, the Scottish Government has taken measures to address that, including a commitment to provide more funding to planning authorities. I welcome the idea within the report of potentially increasing the planning fees that are charged for larger-scale applications, as long as they do not disadvantage community developers. That additional finance could be used to boost resources in individual planning departments where necessary. I also welcome the Scottish Government’s announcement of the planning fees increase, which Murdo Fraser and the minister talked about earlier. There should be greater clarity on environmental impact assessments. The Scottish Government and local authorities should come together to address that issue, providing greater standardisation and guidance on matters such as visualisation standards and noise assessments. The report touched on those points. I support the benefits of community-generated renewable energy and I agree with the report that the Scottish Government should consider making adjustments to planning policy that would include clearer consideration of the local economic benefit of projects through the planning system. The generation of energy by local authorities came up during the discussion about RPP2 in yesterday’s meeting of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee. Local authorities have the power to generate energy, if they want to do so. Start-up costs are high, but in some post-industrial areas there might be infrastructure that could be invested in and brought back into use. There is certainly potential in relation to hydro schemes across the country. I welcome the letter from the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism and the Minister for Local Government and Planning to COSLA and Heads of Planning Scotland, which set out the Scottish Government’s requirement for spatial frameworks to be part of local development plans. There is concern about local authorities’ rates of progress in producing spatial frameworks. The timely development of local spatial development plans that are agreed locally in an open, transparent and democratic process, with due regard to national targets, can reduce the costly and inefficient disputes about renewable energy developments that take place throughout Scotland. Greater clarity on the type of development that is likely to be permitted and where such developments are likely to be permitted in a local authority area can give citizens and developers more certainty about the planning process. Local authorities must ensure that local development plans are consistent with national objectives and targets. Every planning authority has its own plans and policies, but there should be consistency for developers, who should expect a broadly similar service, regardless of where they make an application. As we know, the Scottish Government’s planning policy is under review. I look forward to seeing what comes out of the process. We heard from Liam McArthur, the member for Orkney. I was one of the members who went to Orkney. It was a fascinating trip and I learned a great deal. A key point for me was that the people there appreciate the tremendous opportunity that they have and that Scotland has. The enthusiasm with which they are trying to develop that opportunity is outstanding. They are building expertise daily, which will help not just Orkney but all Scotland. I tried to intervene during Mary Scanlon’s speech, but I was unsuccessful. I wanted to make the point that I am not aware that tourist numbers in Orkney have decreased as a result of the location of wind turbines there. Renewable energy presents an opportunity for Scotland, which we must grab with both hands. The tough targets that have been set will help to steer a clear path for developers and communities and will help to create job opportunities for young people in Scotland.

Will Alex Johnstone give way?

I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in the debate. The issue is important not only for members but to the Scottish public, as we can see if we look at the wide extent of capital projects from broadband improvements, to national health service buildings, schools and transport infrastructure. As well as creating jobs in the economy now, those projects create a better, stronger infrastructure for Scotland’s future and lay the foundations for long-term success. I note that the Conservative motion seems to accept the Scottish Government’s figure of 1,400 jobs being created from every £100 million of capital investment. If that is the case, perhaps the Scottish Conservatives can highlight it to the Chancellor of the Exchequer and encourage the coalition to change its policies to support the economy rather than attempting to hamper it. Perhaps Gavin Brown could also confirm whether he, like David Mundell MP, believes that Scotland was extinguished after the treaty of union. It seems strange to discuss the capital expenditure of a country that, in the eyes of the Tories, has been extinguished and has ceased to be—a country that is no more. Perhaps they took their lines from Monty Python. It is another strange situation from the Scottish Conservatives. Yet again, we are discussing a Conservative motion on Scotland’s—or North Britain’s—capital projects. It is a motion from a party that, not content with having the double cross on its emblem, is foisting the bedroom tax upon Scotland. Where will all the one-bedroom properties come from before 1 April? Where is the Conservatives’ capital plan for new public sector house building? During the recent budget debate, we heard more rhetoric from the Labour Party with little reasoning and little suggestion of where the money would come from to build the one-bedroom properties before 1 April. Today’s debate seems to highlight that the Tories are of the same mind. “Better together,” they say. The updated infrastructure investment plan demonstrates exactly how the Scottish Government has invested, and will invest, in capital projects that will benefit communities throughout Scotland despite the 26 per cent cuts in its capital budgets. Various projects have already been delivered in my West Scotland region. The Renfrew and Barrhead health centres have been completed, as have the Paisley rail corridor improvements, and the first of two hybrid ferries has been launched at Ferguson Shipbuilders Ltd in Port Glasgow. Those are a few examples of investment that the Scottish Government has already made. Infrastructure investment is fundamental to delivering sustainable economic growth by supporting jobs through the construction phase and then, once the infrastructure is in use, enabling businesses to grow. When we consider the role of the NPD model, it is important to remind ourselves of where we came from: the disastrous PFI schemes that were initially developed by the Conservatives and taken to the extreme by Labour. In local government alone, PFI debts have reached the staggering figure of more than £13 billion—more than the annual funding allocation to local councils. In Inverclyde, we see schools to the capital value of £80 million costing £312 million, while in neighbouring Renfrewshire schools with a capital value of £110 million have been transformed into a debt of £538 million. Even Labour MPs such as Margaret Hodge are now realising their mistake, stating: “The irony is that we privatised the buildings but nationalised the debts. It’s crazy.” Is that sentiment shared by the Tories’ not-so-secret weapon in Scotland—their friends in the Scottish Labour Party—or is Scottish Labour too busy providing the human shield for the Tories, who are determined to keep Scotland constrained within its current powers? Judging by John Swinney’s intervention on Richard Baker earlier, that certainly still seems to be the case. With a yes vote in 2014 and the full powers of independence, we could do much more. We would not have to rely on the block grants from London, which are being cut. I certainly hope that, in 2014, the people of Scotland will vote yes to make the infrastructure programme in Scotland a damn sight better than it is now.

I congratulate Annabel Goldie on her motion. The street stuff project is an example of the best use of partnership working to deliver positive change in our communities. At the end of her speech, Annabel spoke about her hope that the project could be rolled out across the country. If a project or any area of the public sector is really successful, I am only too happy for that work to take place. I hope that Renfrewshire Council will provide information to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, which is undertaking an inquiry into public sector reform. It is entering phase 3 of the inquiry and it would be very useful if the council gave it some information on this subject. The street stuff project is a youth diversionary scheme that is very popular in Renfrewshire. It combines the resources, skills and experience of a number of partners who all work towards a common aim. As we heard from Annabel Goldie, the project consists of the youth bus, the gym bus, mobile football pitches and the box, which is a converted transport container that provides an area for dance mat sessions, DJ sessions and chill-out zones. The project attracts more than 20,000 young people a year and, as we know, has led to youth disorder dropping by between 18 and 15 per cent in each area in which it operates. That is an important point that MSPs could highlight in areas that they represent. All too often we hear negative stories about young people—about youth disorder and so on—and it is important that MSPs, councillors and MPs in the areas that they represent highlight the positive things that go on. Many of our young people do tremendous good work in their communities and they do not always get the recognition that they deserve. The street stuff project involves a wide range of partners including St Mirren Football Club, Strathclyde Police and Strathclyde Fire and Rescue. The initial two buses—the youth bus that contains various PlayStation and Xbox consoles and games and the gym bus, which was the first mobile youth gym in Scotland—were provided by Arriva. Since Arriva was taken over by McGill’s Bus Service, the buses have had a makeover and are now back on the road, providing a wider range of diversionary activities to young people across Renfrewshire. The support of McGill’s adds to the partnership approach inherent in the street stuff project. Street stuff was launched in 2009 under the investing in the future initiative by the then Scottish National Party-led Renfrewshire Council. The project was established because evidence showed that some young people were committing acts of antisocial behaviour and violence, partly through gang-related behaviour and partly—allegedly—through boredom. A number of hotspot areas where the project could make the biggest difference were identified. Street stuff engages with disaffected and hard-to-reach young people through a host of diversionary activities such as football, electronic gaming and dance. I am conscious of the time, Presiding Officer. To date, the street stuff initiative has won 12 awards, including the Scottish Premier League best community initiative award two years in a row with St Mirren Football Club. Some members will know that I am a great Morton fan, so it takes a lot for me to give any credit to St Mirren, but they deserve it in this case. The project has been cited as a model of best practice by the Scottish Government and the street stuff co-ordinator won the role model/mentor of the year at the national youth worker of the year awards in 2012. Those awards highlight the street stuff project’s success and I pay tribute to everyone involved in it. As I said, the project was established in 2009 by the SNP-led Renfrewshire Council. It has gone from strength to strength and I hope that it continues to do so. I warmly welcome the debate and I pay tribute to Annabel Goldie for bringing it to the chamber. I look forward to street stuff being even more successful.

As Mr McDonald knows, I was the sole member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee who did not agree whole-heartedly with the proposed definition. Given that background, will he agree to accept an amendment from me that is based on the recommendation in the committee’s report that the system should be reviewed within five years of any act coming into force, if that act contains the narrow definition that is in the bill?

I welcome the opportunity to debate the Local Government and Regeneration Committee stage 1 report on the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill. I, too, want to express my thanks to Mark McDonald MSP for bringing the bill to Parliament, and to the Scottish Government for its extensive work prior to the introduction of the bill, and for working with Mark McDonald to assist him in its introduction. When I was elected in 2007, I knew that high hedges was an issue that had been around for some time and to which people had tried to bring some type of resolution through Parliament. Unfortunately, previous attempts to introduce legislation did not succeed, but I am thankful that we are here now and I hope that we can pass the bill. The bill has not come about overnight and I welcome its introduction, but it will not, as currently drafted, with the narrow definition of a high hedge, solve every issue that confronts MSPs. I am sure that if the scope of the bill were to be extended to include deciduous trees and single trees, it would still not solve every issue. My task, as an MSP who has constituents who are dealing with issues relating to the aforementioned categories, is to ensure that legislation is workable, affordable, enforceable and easily understood. As members will know, I was the sole committee member who dissented from the definition in the bill. The definition is narrow and focuses purely on high hedges. If the definition were to be altered to include other categories, it is reasonable to assume that the bill would have to be altered. However, it is possible that such an alteration would be too great and would thereby, as Christine Grahame said, render the bill a vastly different document from what has been introduced. As we know, the bill, which follows on from the legislation that is in use in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, focuses on high hedges. As we have also heard, the Isle of Man’s Trees and High Hedges Act 2005 is different in that it encompasses trees in the title and throughout the act. My reasoning in dissenting from the definition in the stage 1 report was simple. I could have accepted the narrow definition, while knowing that there would be some unsatisfied constituents of mine, and of all colleagues—apart from Stewart Stevenson—or I could look to work with Mark McDonald to amend the bill, where possible. I do not get the impression—certainly from discussions that I have had with MSPs outside the chamber and committee members—that there is an appetite to increase the scope of the bill. Although all bills are amended in some shape or form, I do not think that any proposals to amend the definition will progress through the committee, although that is entirely up to committee members to decide. The bill can be used as a platform when reviewing the act in the future. I therefore thank Mark McDonald for accepting my amendment that called for a review of the legislation within five years of commencement of the system, which is something that the committee recommended, too. Sarah Boyack talked about the importance of the definition. That is why a review is important; having it written into the legislation will ensure that outstanding issues will not be forgotten and that the legislation can be refined and amended, as required. The review will also achieve something that all members know we do not always manage to achieve: post-legislative scrutiny. We are usually caught up in issues of the day and post-legislative scrutiny sometimes takes a back seat. I am conscious of the time, Presiding Officer, so I will make one final point. I welcome COSLA’s desire to implement the bill, and I welcome its collaborative approach thus far, which I am sure will continue. I am sure that when the bill—in whatever shape or form it takes—is passed, local authorities will be able to manage the work well and work well with others. High hedges might be an area for a possible future shared service, once the initial excess of cases is dealt with by local authorities. I welcome Mark McDonald’s bill and the assistance that the Government has provided on it. I look forward to further scrutiny of the bill at stage 2.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with Transport Scotland regarding the price of offpeak train travel. (S4O-01766)

Constituents in the west of Scotland have brought it to my attention that some rail travellers are missing out on offpeak train travel because they miss the threshold by one or two minutes. However, in other parts of the west of Scotland, the offpeak fare is offered before 9 o’clock in the morning. What action is being taken to address that differentiation and to prevent my constituents from having to pay higher costs?

I welcome this afternoon’s debate. This is a very important issue, and I congratulate Drew Smith on bringing it to the chamber. As members will know, I play the bagpipes, so I know how hard it is to learn an instrument. Years of hard work and dedication go in before someone becomes proficient in any instrument. I can fully appreciate the frustration that is felt by musicians when they are expected to play for free. For me, it is a hobby, not a profession. I always considered playing my instrument as a hobby and never as a profession for some point in the future. As we have heard, the recent report from the Musicians Union highlights the fact that 56 per cent of the musicians who were surveyed earned less than £20,000 per year. That is not a great deal of money, particularly for a professional musician. It is not a great reward for a career that has involved many years of training, rehearsals and dedication, not to mention the personal and financial sacrifices that are required to achieve the level of skill that enables someone to be a professional musician. The motion highlights the fact that too many people seem to regard music as “a hobby rather than a career”. There have always been examples of musicians being asked to play and work for free for charity, as Drew Smith indicated. At the recent London Olympics there seemed to be a blanket policy of not paying for music. Recently, other organisations have started to do the same. That has had an impact on the work that is available for musicians. There are reports of some venues trawling around for open mic nights, looking for musicians who are just starting out and getting them to play at venues for free, rather than paying for professional musicians. I understand the arguments about the showcasing of new bands, singers and musicians wanting to break into the scene—I understand the idea of providing someone with the opportunity to play. However, there needs to be a balance if that is to take place, rather than what appears to be the norm now of getting musicians to play for free. To be a top-class musician takes years and years of dedication and study. It is a full-time job. Although it is largely true that musicians enjoy their jobs, that does not mean that those jobs should have no value. It should be remembered that the enjoyable part of a musician’s job is often their time on the stage or in the studio. However, those enjoyable, creative times are short compared with the time devoted to work behind the scenes, including travelling, rehearsing and administration. A one-hour gig can be part of a musician’s 12-hour day. I have played at many an event in the past. When I was younger, playing at weddings, the wedding might start at 3 o’clock in the afternoon, but our day would then be over—we did not do anything that day apart from going and playing our pipes at that wedding. When someone is being paid to go and do a job, it is not just for the time when they are performing—they are getting paid for the whole of their time that day. I suggest that that is how it should be. Music is already a difficult career to sustain. Unless a musician makes it to the very top, it can be very poorly paid. Most of the Musicians Union’s 30,000 members have to do other jobs alongside music to make ends meet. While we highlight the problems that are currently faced by working musicians, it is still necessary to provide support for the musicians of the future. We need to do what we can to ensure that the study of music is available to everyone who has the ability and who wants to do it. I therefore congratulate the Scottish Government on the additional £1 million of funding to provide schools with the means to buy musical instruments. I also congratulate all local authorities in Scotland on the excellent music tuition that goes on across the country. A short time ago, the Parliament had a debate about the varying fees that local authorities apply but, in the main, local authorities do a tremendous job on music tuition and singing. I welcome the debate and hope that it goes some way towards highlighting to the general public and the people who run venues the importance of music as a career and the reasons why professional musicians, like any other professional, deserve to be paid for their services.

This is an important debate and I congratulate Kezia Dugdale on bringing it to the chamber. The issue is of great concern to many individuals, families and communities throughout Scotland and, judging by the turnout of MSPs today, it is an issue of great concern to us. It is just a shame that no Lib Dem could be bothered to turn up this afternoon. However, I have to ask why the motion focuses on the roles of the Scottish Government and local authorities given that the legislation that controls interest rates rests with Westminster. Why has the Labour Party not condemned the inaction of the Con-Dem Government on the issue? Is the answer something to do with the history of the lack of action that took place at Westminster when the Labour Party was last in power?

I am sorry. I usually take interventions, as members know, but I have only four minutes. The powers to regulate payday loan companies more heavily and to cap the total cost of credit rest at Westminster. We have heard that the enterprise minister has already written to the relevant UK minister to seek greater regulation of payday loans and to urge the UK Government to place a cap on interest rates for high-interest and payday lending. Where the Scottish Government can act, it will do so; as the enterprise minister said, he is already working on the matter. As regards action by local authorities, Dundee City Council’s SNP administration is leading the way. It is banning access to payday loan companies from its computers, including the public access computers in local libraries. At the same time, it is promoting the role of the local credit union as a viable alternative to high-interest, short-term lenders. I turn to the impact that welfare reform will have on those who rely on benefits. In contrast to Labour’s support for welfare cuts, with its cuts commission looking at removing free prescriptions or the concessionary bus pass from 1.2 million older and disabled people in Scotland, the Scottish Government is trying to protect families with its social wage policy, council tax freeze, free bus passes, free prescriptions and free personal care. That all adds up to vital support for families across Scotland against the background of the Westminster cuts. Our commitment to a social wage will deliver benefits for everyone in Scotland. The Scottish Government has already shown that it will not stand by while Westminster cuts fall hardest on the poorest people in Scotland. An extra £9 million was awarded to the Scottish welfare fund to reinstate the money lost through Westminster cuts, and more than £5 million is being provided to help benefits advice groups cope with the increase in demand for help from hard-hit families. Labour members might complain about welfare reforms, but unfortunately their position is not that simple. Despite what they say in press releases, leading Labour MPs at Westminster such as David Miliband agree with the reduction in welfare spending. The only thing that is clear about welfare reform is that a fairer welfare system in Scotland can be achieved only with independence. The Scottish Government has already provided support to credit unions. It recognises the valuable role that they play in providing financial services to a wide range of customers. Through the third sector enterprise fund, it invested £12 million in credit unions between 2008 and 2010, including £10,000 for Dumbarton Credit Union and £63,000 for Renfrewshire Wide Credit Union. That support underlines the support from the Scottish Government and the SNP for the credit union movement. We believe that credit unions are able to offer a viable alternative to high-interest, short-term lenders, and I urge all members to promote and support their local credit union. The motion highlights Westminster’s austerity programme and welfare reforms. It highlights that there are things that Labour would prefer to see implemented on the people of Scotland, as opposed to the people of Scotland being able to decide on Scotland’s priorities through the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government. Labour acknowledges the impact of the austerity cuts and welfare reform, but it will not join the SNP in campaigning for the Scottish Parliament to have the powers to really deal with the welfare situation. The Scottish Government is doing what it can with its limited powers under the current constitutional settlement to mitigate the excesses of the Westminster cuts agenda. It is a shame that it cannot be said that Labour is doing the same.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to assist people with visual impairments. (S4O-01626)

Recently, I have been representing a constituent with dry macular degeneration whose benefit entitlement has been removed as a result of the Atos process. What action can the Scottish Government take to assist people with dry macular degeneration who are suffering at the hands of the United Kingdom Government’s austerity measures?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement. Will the Scottish Government continue to press for a fuel duty regulator after the chancellor eventually listened to the case that was proposed by the Scottish National Party to scrap the increase in fuel duty?

What effect does the Deputy First Minister anticipate the loss of Scotland as an EU member state would have on the EU? [Interruption.]

5. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to promote the use of community service orders. (S4O-01592)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that response. He will be aware that, on a number of occasions both inside and outside the Parliament, I have asked whether those who are serving a CSO might be allowed to undertake work to allay flooding conditions throughout the west of Scotland. What action is the Scottish Government taking to ensure that such community service orders are undertaken in the west of Scotland? Will he consider once again encouraging the use of CSOs to assist with the inclement weather conditions over the winter?

What emissions reduction targets are to be included in the new franchise agreement? What scrutiny measures will be put in place to ensure that the targets are met?

We are fortunate to have a body such as the NHS. Every one of us in the chamber will have called on the NHS at some point and we know that without it Scotland would be a lot poorer. No matter how many times we thank NHS staff for their first-class work it will never be enough, but it is important that we thank them and remind them how important they are to Scottish society. The debate so far has been typical—Jackson Carlaw’s earlier comments were quite apt. I agree that the NHS is not perfect. In fact—dare I say it—no organisation in the world is perfect, whether it is a public or private organisation. Improvements and efficiencies can always be made and support can always be improved. However, what we have heard today sounds like more of the scaremongering that has been going on for some time. Nobody should be complacent, because the NHS as a body can always be improved on, but to downplay its best-ever performance is beyond belief and is to talk down the management and staff of the NHS. Jackie Baillie knows full well that I am prepared to campaign for services and to challenge NHS management proposals and decisions. In fact, in 2007 we were on the same side regarding maternity services. I am, therefore, disappointed that when credit is due—and in this instance it is due—she cannot give that credit but focuses merely on talking down what is clearly a positive story overall.

I am sorry, but I have got only four minutes. It was the Labour Party’s choice to have a debate in which members would get only four minutes. With waiting times at their lowest-ever levels, care safer than it has ever been, premature mortality being further reduced and patients continuing to rate their care very positively, I wonder what it will take for the Labour Party to welcome good news. More than 90 per cent of patients were seen and treated within 18 weeks of their initial GP referral. The Patient Rights (Scotland) Act 2011 came into force in September this year, with the introduction of the treatment time guarantee, and I am confident that the NHS will continue to work hard to improve its deliverability even further to make the maximum waiting time 12 weeks from diagnosis to treatment. A further example of what I consider a success story is the number of alcohol brief interventions delivered. In 2008-09, there were 30,310 such interventions and the number has increased steadily to a high of 97,830 in 2011-12. With alcohol misuse and its effects on individuals and wider society being debated regularly both inside and outside the chamber, that increase is proof of the determination of the Government and the NHS to work hard to help those affected. Alcohol misuse affects all levels of society, and I am sure that, across the chamber, we can all welcome the efforts that the NHS has made to help people to get their lives back. I said earlier that improvements could be made, and the Audit Scotland report—which has been touched on and which the motion mentions—highlights a few issues. Even though the NHS in Scotland has had its best-ever performance, there can be no complacency. Knowing the cabinet secretary as we do, however, we can rest assured that there will be none. The cabinet secretary will continue the hard work and focus of his predecessor. I am conscious of the time, Presiding Officer. I will support the amendment in the name of the cabinet secretary because I know that the NHS in Scotland is safe in the hands of the SNP Government.

Does Annabelle Ewing agree that the section 30 order and the historic Edinburgh agreement allow for 16 and 17-year-olds to vote for the first time and that it is incumbent on us all, on both sides of the debate, to encourage 16 and 17-year-olds to vote and have their voice heard when it comes to the referendum?

4. To ask the Scottish Government how the opportunities for all policy is being implemented in the west of Scotland. (S4O-01529)

What assurances can the cabinet secretary provide to the college sector that the opportunities for all policy will be maintained during college reorganisation and that reorganisation provides an opportunity for the sector to consider running courses that have been scrapped or which have the potential to generate longer-term and stable employment?

I, too, congratulate Iain Gray on securing this members’ business debate. As his speech showed, he obviously has a great deal of passion for and commitment to the subject, and I commend him for that. I thank Clare Adamson for her plug for piping and certainly whole-heartedly agree with at least the first half of Jenny Marra’s speech. However, although I agree with the general thrust of Iain Gray’s motion, I am not too sure how the aims of Scotland on Sunday’s let the children play campaign can be fully implemented. As members will know, I play the bagpipes. However, I was not taught them at school; I actually learned them as a member of 1st Port Glasgow Boys Brigade. Tuition was free, but we paid for it by playing at gala days and functions throughout the year. Like many musical instruments, pipes are not cheap; in fact, they are pretty expensive. Members of pipe bands have to pay for their uniforms, their pipes, their drums, their drumskins, their drone reeds and their pipe reeds as well as for their transport and their accommodation when playing at a function. An important point that we will all take away from the debate is that the vast majority of parents, bands and schools do not have an unlimited pot of money to draw on. Although it is vital to ensure that music tuition is affordable, certainly for our younger people, it is also imperative to recognise that such tuition does not happen only in schools. Before I talk about local authorities, I want to highlight an organisation that does a tremendous amount of work and which I believe I and Hanzala Malik have discussed in the past: the College of Piping in Glasgow. On average, the college takes more than 500 piping students a year, and on a Monday evening it provides free tuition. It supplies equipment such as pipes and drums, and some of the uniforms, for younger people who come from disadvantaged areas. A further example of the college’s excellent work is that it paid for a set of pipes that cost approximately £1,000 and gave them to a young boy to aid him in his piping efforts. A set of pipes is not cheap—in fact, that was a cheap set at £1,000. We should all congratulate the college on the tremendous amount of work that it does for the piping community and for the local communities that it serves. I will touch briefly on the work of local authorities. I congratulate the eight council areas that have no charge for music tuition—I warmly welcome that. I hope that the other 24 areas in Scotland can have a look at their charging regimes and see whether they can make the charges a bit smaller. As members know, I stay in Inverclyde, where the council charges £95 a year for tuition. That is not a lot of money in the grand scheme of things, but for some families it will be a lot. However, that is the lowest sum among the authorities that charge for tuition; in comparison, Aberdeen City Council charges approximately £340. My key point is that I do not believe that we can tell local authorities what to do. At a recent Local Government and Regeneration Committee meeting, Councillor Michael Cook, the vice-president of COSLA, was clear about our councils’ powers and responsibilities. He stated: “We need to recognise that when it comes to a whole range of factors, there is legitimate variation based on local democracy. It is up to councillors, who are the local democratic agents within councils, to make a policy judgment about some of those things ... It may also partly be a consequence of policy determinations that those elected members have made and that is absolutely right. Sometimes we hear complaints about the postcode lottery. Sometimes the postcode lottery is local democracy in action.”—[Official Report, Local Government and Regeneration Committee, 31 October 2012; c 1343-44.] That is a very powerful argument.

I can talk to Jenny Marra about her point later; I am just concluding now. There is so much more that we could highlight and discuss tonight, but time is short. I know how beneficial playing an instrument is, as it has certainly benefited me. However, we must recognise that music tuition does not happen only in schools, and we must acknowledge Councillor Michael Cook’s comments.

Shipbuilding is very much in the DNA of communities in west central Scotland and I have met many people who live in areas such as Inverclyde but work in the yards up in Glasgow. Therefore, any closures will have a negative effect on the whole west central Scotland area. With that in mind, will the cabinet secretary undertake an economic assessment of the implications of the potential closure of one of the yards and the subsequent job losses that that would create?

It has been a consensual debate so far, which has sometimes been quite humorous. I recommend that Tavish Scott have a wee chat later with my colleague Chic Brodie as, when Tavish Scott mentioned breakdancing ponies, Chic Brodie said that he had one. We know that Scotland has a tremendous amount to offer between its people, the golf, the whisky, the food and drink, the cultural events, the bagpipes and the tartan—Dennis Robertson take note—and the sporting events, including the world-class sailing off the west coast. In that regard, we cannot forget the current constitutional debate, which is certainly putting Scotland under the gaze of the wider world and is, I think, making Scotland a more interesting and fascinating place for people to come and visit. We have already heard a number of the facts and statistics, so I will not go over all the ground again. However, it is important to highlight a couple of the points that we heard earlier. VisitScotland estimates that the MICE market brings in around £870 million, which is 19 per cent of our overall business tourism figure, and that 28 per cent of all international association conferences that are held in the UK are held in Scotland. Neil Brownlee, head of VisitScotland’s business tourism unit, said: “Scotland has so much to offer delegates in terms of our world class venues, our spectacular scenes, our fantastic food and drink, our history, our golf and so much more.” I could not have put it better myself. We have the product. We have some world-class establishments and have improving service provision at all levels. We also have the people with the drive and passion to continue to improve the tourism product, particularly the business tourism product, and certainly none more so than Stephen Leckie, who is the chair of the Scottish tourism leadership group and of the Scottish Tourism Alliance. His infectious desire is to make Scottish tourism the best—not just the best for a small country. His foreword to the refreshed Scottish tourism strategy—“Tourism Scotland 2020”—highlights the focus on the sector, stating that the strategy is “for the industry, by the industry.” Those comments are apt and highlight that it is a bottom-up strategy rather than a top-down one. The tourism leadership group, which produced the refreshed strategy, and the Scottish Tourism Alliance, which will monitor the delivery of the strategy, are pivotal in driving Scotland’s offering forward. I am convinced that they will succeed and that, as a consequence, so will Scotland. They will have challenges and some ups and downs, but the challenge for politicians in this Parliament and elsewhere is to help them when it is required, not give them a public mauling. The next two years are important for Scotland. The continuation of the winning years strategy will see two of the world’s top-class events coming to the country, which are huge opportunities. The Ryder cup will put Scotland in the driving seat—sorry for the pun—from a golfing perspective, and the Commonwealth games will put Glasgow on the front foot from a wider sporting perspective. Given that hundreds of millions of pounds are being invested in Glasgow by the Scottish Government in sporting infrastructure, accommodation, staffing and transport links to make the games a success, I am sure that, in their heart of hearts, those who claimed that Glasgow was being ripped off know that be to an inaccurate claim. I warmly welcome the conference bid fund, which has had a tremendous amount of success so far. Glasgow has done well, and the thousands of additional people who have come to Scotland or who will come to Scotland in coming years are a huge boost to the Glasgow economy. The Scottish Government’s collaborative work with Glasgow City Council and the Glasgow City Marketing Bureau is an example that should be emulated.

Absolutely. Inverclyde has a tremendous opportunity to make much more of tourism. I will come on to Inverclyde in a moment. Business tourism comes in all shapes and sizes, whether large conferences coming to the cities or smaller events. Earlier this year, Celestica, an organisation that is based in Gourock, held a small conference of vice-presidents from around the world, who stayed at the Inverkip hotel. That decision was based on the stunning location. It would have been too small to have qualified for any assistance through the bid fund—it involved only about eight people—but it was important to the economy that it served. As far as the future is concerned, the Beacon arts centre, as one of the 31 locations outside the cities that can seat 500 people, represents a wonderful opportunity to bring conferences into Inverclyde. I highlighted its importance to Malcolm Roughhead some months ago, and I am pleased that he took up the point and passed it on to his colleagues in VisitScotland. The bigger cities have plenty of bed space, but smaller locations have a shortage of it. That is the case across the west of Scotland. The west of Scotland has wonderful opportunities. Inverclyde, in particular, has wonderful opportunities in the shape of the Beacon arts centre and the number of people who left the area many years ago for the new world. A great deal more can be done in Inverclyde. I am biased, but anyone who goes there will get a tremendous welcome and nowhere can compete with its stunning location.

4. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s assessment is of the economic impact on Scotland of the planned 3p increase in fuel duty. (S4F-00972)

The Federation of Small Businesses has warned that 79 per cent of its members say that fuel prices are having a damaging effect on their business and 62 per cent say that they are having to increase their prices as a result. In a week when inflation has increased again and the Bank of England has cut its forecast for economic growth, does the First Minister agree that the chancellor should listen to households and businesses, cancel the 3p rise and put fuel prices on a stable footing with a proper fuel duty regulator?

Can the First Minister give an assurance that the driving forward of the national dementia strategy will be enhanced by the integrated health and social care strategy?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to improve the prison estate in the west of Scotland. (S4O-01438)

Is the cabinet secretary able to provide any information on the estimated economic benefits to Inverclyde of the building of the new prison in addition to HMP Greenock’s being kept open? Can he assure the chamber that when contracts are being considered Inverclyde-based companies have the opportunity to tender to ensure that Inverclyde itself can gain the maximum economic benefit?

As members might imagine, I will not be voting for the Labour motion but will be supporting Nicola Sturgeon’s amendment. Yet again, we have a Labour motion of rhetoric and hyperbole when the questions that the public want answered are on the details of independence and of remaining in the union. Labour’s motion talks about “confusion ... as to whether or not legal advice had been sought regarding an independent Scotland’s status in respect of EU membership”. I omitted some words, although only 13, not 27. When the Labour Party embarked on this crusade after the failure of the previous five, surely it should have done some research beforehand. During the first parliamentary session, when Iain Gray and Jack McConnell were ministers, they provided clarity on the issue in written answers to parliamentary questions. Iain Gray said: “Whether legal advice is sought by, or provided to, ministers on any subject is a confidential matter.”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 8 November 2002; S1W-31067.] Jack McConnell said: “It is not the practice of the Scottish Executive to disclose whether they have taken legal advice on an issue, nor to disclose the nature of any legal advice received.”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 3 July 2000; S1W-08098.] I may be wrong, but it appears to me that, on the issue of legal advice, the Labour Party is doing two things. First, it is playing politics with the issue despite knowing full well that legal advice is neither confirmed nor denied—nor disclosed—unless permission to do so is granted by the law officers. Secondly, its main reason for doing so is, I believe, to provide a smokescreen for its own inadequacies in providing a positive vision for Scotland. Labour’s cuts commission—it is cutting free personal care, the bus pass and eye tests and ending the council tax freeze, to name just a few things—is not something that it can crow about. No members on my side of the chamber agree with Labour’s cuts agenda, and I am sure that none of us could go out and sell it on the doorsteps as a positive vision for Scotland. The smokescreen is an attempt to hide not only Labour’s inadequacies, but the party’s hand-in-glove coalition with the Tories in Scotland in the no campaign. That coalition—or partnership—with the Tories sticks in the craw of hundreds of thousands of people in Scotland who have not forgotten how Mrs Thatcher’s policies affected our communities. With the Tories and the Lib Dems having embarked on a welfare cuts agenda that will once again hammer many communities and people in Scotland, I urge the Labour Party to think again about getting into bed with Cameron and Clegg. If the Prime Minister and the Tories are the masters in the coalition, that begs the question of who the puppets are. Before I go on to discuss matters of real importance to the people of Scotland, and why Scotland’s future should be as a normal independent nation, I note that reading of Labour’s agenda was quite revealing. A Sunday newspaper reported that a Labour strategist admitted that, to get a no vote in the referendum, the tactic is to launch personal attacks on the First Minister. I believe that the people of Scotland deserve better than that. They want politicians who will try to work together to improve the country not who spend their time cooking up new ways of attacking the First Minister. The people of Scotland want to know what Scotland will be like if they vote either yes or no, and the nonsense that is lobbed with regularity from Labour Party members does them and the people of Scotland a disservice. I believe that an independent Scotland in the EU is the best option for the country. Last week, after giving evidence to the Westminster Parliament’s House of Lords Select Committee on Economic Affairs, Liz Cameron, the chief executive of Scottish Chambers of Commerce, said: “I am delighted that my fellow panellists agreed with Scottish Chambers of Commerce that continued membership of the EU is of huge advantage to Scottish businesses. Whatever the outcome of the referendum, ensuring that this can continue is a priority.” That is one of the important issues that the no campaign needs to address. Labour has been silent on EU membership, the Lib Dems are positively gushing about the EU and the Tories are trying to deal with a Eurosceptic wing to stave off the challenge from UKIP at the next European elections. The Prime Minister’s comments to the effect of, “Vote for me in 2015 and I might just give you a referendum on EU membership” sound very familiar to us here in Scotland. Earlier in January, we heard, “Vote no and I will give you more powers”, but there was no mention of what those powers would be. The no campaign is all over the place on that particular issue. Scotland’s business community wants answers on EU membership so that it can plan accordingly. In the 14 minutes of Johann Lamont’s speech earlier today, and in previous debates on Scotland’s future, there has been a vacuum in respect of Labour’s vision for Scotland and its policy on Scotland’s place in the world. I was going to conclude, Presiding Officer, but I see that I have a bit more time.

Okay—I will take it.

I am afraid that if James Kelly does not understand the importance of renewable energy and its jobs potential for Scotland, there is a vacuum in him and certainly not in the chamber. I believe that a Scotland that is free from Trident and tuition fees, and that has the full ability to deal with the social issues that are affecting our population, is far more important than the lack of vision that the Labour Party portrays. Listen to Labour members: they want Trident and tuition fees, and they are content to sign up to a pact with their Tory and Lib Dem colleagues on welfare reform. I do not know how anyone can think anything other than that Labour prefers that Scotland cannot do things for itself. Labour must tell the people of Scotland why it prefers a Tory Government to self-government for Scotland.

I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on securing the debate and I welcome members of the cross-party group to the public gallery. Dyslexia is an issue about which Margaret Mitchell cares deeply, and I have no hesitation in supporting the motion. I joined the cross-party group on dyslexia as a result of meeting positively dyslexic, which is the Inverclyde dyslexia support group. The group targets all adult learners with dyslexia, those who are affected by it or who work in the field, and anyone in Inverclyde who can help to raise awareness of the issues that surround dyslexia. The group’s members work towards raising awareness of dyslexia and the surrounding issues, and they support those who have it and inform local adult learning provision through the community learning and development partnership. The group’s initial aim was to create awareness of dyslexia and to destigmatise it. It was challenging but inspirational to speak to some of the group’s members and to hear their stories about how they have adapted to deal with the condition. The online dyslexia toolkit was not available for those members as they were growing up, and it would have been advantageous for them. The key to any learning tool is its implementation and those who teach it. Through the cross-party group, we have heard about instances of a lack of understanding of dyslexia in some educational establishments. However, whenever the issue has arisen in my discussions with constituents, the opposite has—thankfully—been the case. There has tended to be a great deal of understanding, and teaching staff have worked tremendously hard to help their students. I hope that that good practice is being shared among our local authorities. I am sure that we would all agree that no person in Scotland should be left behind because of ignorance and lack of understanding of dyslexia. I applaud Dyslexia Scotland’s extraordinary efforts in ensuring that teachers, parents and students throughout Scotland are better able to address the needs of individuals with learning disabilities. Since its creation, Dyslexia Scotland has been committed to encouraging, enabling and inspiring individuals with dyslexia—regardless of their age or level of education—to reach their fullest potential, and it gives me great pleasure to see the organisation succeed in that goal once again. Margaret Mitchell spoke about the book “Dyslexia and Us”. I have read it myself, and some of the stories are heartwarming, life changing and inspirational. Two years ago—as we have heard—Dyslexia Scotland unveiled the online dyslexia toolkit for educators throughout the country, and last month the organisation released an updated version of that vital resource. The toolkit’s primary purpose is to help teachers and those who work with young children to identify early signs of dyslexia, and in that regard it has been enormously successful over the past two years. The value of the programme to our teachers and communities is certainly evident, and as a result the Scottish Government has this year funded an extension project, which I warmly welcome. I have no doubt that the extension programme will have the same positive impact that we have seen as a result of the original toolkit, and I hope that even more resources will be released in the future to assist people with dyslexia. Dyslexia is a growing trend in Scottish society, and it is important now more than ever that we are informed and prepared to address it. Today—as we have already heard—one in 10 young people in Scotland is diagnosed with dyslexia, and it is likely that even more exhibit many of the symptoms but have yet to be identified. I could go on, Presiding Officer, but I am conscious of time. I say in conclusion that Dyslexia Scotland is a leader in bringing awareness and understanding of dyslexia to our teachers, parents and students, and the recent release of the updated online toolkit is but a small example of the organisation’s many successes. I congratulate Dyslexia Scotland on that and on its years of great service to our communities. I look forward to seeing the great strides forward that I am confident Dyslexia Scotland will continue to make in the coming years. Once again, I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on bringing the debate to the chamber.

I, too, congratulate David Torrance on securing this members’ business debate, and commend him for highlighting some of the positive work in his constituency. I also congratulate the 5th Fife scout group and the winning team members who are in the public gallery. I have tremendous respect for the scouting movement and for everyone who gives up their time to assist Scotland’s younger people. The Scout Association has a wonderful history, some of which we have already heard about. I am sure that it will be around for a long time after I have left this earth. I was not in the scouts; I was in the Boys Brigade. I know that there is a small bit of friendly rivalry between the scouts and the Boys Brigade. That is healthy. Those organisations have immense mutual respect for each other, which is certainly to be commended and highlighted. Both provide younger people with opportunities that may not ordinarily be available to them, and I am delighted that so many young people take up those opportunities. We have already heard about the increasing numbers of younger people who have joined the scouting movement in recent years. That can only be a good thing. In preparing for the debate, I contacted the district commissioner for the Greenock and district scouts, David McCallum. Mr McCallum and his team are committed to the younger people of Inverclyde and Scotland. They have doubled the number of young people taking part in scouting in one area since 2007, which is a remarkable achievement for the team. There are now 17 groups, from beavers up to explorer scout units, and there are many personal and group achievements within the membership. That increase took place not by chance but because of a concerted and planned effort. I will not go into all the successes of the Greenock and district scouts, but I will highlight a couple. Greenock and district scouts have forged a working arrangement with the Ocean Youth Trust Scotland to help young people earn their Duke of Edinburgh’s award badges. I know how difficult it is to get a Duke of Edinburgh’s award badge, not because I did it but because my sister did. I know how much time and effort she had to put in to get her badges. I highlight my entry in the register of interests, as I am an ambassador for the Ocean Youth Trust Scotland. I know exactly the excellent work that it does and how it helps hundreds of people from across Scotland and a range of backgrounds every year. Its working partnership with the scouts is only one example of the Inverclyde community working together. Another positive example of the Greenock and district scouts involves activities related to this year’s diamond jubilee celebrations—854 beavers, cubs, scouts, explorers and leaders held their annual parade and church service, which also became a celebration of the diamond jubilee. That was a wonderful achievement, which involved so many members. The 60th Greenock and district group has 40 beavers and cub scouts at Glenburn school in Greenock, which is a school for pupils with additional support needs. The group, which operates on a Friday afternoon during school time, is operated by a dedicated team of individuals and offers a scouting opportunity to young people who would not ordinarily have that chance. I congratulate the Greenock and district scouts on their decision to establish the group. I also congratulate Inverclyde Council on working in partnership with the Greenock and district scouts to make the group happen and on the other joint working that takes place between both organisations. I could go on, but I would be here for a while. I have given a flavour of one or two of the things that take place within the Inverclyde area. The part of David Torrance’s motion from “considers that the Scout Association has been very successful” to the end is so accurate. Hundreds of thousands of Scots have benefited greatly from the scouting movement during its 105-year history. I am sure that over the next 105 years many more will have the opportunity to benefit and will grab it with both hands. As a former boys brigader, I commend the Scouting Association and wish it every success in the future. Once again, I thank David Torrance for bringing the debate to the Parliament.

I welcome this afternoon’s debate on a crucial issue for the whole country. During yesterday’s debate on Scotland’s future, I stated that when I was growing up, Inverclyde’s economic heart was being systematically dismantled by the Tory UK Government. That was at a time when all powers rested with Westminster. I do not believe for one minute that we want to go back to those dark days, when communities were ripped apart, families were split apart and lives were wrecked. That was the legacy of an uncaring Westminster Government that had little regard for Scotland. Debates on employability are usually charged affairs, and rightly so. The younger generation are the future of the country, so if they are not being given opportunities, what hope will there be? I am thankful that the Scottish Government recognises their importance and has invested finance, energy and time in the issue. It also knows that the measures of past UK Governments, including the abandonment of apprenticeships and the introduction of schemes such as the youth training scheme, have left a legacy for the country to deal with now. Time and again, the issue of skills shortages is raised in the Parliament and the Government is asked what it is going to do about the situation—we have heard that in today’s debate. I honestly cannot believe that the Scottish Government is being expected, in the space of one or two parliamentary sessions, to right the wrongs of years of failed policies for our younger people. Further to that, when unemployment statistics are raised in the chamber, we have to accept that it is impossible to get everyone into work, for a variety of reasons. Every one of us will admit that unemployment is a huge challenge; no Government of any colour has fully dealt with it in the past. I know that from my experience. After I graduated from university in 1997, I was unemployed for six months; I was overqualified and underexperienced. I obtained a job in a factory for six weeks in the run-up to Christmas, which helped me financially, but it also helped me to regain some of my lost self-esteem. I had a student loan, which was a debt that was always on my mind at the time, so I started to put aside money to pay it off. I am thankful that tuition fees had not been introduced, otherwise I would have had an additional debt, and that the SNP Government and the Scottish Parliament had the courage and the guts to be on the side of graduates when we abolished the dreaded tuition fees, irrespective of whether they were at the front end or the back end. I will highlight a couple of firms from Inverclyde and their experiences. Stepper Technology and its sister company MES Marine & Engineering Services have in the past year taken on 22 new employees, of whom 15 are under 24 years old. Many of those young people have come from welfare-to-work programmes, including get ready for work, which has helped 16 and 17-year-olds to achieve employment. The managing director—a guy called Tom Smith—told me that “employers have a duty of care to take responsibility for the future of the young kids within their own community. They are the future, and we the business community have a social responsibility to ensure they are employed and well trained. Without these important elements, what future would the business community have, and Inverclyde too?” That touches on the point that John Park made about employers’ social responsibility. I congratulate Tom Smith on his positive outlook about employing young people and on his absolute commitment to his social responsibility. The second firm that I will highlight is a bus company that is based in Inverclyde—McGill’s Bus Service Ltd. I have been told that it continually has vacancies—it currently has 17. It looks for a range of skills and many roles are for trained engineers and bus mechanics. The skills shortage, which has been touched on, may be due to past Government and college decisions to cut back on particular training programmes. It is nigh on impossible to train bus apprentices fully in Scotland. To be fully trained, a bus apprentice must go to one of the hubs of excellence in England. As a result, Scotland has been deskilled in that sector in the past 20 years.

Margaret McCulloch obviously did not listen to what I said—I talked about engineers and bus mechanics, not drivers. I ask new colleges to examine what might be an opportunity to start reskilling some of our younger people. That will not happen overnight, but the deskilling started long before May 2007. I welcome the debate and I back the motion in Angela Constance’s name. The £30 million and the additional £15 million in funding are welcome. We can all agree that more can be done. If John Swinney’s budget was not being hammered by Westminster cuts, he could put a bit more money into the pot. I agree with the thoughts of my colleague Colin Beattie and of John Park about community benefit clauses. It is imperative that local authority officials engage fully on use of such clauses, because that will benefit our communities and all our constituents. I welcome the 26,000 apprentices last year and the commitment for the rest of the parliamentary session. I welcome the “Working for Growth” framework and the partnership approach. I welcome the investment of £180 million in construction skills and the green economy. More still needs to be done, but that will not happen overnight and will not happen without the full financial accountability that Parliament needs. I welcome the debate and the Scottish Government’s actions, but we cannot be complacent about our future.

Kezia Dugdale talked about the Christmas jobs fair. Does the need for such fairs not demonstrate why full employment is not realistic, because there will always be spikes in employment, particularly at Christmas?

Regeneration takes many forms, one of which is job creation and job sustainability. Given that, will the minister update the chamber on the work of Ferguson Shipbuilders in light of the Scottish Government’s £20 million investment in two new hybrid ferries?

Of utmost importance to me and I am sure everyone in the chamber is Scotland’s future, whether as a normal independent nation, which I obviously favour; as a country with the limited powers that we currently have; or a country with more powers, as promised by the Prime Minister earlier this year. Time will tell and the people of Scotland will decide. I grew up at a time when the economic heart—[Interruption.]

When I was growing up, Inverclyde’s economic heart was being systematically dismantled by a Tory UK Government. In that time, Inverclyde, the area where I still live, has survived. Nevertheless, there have been some positives. For example, Ferguson Shipbuilders in Port Glasgow, through Scottish Government investment, is building the world’s first two hybrid ferries and creating jobs, and Stepper Technology in Greenock has doubled its workforce over the past year. Nevertheless, more needs to be done. There have been huge challenges and there still are, but Inverclyde—the area where I grew up and still live—can have a successful future. As well as addressing employment issues, we need to ensure that we protect everyone who lives there. That is where the Parliament has worked, not only for Inverclyde but for Scotland. It has introduced a number of initiatives that have had a positive impact on all our constituents: free personal care for the elderly, free eye tests, the concessionary travel scheme, free dental check-ups, free prescriptions and the council tax freeze. I note that the West Dunbartonshire Council leader, Martin Rooney, only today warmly welcomed the council tax freeze in the Lennox Herald. He said: “we have no plans to raise council tax over the next five years. I accept the right of my leader of the Labour Party to make these comments”— the comments from last week— “but we’ve made plans”. I agree with him on that point.

I agree that local authorities should make their own decisions, but I also—[Interruption.] I also agree that the council tax freeze has been hugely beneficial throughout Scotland, including West Dunbartonshire. I also appreciate that Scotland and other parts of these islands face financial challenges due to the huge debt burden left by UK Labour and the failing austerity measures introduced by the Tory-Lib Dem coalition—a cuts agenda that goes too far and too fast. We all know that the former chancellor—and now the leader of the anti-independence campaign—Alistair Darling said that Labour’s cuts would be deeper and tougher than Thatcher’s. He said that before he was booted out of office in 2010. I know how Margaret Thatcher’s cuts affected Inverclyde and I assure members that I do not want to go back to that. Johann Lamont’s speech last week and the verbal gymnastics that happened in its aftermath only highlight to SNP members what Scotland’s continuing in the union would look like. Like Mr Miliband and Disraeli, I, too, can use the phrase “one nation”. With one nation, they will slash more services. In one nation, we will pay more council tax. We should vote for one nation if we want free personal care to be scrapped, if we want to pay tuition fees and if we want to pay for prescriptions. The list could go on, and I am happy to provide some more helpful slogans to the anti-independence campaign.

I have already taken one intervention. According to Professor Arthur Midwinter, who advises Labour on its cuts commission, all universal provision is on the table. If we are to have an open and honest debate with everything on the table, will Labour confirm or deny whether any of the following will be on the hit list? Will free eye tests and dental check-ups be on it? Are there to be fewer apprenticeships when, week in, week out, Labour members continually call for more apprenticeships? We have already heard about Glasgow. In its campaign in Glasgow in May this year, Labour’s manifesto highlighted the fact that Glasgow City Council was the first council to introduce the council tax freeze—a manifesto policy on which Johann Lamont obviously campaigned. As I said a few moments ago, Martin Rooney of West Dunbartonshire Council obviously agrees with that policy. Labour in Glasgow also pledged to provide an affordable warmth dividend of £100 to all people aged over 80 every winter. Will that now be a goner? It also stated that it would continue to “provide free swimming for the under 18s and over 60s, free golf for the under 18s and free bowling and tennis for all”, and said: “Labour will extend free golf on Council courses to the over 60s.” Labour’s contribution to the debate is clear and obvious. It is that we should pay more council tax, pay for prescriptions if we are ill and pay for eye tests and dental check-ups. It is that senior citizens should pay for travel and their personal care. However, if we play golf, swim, bowl or play tennis, we can do it for free. The praise that has been lavished on Johann Lamont by her Tory friends in Scotland and Wales may be nice for her to hear, but it is galling for Scotland’s senior citizens, who remember Margaret Thatcher. Who would have thought that Johann Lamont would become Scotland’s Margaret Thatcher?

I am sorry, but I say again to Johann Lamont: who would have thought that she would become Scotland’s Margaret Thatcher? People to whom I have spoken have been shocked by Labour’s conversion to Tory policies, but all members know that they are joined at the hip in the better together campaign. They should change the title of the campaign from better together to poorer together. At least some honesty would then come from the unionist parties in the debate. Let us support Scotland and back John Swinney’s amendment.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the Alcohol Focus Scotland report that was published last week, which showed that alcohol-related harm costs Scotland £3.6 billion per year, indicates clearly that licensing boards should carefully consider implementing as standard the use of the powers that the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 gives them, such as those on overprovision? Does he agree that consideration should be given to strengthening the legislation to encourage local authorities to use such powers?

Will the cabinet secretary explain how the savings from Scottish Water will be made without any detriment to the capital investment programme?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what recent action it has taken to promote tourism in West Scotland. (S4O-01249)

Last weekend, I attended a few of the doors open day events in Inverclyde—I am sure that colleagues from across the chamber did the same in their parts of the world. I was disappointed that Newark castle in Port Glasgow was not involved this year, although it has been involved in previous years. I ask the minister to speak to Historic Scotland and to encourage it to reconsider that decision for future years, please.

I, too, welcome Nicola Sturgeon to her new position. I am sure that she will be a very able cabinet secretary. I welcome this debate on the Scottish Government’s actions to deliver sustainable growth. We all know that the economic situation is challenging, to say the least, and members have highlighted some areas in which the challenge is most evident. If the current economic conditions had been created solely in Scotland, it would be legitimate for members to criticise the Scottish Government for its actions. However, we all know that the economic conditions were largely created elsewhere and that the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government have limited ability to address the hand that has been dealt to them. It is fair to apportion some of the blame for the current situation on the actions of banks, particularly the ones that were bailed out, but the banks are by no means the only contributors to the current economic conditions. I accept that different political parties have different views on how financial resources should be spent. In a perfect world we would all get what we want. However, the facts are clear, and all members should be honest with themselves and with the electorate. The Scottish Parliament has had a 33 per cent cut to its capital budget—the former chancellor, Alistair Darling, proposed a 37 per cent cut, and his infamous remark about cuts that would be deeper and tougher than those of Thatcher will live long in politicians’ memories. Conservative and Lib Dem members might feel a little pleased that their parties at UK level have made some advances in relation to the planned deep and tough cuts. I am sure that everyone welcomes additional money for investment that the Scottish Parliament receives. However, it would be nice if we did not need to put pressure on another Parliament in the first place and could just get on with the job ourselves. It would be nice to be labelled not a bunch of whingers but a bunch of progressives who made a massive difference to poverty in all its forms and provided opportunities for all. Given that the gap between the richest and the poorest increased to a record size under the former Labour Prime Minister Gordon Brown, given that the chancellor’s continuing austerity programme is hitting the people who need assistance the hardest, and given that the current Prime Minister is moving his deckchairs in a rightward direction, to appease the growing number of malcontents in his ranks, surely we should all welcome the Scottish Government’s actions and think about what more we could do if we had the powers of independence.

With the powers of independence, this Parliament and this country could be a damn sight better than we are under the rules and regulations that come from the Westminster Parliament.

Can I make some progress first?

Okay.

We all know that we could borrow money from global markets. There are various ways in which we could make this country better. I know that Margo MacDonald and SNP members very much support Scotland becoming a better country and an independent country. There must be a dearth of ambition for Scotland in the better together campaign, if campaigners are proud to maintain a record of poverty, austerity and a rightward shift. The cabinet secretary talked about the important measures that the Scottish Government has taken. He mentioned the 26,000 modern apprentices and the Government’s legislative programme, which was published last week and focuses on economic recovery. The Government is calling for a stimulus package from the UK Government, to get the construction industry working. It will also maintain the small business bonus scheme, to assist our small businesses. Economic recovery is not easy and no single action will sort the issue out. Recovery requires businesses of every size to be in a position to provide training opportunities to their employees. That is why I warmly welcome the Scottish Government’s record on modern apprenticeships. The delivery this year of 26,000 modern apprenticeships—more than the target of 25,000—is welcome. Surely the Labour Party can welcome the record number of places, even at this late stage and even though it voted against the measure in last year’s budget. Willie Rennie and Ken Macintosh, in talking about the shift in spending proposals, said that the Scottish Government is responsible for its actions. I agree that the Scottish Government should take responsibility for its actions—and it does—but I would have respected their barbed criticism if they had offered any suggestions on which budgets money should be taken away from so that it could go into other projects.

I will not take Willie Rennie’s intervention, as I want to say another couple of things. Mary Scanlon congratulated previous Tory Governments in respect of inward investment, but they should also take the responsibility for the decimation of heavy industries in Scotland, such as the shipbuilding, coal-mining and steel industries. I welcome the Scottish Government’s investment in the two hybrid ferries for Ferguson Shipbuilders in Port Glasgow, which is creating jobs and apprenticeship places and once again helping to build ships on the lower Clyde.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the programme of bills that the First Minister announced today. As a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, I anticipate having quite a busy year with the better regulation bill and the procurement reform bill. Both bills can make a positive difference to the communities that we serve as parliamentarians. In the past, I have questioned the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth on the community benefit clauses. I know other members have also raised that issue. Although they can be used at the moment, I would like to think that the procurement reform bill will enhance them. However, we have to strike a balance between aiding communities and the legal requirements of the European Union. I do not want competition to be removed, as that would be disastrous, but I believe that there can be an enhanced method of procurement that helps people to work and keep their jobs within their areas, but which also provides further training opportunities. During the summer, I met many organisations throughout the west of Scotland, including a number of businesses, and I was struck by their commitment to the areas in which they are based and their determination to succeed despite the current tough economic conditions. Their hope and optimism for the future were abundant. They all said a similar thing—that times are tough but that we have been in recessions before and that we will come out stronger at the end. We must not let go of that powerful message. If we really want to see our communities throughout Scotland improve, we need to have a sharp focus on improving the economic opportunities for all. My summer visits were interesting—fascinating at times—and inspiring. I have only one disappointing comment to mention. A public sector employee raised with me a concern regarding community benefit clauses. The individual informed me that a senior official within their public body, when questioned on the use of such clauses, had apparently stated that they were illegal and could not be used. I have no proof that the allegation is true, but I have no reason to suggest that the employee was making it up. If the allegation is true, that organisation has been done a disservice by that senior official, as have those who are unemployed and looking for opportunities in the area. We can pass laws within the current limitations of this Parliament, but if they are not fully implemented on the ground there is a serious challenge ahead. I anticipate, however, that with the procurement reform bill such allegations can be consigned to the dustbin. Regulation is an area that the business community wants to be improved at every level. I am sure that some businesses would like less regulation, but I know from my discussions this summer that an improved regulatory regime is something that will be closely examined and I am sure that common ground can be found between the business community and the Parliament when the better regulation bill is introduced. In his speech a few moments ago, John Park talked about working to create further employment opportunities. That was a welcome contribution to the debate, but I hope that he will speak to his party leader about the matter. In her opening comments, she seemed to treat the better regulation bill with some disdain, but later on she called for more jobs. If we are going to have more jobs, we surely need businesses to create them, so I hope that John Park will speak to his party leader about that point. Citizens Advice Scotland announced today that a record number of people are turning to charities to feed themselves and their families. I challenge every single MSP to stand up and be counted on the issue. Nobody in Scotland should be living with the indignity of having to resort to charities in order to eat. The reasons for people contacting the food banks are varied, but it comes as no surprise that the UK Government’s welfare reforms are one of them. If our citizens are struggling now, what will the situation be like when many more UK cuts are inflicted in the coming years? In a country as rich as Scotland, nobody should have to live with the perpetual fear of wondering where the next meal is to come from. These are real people. Real lives are being consigned to daily misery and dread, and I for one want no part of living in a society that allows that to continue. While we remain part of a union that allows the welfare state to adversely affect our citizens, however, that will continue. While we remain part of a union that ensures that the gap between the rich and the poor increases, that will continue. While we remain part of the union, the choice of helping those who are less well off will always be a distant second to the replacement of the weapons of mass destruction on the Clyde. I believe that, with independence, this Parliament will be better equipped to improve the lives of our citizens. Surely, as parliamentarians, we are here to make things better. We need the powers to tackle poverty in all its guises. Continuing with a union that is not fit for purpose is not the answer. It will not even begin to tackle the poverty that exists. Under the last Labour UK Government, when Gordon Brown was the Prime Minister, the gap between the rich and the poor increased. We know that the current Tory and Lib Dem coalition is out of touch—and no amount of deckchair shuffling today will improve that—but we also know that the Labour Government that was in power at Westminster last time round could not be trusted to deliver for the less well-off. Only independence can deliver for Scotland and the people. I warmly welcome today’s announcement of the referendum bill and I will campaign for a yes vote for a better Scotland. The programme that the First Minister announced today is ambitious for Scotland and I welcome the positive vision for the people of Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what recent representations it has made to the United Kingdom Government regarding the future of Clyde coastguard. (S4O-01149)

Representatives from the Maritime and Coastguard Agency and a cross-party delegation of members have just had a meeting, and I welcome the fact that the minister showed great interest in and support for the many issues that were raised. Does he agree that, in the light of the recent incidents on the Clyde, it is vital that the Clyde coastguard station remains open instead of being closed, as is planned? Will he write to the UK Government, pressing the case for it to ensure that there is a transitional period? I am convinced that that will highlight the folly of the UK Government’s proposals.

This is my first summing-up speech in my five years in the Parliament. I am delighted to close the debate on behalf of the Equal Opportunities Committee. The debate has been open, interesting and wide ranging, and it follows on from a debate last Thursday morning. I will try to capture much of what has been said but, before doing that, I will make a couple of points. The committee’s discussion of women and work in February was an excellent way of opening up the issue. I am sure that every member finds it abhorrent that major issues affect women in the workplace. My opinion is that the worst issue has been the lack of equal pay. The legacy of women receiving less money than men for doing the same or similar jobs is shocking. Nothing that I can say today will fully reflect my disgust with that situation. The point might have been addressed now, but how much money has been wasted by organisations defending the indefensible? My second point follows on from the debate that took place last Thursday morning. I am happy that today’s debate has not been a mirror image of that debate, but last week’s debate has helped to open up today’s debate. Some of the issues that were discussed last week are just part of the wider range of issues that the Parliament and the Equal Opportunities Committee need to look at. I am sure that we will do so in our future work. I will touch upon some of the points that were raised today and at the beginning of the process. When Elaine Dougall of the STUC women’s committee gave evidence to the Equal Opportunities Committee, she made the powerful statement: “Women bring diversity to an organisation.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 21 February 2012; c 247.] I think of the strong women in my family and how powerful they have been in shaping how the family went through life. I would not be half the person that I am if it were not for my mother and the strong direction that I got from her. It is extremely important for organisations to realise that women bring a totally different perspective on how an organisation could run and its decision-making process. Elaine Dougall’s comment was extremely powerful and when the committee is going through its inquiry, it should remember that comment at all times. Annabel Goldie’s contribution on the three reasons why she supports the inquiry tied in with that and I absolutely agree with her. When we do that piece of work, I am sure that the committee will be as one on many aspects of it. Clare Adamson, who was a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee in February, made an extremely powerful comment about the wider issues when she spoke in last week’s debate. She said: “It is far more fundamental and must involve us all embracing a cultural change in our society.”—[Official Report, 14 June 2012; c 10067.] That hits the nail right on the head and begs the question of how we forge a cultural change. Our society needs to take a genuine look at all the issues that have been raised today and more—working hours, stereotypes, childcare, the gender quota, women on the edge, as mentioned in Claudia Beamish’s powerful speech, welfare reform, working hours contracts—so that we can forge some type of cultural change. Various members touched upon working hours and contracts for flexible working. Clare Adamson mentioned that last week and at the committee meeting in February, and Margaret McDougall spoke about certain terms of equal pay. That is a very powerful argument and another issue that we need to look at. Again, various members touched on occupational segregation. I am also a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. At the committee’s meeting this morning, Fergus Ewing touched on occupational segregation and modern apprenticeships in the renewables sector. That was quite interesting, because he said that the focus is not just on boys doing engineering and girls doing something else. There is a genuine understanding of the issues in that regard. On Monday, I visited a school in Port Glasgow and had a lengthy chat on that issue with one of the teachers. Port Glasgow was traditionally a working-class area in the shipbuilding and engineering industries. We talked about how young people’s attitudes today are different from what they were 30, 40 or 50 years ago, as are the opportunities. Sandra White talked about modern apprenticeships. I am sure that everyone will welcome the women’s summit that will take place in September. Many members spoke about childcare. In evidence to the Equal Opportunities Committee, Anne-Marie Mackin of Play First (Scotland) Ltd made the powerful comment: “If the childcare issues were dealt with so that care was available for longer hours, was more responsive to family needs, was provided in the right locations and was either free or relatively affordable, that would deal with many of the other issues.” Obviously, there are positives. All members should warmly welcome the increase to 600 hours of free childcare a year under the forthcoming bill next year. I dare say that that measure will be welcomed, once it has been thoroughly scrutinised. Another issue that was raised was about welfare reform. Once again, Anne-Marie Mackin made a comment that I thought was bang on the money when she said: “I think that welfare reform might be the straw that breaks the camel’s back.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 21 February 2012; c 249, 261.] All members understand that welfare reform will have a detrimental effect on hundreds of thousands of people in Scotland, both male and female. However, given the issues of working conditions and childcare, welfare reform will have more of an adverse effect on women than on men. I am sure that we will consider that in our inquiry. There are positives. I warmly welcome the women’s summit in September and the proposed increase in nursery provision. The work on the living wage in Scotland is also welcome. However, I absolutely agree with Richard Lyle that we need to reassert our desire for improvement. As the father of two young daughters, I want them to grow up in a Scotland that is fair and equitable and in which they have exactly the same opportunities and chances as males. I want them to work hard, but I want them to have exactly the same chances and opportunities. I look forward to the inquiry with my colleagues on the Equal Opportunities Committee. I dare say that we will discuss the issue further in the Parliament.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to promote waste reduction and recycling. (S4O-01135)

Some local authorities have made significant improvements in their recycling rates, but it is disappointing that the amount of municipal waste that is sent for recycling by others, such as Inverclyde Council, is consistently below the Scottish average, even though they, too, have made steps forward to reach the target that is set out in the Scottish zero waste plan. What further targeted support can be given to local authorities to encourage them to improve their recycling levels?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it is providing to businesses in the west of Scotland. (S4O-01105)

The minister will be aware of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s inquiry into the Scottish Government’s 2020 renewable energy targets and the wide variety of evidence that we have received so far. According to the evidence, there are parts of Scotland that are not yet fully engaged in the job opportunities that will be available in the renewables sector, particularly the offshore sector. What actions has the minister tasked public agencies to undertake to ensure that every area—particularly areas in the west of Scotland such as Inverclyde and West Dunbartonshire—can get involved in creating jobs, apprenticeships and other opportunities in renewable energy? Will he agree to meet me to discuss the matter further?

I welcome the statement and its progressive nature. I am not surprised that the Conservatives do not welcome it, but I am extremely surprised that the Labour Party does not welcome it either and by its negativity once again. Organisations, such as the National Association of Estate Agents, have voiced support for a more progressive approach. What effect will the adoption of a progressive approach have on first-time buyers and, more generally, the Scottish housing market?

I warmly welcome the report and the cabinet secretary’s statement. As he is aware, energy efficiency and tackling fuel poverty are important for helping people to keep their homes warm and for bringing down carbon emissions. How is the Scottish Government going to work with the newly elected local authorities to build on the measures that he announced in his statement?

As one of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee members who scrutinised the bill, I am happy that it will provide an improved framework and experience for all stakeholders. In the stage 1 debate on 14 March, I highlighted my “sense of trepidation” at the beginning of the bill’s progress through Parliament. However, the bill has been extremely interesting, in contrast to what Murdo Fraser said. I do not know whether he takes his view because he is a lawyer—the only lawyer on the committee. The bill has been extremely interesting and it is important, because it will bring an element of public and private life up to date. A number of issues were raised during the bill process. I took a particular interest in the automated registration of title to land system and the use of information technology under part 10. In this day and age, there is absolutely no reason whatever why the use of electronic means—or, to coin a phrase, electronic wizardry—should not be increased. In paragraph 103 of our stage 1 report, we suggested that the keeper should “consult and test widely” to get improved buy-in from the sector for e-registration. I am content that Registers of Scotland will undertake appropriate consultation and testing with stakeholders and end users in developing new or upgraded electronic registration systems. However, I reserve the right—I am sure that every member in the chamber would do the same—to challenge the Registers of Scotland if it does not undertake those actions. We all understand that public consultations sometimes do not get full backing. In listening to some of the evidence throughout the bill process, it was clear that there was a level of scepticism towards the keeper, particularly with regard to consulting and listening to practitioners. I hope that the process of consultation and testing will continue once the bill is enacted. I am sure that an improved dialogue will take place, and I hope that the end user will obtain a better experience. A key aim of the bill is to bring land registration into the 21st century. However, a further key aim is to use land registration as an economic driver, as the minister highlighted earlier. The SPICe briefing for today’s debate highlighted the challenge that we as a Parliament face in progressing registrations. There are 2.6 million units of property in Scotland, of which 55 per cent have switched to the land register, and 21 per cent of Scotland’s land mass is on the register. That has come about since the Land Registration (Scotland) Act 1979 was passed. The bill will have a positive effect on the number of registrations, and on the percentage of land mass that is registered. However, I hope that the Parliament will return to various land registration issues in the future. Patrick Harvie mentioned compulsory registration, which the minister indicated that he does not wish to include in the bill. I agree with the minister’s comments on the economic potential of the bill and the economic driver theory behind it. However, future Governments will need to continue to scrutinise the progress of land registration. If that happens, the land register will indeed be completed. The Parliament has not undertaken much post-legislative scrutiny since it came back into being because it has had so many other issues to deal with. However, regular scrutiny would allow future Governments the opportunity to act swiftly if the bill’s aims were not being achieved. I will back the bill tonight, and I thank my colleagues on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee for the way in which they have scrutinised it. I also thank the clerking team, the SPICe team, the committee adviser and the witnesses who gave evidence to the committee. I have enjoyed the bill process, and I have learned a tremendous amount. I am sure that when the bill is enacted, it will bring about an improved level of land registration. I am convinced that we will reach the 100 per cent registration target in future.

Does Annabel Goldie agree that it should not be about just the next five years, but that there should be continual scrutiny by future ministers to ensure that we reach the 100 per cent target?

Many young people do not go into post-16 education. How will the Scottish Government identify them, and what are the procedures for offering them training under the opportunities for all initiative, in Inverclyde and in each of the local authority areas in the west of Scotland?

When I was listening to Claudia Beamish’s closing comments about Italian, I was taken back to the time when I studied in France and Germany. As a vegetarian at the time, I have to admit that I found living in those two countries—I also studied in Sweden—a bit of a challenge. I am delighted to be taking part in the debate not as a member of the Education and Culture Committee but as someone who has studied and, indeed, struggled with languages. Although I have come close to tears of despair with them, I felt elated when a lecturer told me that I could now speak French. I whole-heartedly support the motion in the name of the minister. My only sadness is that such a motion was not one of the first debated by the Parliament back in 1999, long before either the minister or I were elected. I warmly welcome the debate and the report published by the languages working group. As we have heard, languages are vital to the economic wellbeing of the country and to the wellbeing of individuals. Languages help to broaden horizons and we need more of that. Some people may think that learning languages is a middle or upper-class activity that is far removed from the skills that matter to people. I suggest that those who think that are far removed from reality and need a reality check. In fact, they are the proof of why we need more languages to be learned across the country. It is no longer an option to continue in the same way. We, as parliamentarians, are failing Scotland’s people if we do not consider our children’s future and economic prospects. I know that the situation will not change overnight or over the course of a parliamentary session. Introducing the 1+2 model over two years is welcome, and I warmly support that measure. However, changing many of the cultural thoughts of people who are against languages will probably take a bit longer than two parliamentary sessions. I could talk about this subject for hours, but in the generous six minutes that I have—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. In the time that I have, I have struggled to cut down some of my real-life experiences that show why languages matter but, towards the end of my speech, I will provide a couple of examples that show why they are relevant for people today. I grew up in a working-class family in Port Glasgow. My mother worked in school health for over 30 years before she retired. My father worked in the shipyards and then, after they closed, was unemployed for three years. He got back into work and worked in marine engineering until he passed away. My parents were traditional, working-class parents who never spoke languages, although they always encouraged me to. In third year, I picked German for my O-grade because my father was working in Germany at the time and I thought that I could help him with the language when he came home, every few weeks. As a result of learning German, I took part in a German exchange trip—Claudia Beamish also talked about exchange trips. I was 15 and 16 when I took part in that. One year the kids from West Germany came to Scotland, and the second year we went to West Germany. The whole experience had a profound effect on me, particularly when we went on a day trip to East Berlin. The effect that had on me was to prove that communism did not work—although that is a debate for another day. To have the opportunity to spend two weeks in a new country and pick up even more of the language was wonderful. The experience of waking up one morning after having a dream in German was one of those moments that helped to shape me as a person. I realised that I was good at the language, I understood a lot of it, and I appreciated, over that period, that the German people were just like me. There was no reason why we should not be able to work together to form a better future.

Absolutely—I could not agree more. I will make a point later in my speech that highlights why it is important for people in Scotland to learn more languages. My journey through learning languages was never easy. When I got a 1 for my O-grade German, I thought that I had an aptitude for the language—indeed, I did. However, my two hours of higher German on Friday afternoons was tough going and I struggled with it. I did not apply myself as much as I should have, and I failed it. Undeterred, I went on to college and university and completed my honours degree in European business management with languages—I studied French and German. I went on to obtain an MBA European. On both courses I had the opportunity to study abroad: in Toulouse—I will speak to Maureen Watt about Toulouse later—and Dortmund during the undergraduate degree, and in Angoulême and Ronneby, in Sweden, during the MBA. The MBA course was all in English, so members may ask why it is relevant to this debate. It demonstrates precisely the reason why we need to improve our language skills and capabilities. How many lecturers in Scotland would teach a class—other than a language class—in another language? Probably very few would, yet that is exactly what happened in Sweden and in France, which, as you all know, is fiercely proud of its language and promotes and protects it in equal measures. The thing about Sweden that really impressed me was the ease with which the lecturers would switch from Swedish into English and back again. The students would read business textbooks in English so that nothing would be lost in translation, and the discussions and debates would also take place in English. Marco Biagi spoke about speakers of other languages having a head start. That is exactly what we are talking about. When it comes to languages, other countries such as Sweden are a long way ahead of us. If we want to fully compete with other countries, we should look at models such as those in the Scandinavian countries. I am conscious of time, but I want to give two real-life examples of why languages matter and are important to people. IBM in Greenock has an international customer call centre. Some years ago, I worked for IBM. Part of my job involved dealing with colleagues in that centre. People from all over the world worked there, including Scots, but when it came to languages, they were very much in a minority. There are language-related job opportunities in Scotland, not only with IBM but with many other companies. My second example relates to football and it goes back to Kevin Stewart’s point. The Hearts team that won the Scottish cup on Saturday has a Portuguese manager. Rudi Skácel, who scored two goals, is from the Czech Republic. In the old Czechoslovakia, Russian and German were taught rather than English. People come to this country to play football. For them, it is an opportunity to improve their language skills and to enhance their economic opportunities.

The disruption to the Gourock to Kilcreggan ferry service is not only affecting naval base staff; it is affecting national health service staff, who are struggling to get to work at Inverclyde royal hospital, due to the infrequency of the service. Will the minister ask Audit Scotland to investigate the tendering process, as the running of the service is clearly not delivering for passengers?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, given the millions of pounds-worth of investment from the SNP Government in housing, regeneration, ship building and new schools—to name just four examples—it would do the current Labour-Conservative coalition in Inverclyde Council no harm to welcome that positive investment, instead of constantly undermining efforts to improve the area?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made with the refresh of the Scottish tourism strategy. (S4O-00911)

I am pleased that the Scottish Government is taking further action to improve tourism in Scotland, but concerns have been raised with me about the lack of representation of sports governing bodies on the tourism leadership group. As I am the convener of the cross-party group on recreational boating and marine tourism, I fully understand the huge part that sport has to play in any future tourism strategy. What steps are being taken to ensure that sports governing bodies are being afforded a say on the tourism strategy?

We have heard how important energy transmission is and will continue to be for Scotland’s economy. It is clear that energy generation is an integral part of Scotland’s economy and will become more so in the years ahead. Furthermore, the carbon emissions targets set by the Scottish Government, the UK Government and the EU mean that clear and distinct challenges lie ahead. I believe that we will be successful in achieving the targets, but we need to give ourselves every opportunity to do so. The current charging regime is clearly not fit for purpose—a phrase that I am not prone to using very often, as Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee members know. The current charging regime has been used for some time and electricity generation has advanced and changed from the traditional generating methods. More renewable energy is generated and consumed and more is in the pipeline. The current infrastructure is in need of investment to ensure that it can deal with increased supply. In order for Scotland to fully capitalise on that required investment while creating more employment opportunities and reducing its carbon emissions, it needs to use every opportunity at its disposal. We currently operate in a GB market and cross-border working is something that will continue when Scotland achieves its independence. Given the targets that have been set, and bearing in mind that Westminster needs Scotland to deliver more than our per-head-of-population share for the UK Government to reach its overall target, it should be inconceivable that a new mechanism may well be introduced that continues to make that challenge even greater. That is not to say that Ofgem has not moved ground; it clearly has, and I welcome that progress. I fully appreciate that those who work in Ofgem have a difficult task and may well feel at times as if they are getting battered from all sides, but the role that they have to play is crucial. Ofgem appears to have ruled out the postage stamp approach across GB by saying that it would add an extra £25 to £30 to consumer bills in Scotland. With fuel poverty on the rise due to various factors, including energy prices, the last thing that anyone wants to do is force more people into fuel poverty. However, the debate about location versus usage is changing as a result of the proposals that have been made so far. Ofgem’s preferred proposal of an improved ICRP has certainly not been rejected by Scottish Power or Scottish Renewables, although they preferred the postage stamp model of operation. They could work with Ofgem’s proposal, although improvements would still need to be made. On the specific point regarding the different solution that is proposed for islands in the north of Scotland, I note from the Scottish Renewables briefing that members were sent in advance of the debate that the organisation queries the Ofgem proposal’s consistency with the renewable energy directive. I have sympathy with the argument from an equality perspective. I urge Scottish Renewables and any other interested organisation to examine the equality legislation, if they have not already done so, as I believe that the proposals for the islands will certainly not generate a level playing field for generators or for those who are seeking opportunities in the industry. Scottish Renewables reported that, under the ICRP model, proposed renewable electricity developments on Scottish islands would become uneconomic. It suggests that 1.2GW of projects—a frightening figure—would not proceed. I firmly believe that any other country that had the massive potential that Scotland has would be bending over backwards to develop it. The economic boon—not to mention the positive environmental impact—would be a tremendous boost in these times. Ofgem is moving in the right direction as progress appears to have been made, but there is still some way to go. I urge every member to work to ensure that Scotland obtains the full economic boost—not to mention the clean energy and the reduction in carbon emissions—that renewables can bring.

I welcome today’s debate. I will support the motion at 6 o’clock with the full understanding that doing so will bring the Parliament closer to the position that I wish for it, namely that of a normal, independent Parliament. It is obvious that members and parties across the chamber will vote for the LCM for different reasons. Some will do so because they see it as limiting our ambition and opportunities, while others will do so because they see it as a step in the right direction towards independence. I do not doubt that some people have suggested in the past that devolution will kill independence stone dead. However, we on the SNP benches know that that is not true. Others should appreciate that the demand for independence is not decreasing. However, the Scotland Bill that is going through Westminster is a missed opportunity—of that, there is no doubt.

That is quite rich coming from a Labour Party member who earlier talked about socialism and all his socialist ideals. I do not see much socialism from the Labour Party these days. The Scotland Bill will be out of date, as the Prime Minister has already promised more powers if Scotland votes no in 2014. That jam tomorrow or on-a-promise suggestion from the Prime Minister is just incredible. Those who were involved in the 1970s devolution campaign will remember the promise then from Sir Alec Douglas-Home, who promised a better deal if Scots voted no to devolution. What Scotland obtained was certainly not a better deal: 18 years of Tory misrule that decimated shipbuilding, mining, engineering and steel communities the length and breadth of Scotland. David Cameron made a very interesting statement in his speech of 16 February this year when he was up in Edinburgh: “When the referendum on independence is over, I am open to looking at how the devolved settlement can be improved further. And yes, that means considering what further powers would be devolved.” It was disappointing that the Prime Minister did not provide any further details on that suggestion. After questioning, he seemed to backtrack immediately by saying that the independence issue needed to be dealt with before how “to improve the devolved settlement” could be considered and discussed. It was not that that was going to happen, but that it could happen. The Prime Minister’s Tory on-a-promise suggestion may not happen at all. The people of Scotland will not be hoodwinked in 2014, but I am sure that they will welcome the further powers that are coming to Scotland through the Scotland Bill. Not only are the borrowing powers that are coming to Scotland additional powers for the Scottish Government, they will provide it with the flexibility to deal with employment and infrastructure opportunities. However, the bill is a missed opportunity for a variety of reasons, one of which involves the Crown estate. As there is a members’ business debate on that issue after this debate, I do not intend to say too much about it. I have no doubt that the next debate will cover a lot, but we should consider the wider support for the devolution of the Crown estate from, for example, the Scottish Affairs Committee in the Westminster Parliament, the Lib Dems, who proposed a related amendment to the Scotland Bill in 1998, the Calman commission and both the Scotland Bill Committees of this Parliament. It is therefore perfectly reasonable to regard the Scotland Bill as a missed opportunity for the devolution of the Crown estate. Earlier this afternoon we debated project transmit, and some wider energy issues were touched on during that debate. We all know and understand the huge economic opportunity that energy policy presents for Scotland. We also know that offshore developments will play a major part in achieving the renewables targets of Scotland, the UK and the EU. The Crown estate plays a crucial role in that regard. I commend the Scottish Affairs Committee for its report in which it highlighted that rights to the sea bed and out to 200 nautical miles should go to Marine Scotland. The report stated that that body should oversee the management and use of the sea bed. It is just a shame that the UK coalition Government of Lib Dems and Tories did not see the need to transfer those powers to the Scottish Parliament, despite the fact that they have supported that proposal. I am proud to be an SNP member of this Parliament and I look forward to our agreeing to the LCM tonight, not because it is the end of the process but because it is a step closer to our destination of independence. So far, the debate has been typical. Mr McLetchie is not here at the moment, but he said in his usual Tory fashion that he wanted to limit Scotland’s ambition and opportunities. We heard the total hypocrisy of the Lib Dems and their long, drawn-out home rule process—whatever that will be and whenever it will happen. Labour has managed to make a positive advance for the Parliament appear to be a retrograde step. The bill will be out of date by the time that it receives royal assent. The people of Scotland will not be fooled again by the Tory Prime Minister offering jam tomorrow without telling us what the ingredients are. By autumn 2014, the people of Scotland will have the opportunity to decide for themselves exactly what they want for their nation—continued limitation of ambition in the union or responsibilities and being a normal independent nation.

Does the minister agree that it is short-sighted of the Labour and Tory-led Inverclyde Council to reduce the number of welfare rights officers from 18 full-time officers and one part-time officer to 13 when unemployment issues are affecting all age groups and especially when there is increased demand for the services provided by welfare rights officers?

16. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the review of the provision of maternity services in West Scotland. (S4O-00874)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of a previous public campaign, created in Inverclyde, in support of the retention of the community maternity unit at Inverclyde royal hospital. Does she agree that the CMU is an important cog in IRH’s future and that removal of the birthing unit is not inevitable or desired? Will she meet me to discuss the issue?

We have heard much of what the member has to say, we have read the proposals in Labour’s amendment and we have seen what has happened since the Welfare Reform Act 2012 was passed. Does Ken Macintosh agree that it is shortsighted and will have a detrimental impact on the people of Inverclyde for the Labour-Tory Inverclyde Council to cut the number of welfare rights officers from 18 full-time officers and one part-time officer to 13 at a time when even more demand will be placed on them by those who seek their advice?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am sorry but it is about Inverclyde. Gavin Brown was talking about whatever it is he was talking about, because I got lost—

Ken Macintosh sideswiped my question earlier. Is Gavin Brown delighted that as a result of the deficit reduction policies of his party in power in London, there will be fewer welfare rights officers in Inverclyde to deal with the effects of the deficit reduction policies?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I declare that my wife works part-time for Caledonian MacBrayne, but is permanently based in Gourock. Scotland’s ferry network has been used as a political football for many years; indeed, we can trace all this right back to the long-running saga of the Gourock to Dunoon route, which predated the Parliament’s establishment. Now we have the debate over the Lochboisdale to Mallaig route which, as we have heard, was abolished in 2001 by the Labour-Lib Dem Scottish Executive. Although I am greatly interested in the economic arguments that have been made this morning, I believe that Scotland needs to get to grips with its ferry network once and for all. I am not going to stand here and propose the perfect solution for our network or, more particularly, speak to the lack of a Lochboisdale to Mallaig route that is highlighted in the Labour motion. However, Scotland needs a sustainable, robust and affordable network—which does not necessarily mean that there should be no subsidy—and I am confident in the approach that was taken by the Scottish Government in the ferries review in 2009 and that the draft plan, which was published in December and is still out for consultation, is correct and should continue. I agree whole-heartedly that MSPs—constituency and regional—have a right to campaign on behalf of their constituents—after all, that is why we are here. It is imperative, particularly during a consultation period, that we lobby on behalf of constituents and communities and that we put forward a strong and balanced case. The motion mentions the “economic need” for a new Lochboisdale to Mallaig ferry service. I do not doubt the ability of MSPs from all sides of the chamber to progress economic arguments for many things, nor do I doubt the ability of outside bodies to do the same, but I know from experience—I am sure that others do, too—that the economic argument can be the hardest part of a case to make, regardless of what the issue is. For rural and smaller communities, the economic argument can be that bit harder to make. When it comes down to a business decision, the numbers need to stack up. We all have projects that we think, for a number of reasons, it is vital to progress, but ensuring that the numbers work is key to getting to the next stage. I stress that I do not for one minute dispute the economic argument that has been pursued this morning but, as we know, our belts have been tightened as a result of budget cuts from Westminster. Those cuts have put added responsibility on ministers and the Scottish Government to ensure that they get the best economic returns for their expenditure. I am sure that, across the chamber, we all wish that we had more money to spend on projects. I know that the demands that have come from some quarters in the recent past would require more than £1 billion of extra expenditure, but no indication has been given of where that money would come from. The Government and Parliament need to deal with the reality that less money is coming to us. I am sure that the Labour Party or individual Labour MSPs will have contributed to the consultation exercises that have been held so far. If they have not, they still have time to contribute to the consultation on the draft ferries plan before it closes at the end of next week. I am sure that they, along with others, wish for a comprehensive ferries strategy that covers the country. From a West Scotland perspective, I hope that more shipbuilding work will come to Port Glasgow, and I will certainly lobby the Government for that to happen. The recent announcement of the £20 million order for the world’s first two hybrid ferries for Caledonian Maritime Assets Ltd was excellent news, which will help employment prospects in Inverclyde. The draft ferries plan shows an exciting future for the ferry network, with newer ferries being required to replace older vessels, as well as the prospect of new routes. That opens up further opportunities in Inverclyde which, as we all know, builds first-class vessels of which all Scotland can be proud. After the loss of orders in the past—before 2007—for Scottish fisheries protection vessels and for some CalMac ferries, I am glad that the tide has begun to turn. I am sorry for the pun. It has been an interesting debate and I commend Labour for bringing it to the chamber, but I support the Scottish Government’s amendment, because we need a robust ferries review and a more robust network around Scotland.

Renewable energy presents an opportunity to reindustrialise all Scotland. Can the minister give details of how shipyards on the Clyde have the potential to benefit, bearing in mind our world-renowned heritage of Clyde-built ships?

As one of the non-lawyers on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, it was with a sense of trepidation that I started out on my journey through scrutiny of the bill. At the informal briefing session that we had before our scrutiny began, the bill was described as largely technical, but when we went through it, a number of issues were highlighted, none of which was merely technical. We have already heard about section 108, and I warmly welcome the minister’s comments on that in his opening speech. He and other members touched on the issues that are highlighted in the committee’s report. I am sure that the constructive approach that we have seen so far in the committee will continue. The bill is welcome because it will update the land registration process. I agree with Murdo Fraser’s comments on those who have participated in the bill process, and all who have assisted the committee. I particularly thank Ken Reid, the committee’s adviser, who managed to put some technical terms into layman’s terms for the benefit of the non-lawyers on the committee. One area of the current system in which deficiencies have been highlighted is the automated registration of title to land system. We were told in both written and oral evidence that that system is clunky, is deemed to be inefficient and difficult to use, and is not well used. Given that the purpose of the bill is to ensure that more of Scotland is on the land register, the technical issue with the ARTL system needs to be resolved. The committee whole-heartedly supports the proposal to allow e-registration as that should make registration easier and more accessible. However, if the ARTL system is not improved, the policy will face technical difficulties. The sector has already bought into the idea of e-registration despite the fact that there has not been much take-up. To ensure that the buy-in is carried through, the keeper needs to carry out widespread consultation and testing. As someone who worked in the information technology sector for a time some years ago, I understand that technology and software rapidly become out of date when they leave the factory. As a result, futureproofing any IT system is a tough challenge, irrespective of the sector for which it is designed. It is imperative that systems are designed with input from those who will use them, and that is particularly true in the area that we are discussing today. Furthermore, I am sure that the financial benefits of such a system will help both the sector and the end customer—the individual who is buying or selling a property. I have focused my contribution on the issue of the ARTL system because of my background in the IT sector, which meant that I could understand it easily, and because of the importance of e-technology to the Scottish economy. The bill represents an opportunity to bring Scottish land registration into the 21st century, and e-technology can play a massive and major part in making that happen successfully.

Does Rhoda Grant agree that not just rural areas but urban areas outside the cities play an important part in tourism?

I think that members will all be surprised that it took George Adam 20 seconds to mention Paisley. We have heard some excellent contributions from members on all sides of the chamber, and the debate has highlighted that we can unite as one from time to time. That does not preclude members from highlighting particular issues in their own area, which is the reason that we are here. As we all know, this is Scottish tourism week, and it is an ideal opportunity to highlight what we have in the areas that we represent. I will put in a plug for the area that I stay in: Inverclyde. Most—if not all—members in the chamber will have visited Inverclyde last June, and will have seen how beautiful an area it is. The location is perfect: it is a gateway to Argyll, the airport is just 15 minutes up the road, the largest city in the country is just half an hour up the road and Ayrshire is just down the coast. Inverclyde is truly blessed. About three years ago, a group called Discover Inverclyde was established to start to market Inverclyde, because so little had been done in the past. The economic situation has helped no one in the country, but if members, people who are in the public gallery or any readers of today’s Official Report are interested or want to find out more about Inverclyde, they can go online at discoverinverclyde.com. I will also mention water-based activities. I chair the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on recreational boating and marine tourism and was delighted that the minister mentioned sailing in his opening speech. I urge members to contact me and I will send them a report that the cross-party group in the previous session of the Parliament published 12 months ago when it was being closed prior to the election. The report highlights many things, but one that members may not be fully aware of is the economic value of marine-based activities to Scotland. In 2008, Sail Scotland published a document that estimated that recreational boating and marine tourism provided an economic benefit in excess of £250 million per annum, supported more than 1,800 full-time equivalent jobs and indirectly supported another 7,900 jobs. Much of that activity will be small businesses in urban and rural settings. That means that the sector is rich, diverse and assists our communities, particularly small communities. In the previous session of the Parliament, three Government reports were published that provided an indication of how important our coastline is from a tourism and employment perspective. In July 2009, the Scottish Government published a report entitled “Technical Report: Economic Impact of Recreational Sea Angling in Scotland”—the Scottish Sea Angling Conservation Network is a member of the cross-party group. The report indicated that sea angling contributes some £140.8 million to the economy and provides 3,148 full-time equivalent jobs, which is estimated to represent some £70 million in wages. Sea angling can, and does, take place across the country. Those who are involved in it travel, sometimes stay overnight and even drink in bars and restaurants. That is not to mention the cost of getting there and of the equipment that they use. Not having sea angling would hamper many smaller communities in the country. The second report was “The Economic Impact of Wildlife Tourism in Scotland”. It was published by the Government in May 2010 and gives us a flavour of the economic impact. I will give members a few of the key points from it. The net economic impact of wildlife tourism is around £65 million and it supports around 2,760 full-time equivalent jobs. It is estimated that £276 million is spent on the 1.12 million trips that are made each year to, or within, Scotland to view wildlife, with 75 per cent of that money being from tourists from within the UK. The third and final report is “Sailing Tourism in Scotland”, which was published by Scottish Enterprise and HIE in February 2010. The sector greatly appreciated that report, as it was the first time that official statistics on it had been collated or produced. Some key information from the report is that sailing tourism accounts for £101 million and supports 2,700 full-time equivalent jobs throughout the country. Non-Scottish boat owners contribute a total of £27 million. The sector has grown over the past 15 years, and new marinas are opening. For example, the James Watt dock marina opened last year in Greenock and hosted the Greenock leg of the tall ships race. There is also investment from the MalinWaters programme. Those reports highlight only part of the massive economic impact that the sector has in Scotland. The marine-based activities that I have mentioned are not the only ones. There are also subsea activities, canal boating, windsurfing, canoeing, kayaking and waterskiing to name only a few. That is not to mention the huge influx of cruise ships, which Tavish Scott spoke about a few moments ago. He mentioned the 36,500 passengers who dock at Lerwick. That represents £1.3 million to that economy. This year, Greenock expects a 13 per cent increase on last year’s cruise ship passenger numbers. So far, 41 ships are booked, with a staggering 65,500 passengers coming to Inverclyde. It is estimated that one third of them will stay in the area; that has a massive impact on that economy I will lavish a wee bit of praise on a voluntary group called the Inverclyde tourist group. It has been in existence for 10 years and not one person from the group takes a penny. I organised a round-table event earlier this year with the Scottish Government, VisitScotland, Scottish Enterprise, Historic Scotland and Scottish Natural Heritage. If it was not for the Inverclyde tourist group, the folk who come off the cruise liners in Inverclyde would not see the benefits of the area. That group—and others like it throughout the country—deserves massive praise.

There will be outcome agreements with the new regional colleges. What does the cabinet secretary foresee that they will focus on initially, and will they be developed year on year?

We have just heard a speech of great courage and strength from Dennis Robertson. I am sure that he knows that every member is with him and his family. I apologise for being unable to stay for the full debate. Eating disorders are serious health issues that affect people from all walks of life. They are often misunderstood, are increasingly common, and are found more and more in demographics with which they are not traditionally associated. Their increasing incidence is accompanied by ever-improving understanding of them and rising rates of diagnosis, but there is still more that can and should be done. To establish some context, I will present some data on the prevalence of eating disorders in Scotland over the past few years. The information was provided to me as a result of parliamentary questions that I lodged last year. The figures that were given in response to written question S4W-02313, which was lodged last September, show that the estimated number of patients who consulted a GP or nurse regarding a potential eating disorder or related issue did not change much between 2003-04 and 2009-10. The number moved from 3,210 to 3,270. However, if the figures are broken down by age, we see that the most substantial increase in eating disorder consultations has been among Scotland’s young people. In fact, there was a 15 per cent increase in the number of patients aged 14 and under who sought help from a doctor and a 12 per cent increase among those aged between 15 and 25. On the face of it, that apparent rise in the incidence of eating disorders is concerning, but I am heartened by the fact that, more than ever, people are open to seeking and receiving the help that they need. In the past, the condition may have gone undiagnosed and the patient may have gone untreated. In large part, the long-term risks that are posed by eating disorders stem from the difficulties that sufferers and their families face in recognising and accepting the existence of a problem and seeking the appropriate help. It is worth noting that, in a recent study by the eating disorder charity Beat, more than half of the people who were asked said that they did not tell anyone about their eating disorder because they did not know how to talk about it. I hope that our participation in the debate demonstrates the Scottish Parliament’s commitment to helping to break the silence, so that when people with eating disorders find the courage to confide in someone, they feel understood and supported. Today, we are debating the motion that Dennis Robertson lodged. A couple of days beforehand, however, I lodged a similar motion, following which I got an e-mail from a Labour MSP’s researcher congratulating me on lodging the motion and on raising the issue in the Parliament and saying that it was something that should have been done a long time ago. I am happy that we are debating Dennis Robertson’s motion. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has seen a noticeable rise recently in the treatment of eating disorders across the healthcare spectrum. Charities such as Beat and the Scottish eating disorder interest group act as a vital link between sufferers, their friends and family, and the treatment that they require. Information from the parliamentary questions that I submitted showed that there was an increase in eating disorder patients being treated at all hospital types in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area between 2003 and 2010. That said, because of the veil of silence that still remains, eating disorders represent an area of health policy debate that does not receive as much attention as other areas, which is something that we hope to redress through eating disorder awareness week. To that end, understanding is key, and we can already see a growing awareness of symptoms, conditions and treatments in families, schools and the workplace, as well as an erosion of the stigma that, for too long, has been associated with eating disorders. I am confident that we will see support from members across the chamber for the various treatment centres and support organisations across Scotland. Indeed, I am sure that colleagues in the chamber would echo the thanks that I express to the national health service, the Scottish Government and the various eating disorder charities and support groups that continue to be perceptive of the needs of individuals and families affected by eating disorders. However, more still needs to be done.

6. To ask the First Minister how important offshore opportunities in the west of Scotland are in helping to meet the Scottish Government’s renewables targets. (S4F-00463)

I am delighted that the west of Scotland will play such an important role in Scotland achieving its renewables potential. I note that, this week, Conservative politicians made comments critical of the development of renewable energy. Will the First Minister offer my constituents in the west his reassurance on the Government’s commitment to renewables and that Tory scare stories will not affect people’s chances of gaining employment in that industry, which is vital for Scotland?

Once again, the Conservatives come to the chamber claiming to be the guardians of students in the college sector but I am sure that, at 5 pm, they will once again be found wanting. Not one person in the chamber this morning would wish to reduce the budgets for our further education establishments, but the Government needs to make tough decisions because the budget of the Parliament has been slashed by the UK coalition of the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats.

Normally, I would, but I have only four minutes. The Conservative and Liberal Democrat members of the Scottish Parliament will, of course, defend their colleagues in Westminster by saying that this reduction is necessary as a result of the shambles of the UK public finances that was inherited from the previous Labour Government. Listening to Liz Smith this morning, the message that I received was that the FE cuts in Scotland should be proportionate. She later mentioned the fear of future cuts. We also heard from her that the way to ensure that there are no further cuts is for students to pay instead of having free education in Scotland. I looked at the funding figures for the college sector going back to 1999. Then, £213 million and £4 million was spent on the resource and capital allocations respectively. In 2006-07, that had increased to £510 million and £88 million. Since 2007-08, the figures have increased until this year. However, as we all know, even though there were increases, that was never going to be enough for some in the chamber. Year after year, we heard and read of the complaints from some parties that the college sector was being short-changed, even though its funding allocation was increasing. The commitment to maintain student numbers should be welcomed across the chamber. The economic conditions in Scotland, across the UK and around the world, are difficult and, as a result, it is imperative that students who wish to attend colleges have that opportunity to improve their education, skills and employability. At the same time as maintaining student places, we have a welcome opportunity for college reform. I understand that change can be frightening to some, as they are unsure of what will happen. However, the current college sector was established some 30 years ago, under the then Conservative Government with the aim of creating more competition within the sector. That had the inevitable effect of creating duplication. It also created institutions where there has been a level of strife between management and the lecturers, with the result being that students do not always obtain the level of education that they deserve. The history of James Watt College in Greenock over the past 10 years bears that out. I remember taking part in a march and rally prior to the 2005 election in support of James Watt College and its students. Things settled down when the principal at that time left but, in recent weeks, lecturers have once again been on the picket lines and students have suffered. The strike has been suspended for two weeks for further talks, but the situation is one of great confusion and apprehension. I am conscious of time, Presiding Officer. The students and lecturers who have contacted me are raising issues not about the funding to the college but about how their college is being managed. James Watt College is one of the colleges that have reached a no compulsory redundancy agreement, as was mentioned by Anne McTaggart. That was signed last May and is due to expire in June. I have been informed that management sent out a letter in October, indicating that 29 senior lecturers will lose their positions, with 15 learning enhancement lecturer positions being created instead, obviously on reduced terms. Whether the issue is the funds that are going to colleges’ budgets or the money that colleges have themselves, we in the chamber should agree on how that money is managed. It should be managed efficiently and it should—

A couple of weeks ago, I met up with three representatives from a prison visiting committee, and was greatly interested in their comments and their passion and commitment to what they do. I appreciated their honesty when they said that they knew that the prison visiting committees system needed to be updated. There was a slight—I emphasise the word “slight”—touch of, “If it ain’t broke, why fix it?”, but in the main there was an understanding that an organisation that was created in the 19th century should be brought into the 21st century. They were not against change and were more than happy to play their part in it. Another point that they raised was their welcome of the introduction of an advocacy service. They said that it should have happened many years ago and they warmly welcome the cabinet secretary's determination to introduce it. They accepted that professionalising assistance in prisons can only be a positive step forward. I do not mind saying that I was extremely heartened by the generosity of spirit and time from the individuals I met, and by their determination to provide the best possible service. As the cabinet secretary knows, as a result, I wrote to him about the issues that were raised. I have had to consider what the right way forward is for the service and for services to prisons as a whole. I have had to ask myself whether the visiting committees should be scrapped. After all, they were established in the 19th century, and life today is different from then.

I will come to that point later in my speech. Life is different now from how it was in the 19th century. Prisons are different, inspection services are different, the services available to prisons are vastly improved and there is even more scrutiny of the situation for the returning prisoner. I am not so naive as to think that we will never need prisons or that any Government of any hue will solve the problem of the revolving-door prison population—that is, repeat offenders. If we, as a society, had the answers to those problems, we would have introduced them some time ago—obviously, we have not. As a result, we need to consider the range of services that are provided and think about who receives public money. Across the chamber this morning, we have been unanimous in our appreciation of the work that the prison visiting committees undertake. The cabinet secretary could not have been clearer in his comments or in his amendment. However, the amendment also states that there is a clear procedure for prisoners to utilise if they wish to complain—they can do so through the SPS complaints system. Further, the chief executive of the SPS is accountable to Scottish Ministers for the treatment of prisoners.

I am in the last minute of what is only a four-minute speech. Her Majesty’s chief inspector of prisons also carries out inspections. I do not think that any MSP, irrespective of the side of the chamber on which they sit, could argue that the HMIP reports are a sop to the Government of the day. The independence of HMIP and the reports it publishes may not always be welcomed by the cabinet secretary or his predecessors, but that is a strength of our system. I welcome the introduction of a further public consultation on the proposals, and discussing the timetable with the stakeholders is a positive step forward. I acknowledge what has been said about the 2005 report. However, to be honest, if it will take only a couple of months to get a longer-term system in place, I welcome that. I do not think that a delay of a couple of months should concern the chamber. I urge the Parliament to work to get this right for the future and I hope that there is regular scrutiny of whatever is implemented as a result of the consultation.

I commend Linda Fabiani for securing the debate and raising such an important issue in Parliament. I am sure that every member knows that when Linda gets involved in an issue, she is dedicated to getting a positive result. She will have my full support for this campaign. I chair the Parliament’s cross-party group on visual impairment. This issue has not come before the group in either this parliamentary session or the previous one, but I will certainly try to get it on to the agenda at future meetings. I was not aware of the VAT problem and the exemption for working dogs, so I was quite taken aback. Disability legislation has gone through the Westminster Parliament, and I can only imagine that the issue has slipped through the net. After hearing Dennis Robertson’s speech, I am a wee bit disappointed, to say the least. I did not think that there was anything sinister on the part of the Westminster Government, and I hope that the current coalition Government can work towards rectifying the situation. Any support for the issue from this Parliament would therefore be very welcome. As we have heard, a guide dog is very expensive, but it is essential. The definition of a working dog should be clarified. The current definition excludes guide dogs but includes working sheepdogs of any breed, gundogs and racing greyhounds. However, labradors, pointers, retrievers and greyhounds are excluded. There is an inequality in the current system. I appreciate that the UK Government cannot fix every problem, but I hope that it can look at the situation and establish a remedy. I also whole-heartedly welcome Jamie McGrigor’s contribution and I am sure that everyone in the chamber appreciates it too. We all realise that the Scottish Government cannot do anything about this issue because VAT is a reserved matter. I ask it to correspond with the UK Government to ask it to look at the issue and try to get to a satisfactory outcome. I am sure that that would be appreciated by and beneficial to all those concerned. I do not intend to take up my full allocated time, but I will bring the issue to the cross-party group on visual impairment. I ask the Scottish Government to contact the UK Government on the matter, and I hope that the UK Government can find a satisfactory solution to the problem. That would be massively beneficial to assistance dog organisations across the UK and to people who require a guide dog. Once again, I thank Linda Fabiani for bringing the issue to Parliament.

The consultation proposes to give the right to vote to all those living in Scotland who are on the electoral roll. I am from England—I was born in Barrow in Furness. Will the First Minister encourage all those in Scotland, no matter where they come from, to join the debate between now and 2014?

I congratulate Stewart Maxwell on securing this evening’s debate. I apologise at the outset that I will be unable to stay for the duration of the debate. I spoke in a similar debate on 5 June 2008. My recollection is that all the members who contributed were resolute in their support for the Holocaust memorial day commemorations and the Holocaust Educational Trust. In the motion, Stewart Maxwell mentions Katie McKenna and Dominic Bradley, two former students of St Ninian’s high school in East Dunbartonshire, who took part in the Holocaust Educational Trust’s lessons from Auschwitz project and who delivered the Parliament’s time for reflection on 18 January. Katie and Dominic provided a telling recollection of their experience, which I know that, in the future, they will look back on and appreciate even more. They also provided the exact reason why it is vital that today’s young people have the chance to learn about the atrocities of the past. We must not allow future generations to forget about those events.

I welcome that contribution from Jamie McGrigor. I have not been there, but if it is as he says, I certainly recommend that people go along. The lessons from Auschwitz project, which reaches across the whole of the United Kingdom, is an excellent initiative and certainly has a long-term future. I have been to Auschwitz. I was there in 2000 as part of an InterRail trip to eastern Europe. There were three camps at Auschwitz: the main one, Birkenau and Monowitz, which had been a munitions factory. In 1947, the new Polish Government decided to create the Auschwitz-Birkenau state museum. Everyone who has been to Auschwitz will recognise that that was an important decision and an important landmark in teaching people about the history of that location. I am sure that members will know that Auschwitz receives around half a million visitors every year from across the world. When I walked through the gates under the “Arbeit macht frei” sign, I had the strangest and most surreal experience—the first thing that I heard was people speaking German. Some German school pupils were there to learn. I recoiled for a few moments, but then I gathered myself and realised that that was a wonderful thing. Anyone who has been to Auschwitz—I hope that we will hear from members who have been there—will have their own story to tell about how the experience affected them and their thinking about some of the activities that go on in the world today. The first thing that people notice when they go into Auschwitz is the silence and the second is the terrible atmosphere. I would encourage everyone to go to Auschwitz or Dachau or any of the other camps that still exist. It is important that not only the present generation but future generations learn about the past and how cruel and callous the human race can be. Every member has a duty to ensure that education about the holocaust is never allowed to be removed from the curriculum. Knowing the people around me in the chamber and the parties that are represented in the Parliament, I do not expect that it ever will be, but we should continue to ensure that it forms part of the curriculum. I congratulate Stewart Maxwell on securing the debate, and I am sure that the Parliament will continue to be unanimous in its support for the Holocaust Educational Trust.

I invite the cabinet secretary to welcome Denmark taking over the presidency of the EU. Denmark and Scotland are both small European seafaring nations with a shared Nordic heritage and similar natural resources, one of which can take its place at the helm in Europe, while the other is denied the position of a normal nation.

I welcome today’s debate and the publication of the new cities strategy. I am sure that the strategy will be welcomed in Scotland’s cities, and I hope that the Parliament can unite behind the initiative. I have to express a wee bit of concern that there are no Lib Dems present this afternoon. Although they lost the votes in the cities last year—and the regions and towns—the document and initiative are things that Lib Dems should show an interest in. Unfortunately, they are not here to defend themselves. The creation of the Scottish cities alliance is long overdue. As a non-city dweller, one thing that has really annoyed and disappointed me over the years is the constant bickering between those who have led Glasgow and those who have led Edinburgh about which city is better. I am sure that there are arguments on both sides, but as a non-city dweller I found the discussion boring and tedious. It also belittled those two marvellous cities. I am delighted by the creation of the strategy and the Scottish cities alliance, and I welcome the fact that the six cities—not just the two—can work together to make their economies better and help Scotland to become better. As I said, the constant attacks detracted from Glasgow and Edinburgh’s successes and opportunities. I accept that some of that might have been a bit of banter between the two cities, but we have grown up and I welcome that. A successful Scotland needs its two largest cities to work together. I will talk about how the west of Scotland can benefit from the strategy, but first I want to talk about Dundee. I studied in Dundee, which is a marvellous city. Before I went, I had the impression that it was dour, drab and dreich, but I found it to be a wonderful city. The people are tremendous and very similar to the folk in Inverclyde, where I am from, and there is a range of things to do. Many people have come to live, work and study in Dundee, and it is a wonderful melting pot. I hope that the strategy will benefit the city. The cabinet secretary talked about the wider regional benefits of the strategy and touched on the question that Willie Coffey asked in Parliament last week. When she appeared before the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, Chic Brodie, Angus MacDonald and I made the point that we do not represent cities. We asked her how the strategy will affect the areas that we represent and whether funding for our areas will be reduced. The cabinet secretary gave an assurance, as she did today, that funding to our areas will not be reduced. I am happy to accept that. There are challenges to do with deprivation and poverty in the west of Scotland that are similar to the challenges in our cities. It is vital that the strategy is a success for the west of Scotland, and if Glasgow is a success, the west of Scotland can also be a success. I stay in Inverclyde, which many members visited in June. Many people from Inverclyde commute to Glasgow and elsewhere for employment. If there is more investment and collaborative working, I anticipate that there will be greater opportunities for people in Inverclyde, if not elsewhere in the west of Scotland. The strategy presents opportunities for the area. There has been huge investment in Glasgow during the past four years and more investment is planned, so I stress that business opportunities for the wider region should be actively promoted by the relevant Government agencies. However wonderful our cities are, not everyone wants to live in or put their business in a city. Members who visited Inverclyde last year will have appreciated the beauty and splendour of our area. Mark McDonald talked to me about the area and said that he thought that Inverclyde must have a massive tourism industry. That is unfortunately not the case, because there has been a lack of vision from many people who have led in Inverclyde over the years. I am glad to say that things are moving forward, but opportunities have been missed in the past. Inverclyde was decimated by the Tories when they were last in power and we have lost 20,000 people, who moved to find employment. However, many people have not given up. The people who stayed still have hope and aspire to make Inverclyde better. I recognised much of what John Park said in his excellent and thoughtful speech, because similar things have happened to the area in which I live. Drew Smith said that the Scottish Wildlife Trust talks about a “missed opportunity” in its briefing. I studied in Sweden and spent a lot of time in Stockholm, which is a stunning city. The Swedes are proud of the mix of green and built-up areas in the city. I gently remind Mr Smith that the Scottish National Party is not yet in power in Glasgow, so if he is questioning the lack of green space and parks in the city, he needs to look a bit closer to home. I whole-heartedly agree with what Sandra White and John Park said about community-benefit clauses, because we must ensure that there is community buy-in. Neil Findlay talked about a socialist Government. It appears that he has not read the memo from his current leader, Ed Miliband, who talks about responsible capitalism. If Mr Findlay wants to put in a bid, I am sure that the trade unions are listening.

Okay. I welcome the strategy and I look forward to the six cities progressing and communities in the west of Scotland benefiting from the strategy.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it provides to people who are facing the prospect of bankruptcy and insolvency. (S4O-00541)

The minister will be aware of the recent report by the accountancy firm PKF, which stated that 20,000 people will be declared insolvent in 2012. What further actions can the Scottish Government take to assist people who are declared insolvent? Does the Scottish Government have the full range of powers at its disposal to deal with both pre and post-insolvency issues?

4. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s assessment is of the economic impact on Scotland of the Prime Minister’s actions at the EU summit last week. (S4F-00345)

Given that the euro area accounts for some 42 per cent of Scottish exports and represents such a vital market for Scotland, does the First Minister agree with the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s statement in its report on trade from September 2010 that we should build on the existing network of Scottish Development International’s overseas offices and consider the Scotland house model that operates in Tallinn? Does he agree that that is one way in which to try to circumvent a Prime Minister who is not only isolated in his own party on Europe, but is trying to isolate the economic prospects of Scotland and all the other nations and regions in the UK?

I thank all the members who signed the motion, including Murdo Fraser, without whom the debate would not be taking place, as he was the first and only member from the Opposition parties to sign the motion. I congratulate the Greenock Telegraph on its campaign to highlight the inequality of petrol and diesel pricing that every vehicle driver in Inverclyde is facing. It is important to state that the Tele—the shortened name for the newspaper—did not launch the campaign because it wants petrol and diesel to be cheaper in Inverclyde than anywhere else, but because it believes that there is inequality in the pricing of petrol and diesel in Inverclyde and in nearby towns. This week, the newspaper is reporting that the average price of unleaded petrol is 132.9p a litre, and that the average price of diesel is 141.9p. It uses a couple of petrol stations outside Inverclyde to make daily comparisons, and the prices at those stations are regularly lower than those in Inverclyde. I know people who have stopped putting fuel in their cars in Inverclyde because they know that, if they buy it elsewhere, it will be that bit cheaper. That has a knock-on effect on the local Inverclyde economy, because those people purchase other products and services outside the area. In previous correspondence with companies that supply fuel, they have responded that they are pricing the fuel to be competitive in the local market. In studying economics, we are always told that competition works to reduce prices, and that if there are more suppliers, there is a better chance of the customer getting a better deal. I accept that theory, but it is not working for motorists in Inverclyde. Competition in fuel pricing does not appear to be working. I can understand when members who represent rural communities highlight the high price of fuel in their constituencies. I contacted some of my colleagues this week to ask for examples of fuel prices in their areas. Mike MacKenzie responded, telling me that a petrol station on the Isle of Coll is charging £1.71 for a litre of unleaded petrol, and £1.72 for a litre of diesel. I fully appreciate that the price of fuel in Inverclyde and other parts of West Scotland is not as high as it is in the Western Isles, Orkney, Shetland and parts of the Highlands. There remains an issue, however, with regard to the inequality of the prices. The Greenock Telegraph online reported on 22 July that fuel was 7p a litre cheaper in Ayr than in Inverclyde. I congratulate the people of Ayr on getting their fuel 7p a litre cheaper—well done to them—but that highlights yet again how flimsy the local-competition argument actually is. Within the past week, I have purchased fuel from two garages outwith Inverclyde. The first occasion was at Tesco in Helensburgh last Friday, and the second was at the Esso garage in Paisley yesterday, when I was on my way to Parliament. I noticed that the diesel in the Esso garage was 5p a litre cheaper than in Inverclyde, and that petrol was 3p a litre cheaper. Any purely economic explanation of those irregularities falls down. Scotland is an oil-rich nation, yet Scots are now paying among the highest fuel prices in Europe, and more than ever before. Rising oil prices are putting extra revenue into the United Kingdom Treasury. It is bad enough that Scotland does not see the benefit of its rich natural resources, but we also lack a structure to ensure fairness in relation to fuel duty. It is high time that some of the money that the Treasury rakes in was used to bring down and stabilise fuel prices in Scotland. This situation, more than anything, underlines the need for the fuel duty regulator for which the people of Scotland and the Scottish National Party have long campaigned. Last week, during our debate on the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s autumn statement, I mentioned the delay in introducing the 3p per litre increase that had been due in January. I welcomed the chancellor’s decision not to introduce the increase, and I do so again today. However, he has delayed it only until next August, so I encourage him not to introduce it then, either. Murdo Fraser also touched on that in his contribution to the debate last week. The 3p increase would be a retrograde step, whether it was done in January or August. We know that the economic conditions are not great and, in the light of today’s announcement of the latest unemployment statistics, I hope that the chancellor will realise that high fuel prices play a part in such figures. Inverclyde faces particular challenges. In an environment in which there is high unemployment, people can ill afford increased fuel bills, especially when the bills could hinder their trade or their route back into work. This morning’s announcement highlighted that there are 3,500 unemployed people in Inverclyde. That just goes to show the economic challenges that the area faces. Although the SNP Government is working to lower bills through the council tax freeze, the small business bonus scheme and the abolition of prescription charges, as well as trying to create opportunities to stimulate the economy and creating modern apprenticeships, Inverclyde motorists feel as if they are being ripped off at the fuel pump. There are knock-on effects on the wider Inverclyde economy.

The information that I have received on various supermarkets the length and breadth of Scotland, in rural and urban communities, suggests that there are variations in the prices that they charge. I do not fully comprehend their reasoning around having similar prices throughout the country. I am conscious of the time, so I will conclude. In the absence of any action from Westminster to introduce a fuel duty regulator, I want those powers to be devolved to this Parliament. Ultimately, the people of Inverclyde are really fed up of feeling as if they are being ripped off when it comes to fuel. The great Inverclyde petrol rip-off has sickened many people from the area, who have decided to buy their fuel elsewhere. Something needs to be done about it. I warmly welcome the Greenock Telegraph’s campaign for fair fuel prices. It is an excellent initiative and the newspaper deserves to be commended for it whole-heartedly. The people who work on the newspaper understand the harsh economic reality that Inverclyde’s motorists are facing, as well as the wider economic challenges. I hope that the newspaper keeps the campaign going. I know that that service is warmly welcomed by everyone in Inverclyde.

The minister touched on this in his statement, but I would be grateful if he could provide further detail on the national benefits that will be gained through this power line in relation to the potential for further economic growth.

Does Gavin Brown agree that it is strange that it takes the OBR 18 months to realise that the strategic deficit is worse than planned? What has it been doing for the past 18 months?

In households in the west of Scotland, and across Scotland, budgets are being squeezed more than ever, especially at this time of year. Rising fuel and food prices are constantly on the minds of businesses and households alike. Last year, the Greenock Telegraph started its petrol and diesel watch campaign, which provides a great service to Inverclyde and the surrounding communities by printing the price of fuel at filling stations throughout Inverclyde and the neighbouring towns on a daily basis. As members will know, I have lodged a motion on this issue and, following the vote tonight, I am hoping to have a member’s business debate on it next week. Last week’s decision not to introduce the 3p increase on fuel duty was welcome. However, the chancellor is still committed to introducing it next August, and there is much more to be done to encourage him not to do so. Welcome though the delayed introduction—and, I hope, postponement—of the fuel duty increase is, it represents a short-term fix in an area that requires fundamental restructuring. People in Scotland have long campaigned for a fairer fuel duty regime, and the SNP has led calls for the establishment of a fuel duty regulator. Unfortunately, those calls have been rejected time and again in Westminster. We all know that the European economic situation is not in good shape. We read and hear daily of the increasing difficulties facing the European economies. Last week’s downgrading by the OBR of growth forecasts over the coming three years made it clear that the UK Government’s actions so far are just not working. Capital projects help to stimulate jobs and economies, but the chancellor’s autumn statement last week was a missed opportunity for Scotland. An expanded £2 billion of capital infrastructure expenditure in Scotland to help offset the 32 per cent real-terms cut to Scotland’s capital budget would have provided a good opportunity for the chancellor. As the cabinet secretary said, every £100 million invested in capital generates £160 million and 1,400 jobs in the wider economy. That kind of investment is even more vital in the current economic climate. A theme is now well established, however. When action is required, the UK Government is lethargic, and when it sees fit to act, it does so using broad strokes that are ill tailored to Scotland. Last week’s announcements did not break with that tradition. Until the people of Scotland have full control of their own affairs, we will be forced to await such announcements from the chancellor with more than a little trepidation, year after year, knowing that despite the Scottish Government’s best efforts, Westminster can continue to ignore and undermine proposals that are in the best interests of Scotland.

As Gavin Brown knows, the full economic powers still lie with Westminster. This Parliament does not have the full range of economic powers to deal with these situations better. While the Scottish Government continues to take positive action to provide security for the people of Scotland by freezing council tax, abolishing prescription charges and protecting concessionary travel, the Westminster coalition pays little attention to Scotland. The coalition continues to squander billions on nuclear weapons, it has decided to keep the rate of VAT for building repairs and maintenance work at 20 per cent instead of reducing it to 5 per cent, and one week after the announcement in the UK Parliament, this Parliament is still waiting to hear what the consequentials actually are. It is little wonder that the people of Scotland are increasingly of the opinion that the UK Government’s one-size-fits-all approach to fiscal policy does not suit Scotland as much as the Westminster coalition would like us to believe.

I think that Mary Scanlon knows that that is a factually inaccurate question. Willie Rennie said that households in Scotland know the challenges that face our economy. I whole-heartedly agree with that comment, but I also know that the people of Scotland are aware of the economic potential of our country and that, if we ran our own affairs, we would improve Scotland’s economy compared with what Willie Rennie would like to continue. Scotland is already the most competitive environment for business in the UK, and the enormous and increasing investment from companies such as Dell, Amazon and Doosan comes as no surprise to those who want nothing other than to see Scotland flourish. I am conscious of the time, so I will conclude by touching on one other point. John Pentland spoke of increasing borrowing. I agree with him that the UK borrowing level is way too high, but I suggest that he looks at the House of Commons table of borrowing figures. It shows that, under Labour, central Government gross debt was 49.3 per cent of GDP in 1997. It went down to 38.5 per cent in 2003, which was a good thing, but it was 77.2 per cent in 2010. I do not think that Labour can say anything positive about debt and borrowing to this Parliament.

Does the member agree that if the Parliament had not agreed to squander £500 million on Edinburgh trams, some of the money could have been invested in upgrading the A9?

It was right to choose this topic for debate and I thank Iain Gray for bringing it to the chamber. His initial comments about the erosion of confidence, hope and bravado were absolutely correct and I know exactly what he was talking about when he said that, despite being polite and courteous, young people are still receiving rejection after rejection. In 1997, when I graduated from university with my second degree, I applied for well over 200 jobs and either did not get an interview or simply did not hear anything back from the workplace in question. Anne McTaggart referred to the challenge of putting together a CV and some of the online assistance that young people can access. Of course, the option of online support was not really open to people in 1997; instead, I was sent on a five-day course that could have been done in a day and a half. It was simply a means of getting people out of the way and was an absolute waste of time. Thankfully, things have moved on a bit since then. Eventually, I managed to secure short-term employment, which helped me to regain some of my self-belief, confidence and hope and allowed me to refocus my attention. Within a couple of months, I managed to get a position in IBM and remained there for two and a half years. I agree with many members that a great deal more needs to be done to tackle youth unemployment. However, it is not a new issue; it was an issue five years ago and it was an issue not only in 1997 under the UK Labour Government but during the 18 years of the Tories’ attempts to decry society. This challenge has been around for many years and I am sure that it will still be a challenge in 15 or 20 years’ time. Given the many valid points raised in Iain Gray’s motion, I hope that the Labour Party fully engages and tries to work with the Scottish Government on this year’s budget. The experience of last year’s budget was appalling. Even though Labour members were offered what they wanted, they voted against the budget and could not bring themselves to vote for the 25,000 modern apprenticeship places each year over the five-year period of the parliamentary session. Liz Smith spoke about the comments in the Willy Roe report and from businesspeople about young people not having the correct attitude. Last week, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee had a focus session on the tourism industry in Scotland, during which we once again heard that claim. Gavin Ellis from the Knockomie hotel—I hope that I pronounced that correctly—in Moray and Norman Springford from the Apex Hotels chain stated their belief that there is an issue with young people not having the correct attitude. Before Jenny Marra goes on the attack, I point out that I believe that young people want to work. With additional guidance and careers advice, some young people might have improved options and opportunities. If I had received additional guidance and assistance in 1997—and before that, when I was in school—I might have taken a different path in life. If businesses say that there is a problem, it is imperative that the Government, the new minister for youth employment—I welcome the announcement of that position—and public agencies discuss those concerns, find out whether there truly is an issue and, if so, deal with it. It is important to highlight the issue of apprenticeships. The Scottish Government is writing a requirement for apprenticeships into agreements so that funding creates employment. We have heard examples of that from the First Minister and other members, but I will mention another. A few weeks ago, the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment announced a £20 million order for Ferguson Shipbuilders in Port Glasgow to build the world’s first two hybrid ferries for Caledonian Maritime Assets Ltd. The order will safeguard 75 jobs and create up to 100 more, including 20 new apprenticeships. The ships will be the first to be built by Ferguson’s in more than four and a half years. The order has been warmly welcomed in Inverclyde, and particularly because of the apprenticeships. I firmly believe that the order provides Ferguson’s with a wonderful opportunity to make progress and I am sure that it will do so with great relish. I look forward to there being even more apprenticeships if Ferguson’s gets more orders. I will touch on funding for colleges. The NUS briefing highlights the importance of our colleges, as they provide a second or third chance and a route to more opportunities for people to help themselves. I know that that is the case because, although I worked hard at school, I could not study when it came to exams so, after school, I went to college and was there for three years before going to university. I know exactly the opportunities that colleges provide. I chose to study in Glasgow rather than at James Watt College in Greenock or Reid Kerr College in Paisley, which were closer to where I stayed. That was purely a life choice, as I wanted to meet people outside Inverclyde.

My final point is about the line in Labour’s motion that talks about the Parliament’s “significant powers”. Why should we limit our opportunities and chances to take Scotland forward and to provide better opportunities for younger people?

I hope that we in the Parliament can work together to tackle youth unemployment.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the joint ministerial committee on Europe. (S4O-00441)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that the EU will shortly embark on a review of state aid rules for shipbuilding. Will he press as strongly as possible the commercial shipbuilding opportunities that exist in Scotland, particularly the west of Scotland, and stress that, with an even playing field across Europe, there is no reason why Scottish shipbuilders cannot compete and thrive, and increase employment and training opportunities?

Rob Gibson touched on the Highlands. Does he agree that there are other areas of Scotland in which a high percentage of people work in the public sector and that the pension cash grab will reduce individuals’ spending in communities? It will certainly hamper the future of our communities and the economy in Scotland and elsewhere in the UK.

Will the member take an intervention?

I speak in this debate with a heavy heart. This week, campaigners for the Clyde maritime rescue co-ordination centre at Greenock heard the news that they and the Inverclyde community have been dreading: the Greenock base is to close. Parliament has debated the coastguard modernisation proposals on two separate occasions. The first time was a members’ debate led by Alasdair Allan in January, and the second was my members’ debate in June. I am glad that every party and every MSP who spoke supported maintaining coastguard facilities across Scotland. We all realised the folly of the proposals, because the coastline and Scotland’s internal waters are of paramount importance to the Scottish economy. More than that, we all know that no one can put a price on the saving of a life. I welcomed that unanimous support from Parliament and I hope that, come 5pm today, we can still speak with one voice to let Mr Penning and his department know that this Parliament values safety over coastguard cuts. I whole-heartedly support the 31 men and women who work in Greenock to deliver the full range of coastguard services. Their skill, expertise, understanding and local knowledge that cover 2,500 miles of Scottish coastline will be hard to replicate. It is vital to maintain the local knowledge of the men and women who serve at MRCC Clyde. Not until one considers the area and the population that MRCC Clyde serves does one realise how indispensable a first-hand understanding of the region and its coastline is to effective co-ordination. Some key facts need to be highlighted about the Clyde base: it covers some 2,500 miles of coastline in the west of Scotland; the area that it covers includes the UK’s busiest ferry routes, which carry 6.4 million passengers every year; it is on the flight paths for two of Scotland’s major airports, not to mention those of many smaller ones; and it covers the UK’s nuclear submarine fleet and weapons, which are based on the Clyde. MRCC Clyde is the busiest coastguard station in Scotland and the third busiest in the UK. Given that the nuclear submarine fleet is based on the Clyde, and given the growing number of cruise liners, which bring thousands of visitors to the west of Scotland every year, and the increase in the number of onshore and offshore renewables projects, added to the fact that approximately half the marinas in Scotland are located in the area that is covered by MRCC Clyde, we can only assume that the trend of rapid expansion in river traffic is set to continue. To render MRCC Clyde inactive would leave Scotland and, indeed, the UK without a mainland maritime rescue co-ordination centre between Holyhead and Aberdeen, with responsibility for the vast distance in between being distributed between Belfast and Stornoway. I welcome the fact that the Belfast and Stornoway centres will remain, as there were legitimate arguments for that, but I cannot understand why the Clyde base is to close. After listening to Mike Penning’s statement and his answers to questions on Tuesday, I was of the impression that he was totally out of touch with Scotland. Given that the Tories have only one member of Parliament for Scotland, he may think that he does not have much to lose in Scotland, and very little to lose in the north-west of England from the closure of the Liverpool centre. I would like to be wrong in making that assumption, and I hope to be persuaded that that is the case. I have listened to what has been said so far, and I will continue to listen. My support for the saving of MRCC Clyde has been resolute. I sent in a submission to the consultation, I attended the public meetings in Greenock and, at the march and rally in Greenock, I shared a public platform with the leader of Inverclyde Council, the newly elected MP for Inverclyde and a member of the Clyde coastguard staff who is a Public and Commercial Services Union member. Along with Duncan McNeil MSP, I met the First Minister and Greenock MRCC workers. In addition, I wrote to the First Minister of Northern Ireland to seek his support for the Clyde centre. The Northern Irish First Minister and our First Minister cannot both be wrong. They fully understand the importance of local knowledge and understanding in dealing with this vital public service. Saving MRCC Clyde and saving MRCC Belfast are not, in my opinion, mutually exclusive. The arguments to save both are absolutely sound. The additional burden that will be placed on the staff in Belfast will pose massive challenges, and I have every sympathy for them. They have not asked to be put in a near impossible position, but I believe that that is what they will find themselves in. I do not believe that the people of Northern Ireland, let alone the people of the west of Scotland, will receive the same quality of service that is currently provided. The dangers of the proposed closures are clear: they threaten to leave us with too few co-ordination centres, too few staff and a lot less local knowledge. In straitened times, certain cutbacks can be explained, but there is no reason to compromise safety and people’s lives unnecessarily. This Scottish Government has prioritised front-line services, wherever possible, above all else, and I am astounded that the London Government will not support a similar course of action. Ensuring the safety of our coastline and our inland waters is of paramount importance to save lives and to provide a strategic economic direction. Mr Penning’s decision underlines the fact that the UK Government does not consider our coastline to be of strategic importance, and it is now imperative that responsibility for the coastguard services is devolved to the Scottish Parliament with immediate effect. That way, we can work to provide the safety of Scotland’s people and its coastline that is required.

Does Alex Johnstone agree that closing the Clyde base, which is the busiest in Scotland and the third busiest in the UK, is not an acceptable proposal or the way ahead for the UK Government?

Will the member take another intervention?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to tackle dementia in West Scotland. (S4O-00408)

I would be grateful if the cabinet secretary could indicate whether there will be any set allocation of funds and resources from the preventative spend budget to tackle dementia in the next financial year.

We have heard a lot about regeneration strategies and about the urban regeneration companies, which I intend to address later in my speech. Given that we are in the midst of a real-terms reduction in capital funding from Westminster of 36.7 per cent between 2010 and 2015, the current funding strategies need to be examined, and I await with great interest the cabinet secretary’s announcement about the new regeneration strategy.

I will come on to that later in my speech. As I said, major cuts have been made to the Scottish Government’s budget. The debate highlights the limitations on the Scottish Government’s ability to borrow and on its financial powers and shows that the Parliament needs to be a normal independent Parliament if it is to be able to deal with the cuts that sometimes come this way. Regeneration takes many forms, as we all know, and we should recognise—whether we are talking about funding the URCs, building new homes, building and refurbishing schools, refreshing our town centres or building new health and other facilities—that it is not defined by any one thing. Two weeks ago, I was surprised to hear the Scottish Government’s announcement that it would cease Riverside Inverclyde’s funding at the end of the next financial year and reduce its funding allocation by £1.5 million to £2.5 million. I raised the matter with the cabinet secretary at the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, and I met him the very next day. He gave me an assurance that even with the new regeneration strategy, there will still be Government funds available for which RI can bid. Being given that assurance is better than being told that there will be nothing left at all, and nothing available.

No—I have taken an intervention, and you are going to listen to what I have to say. [Interruption.] I have already taken an intervention—you have taken up enough of my time. Yesterday, a meeting of Inverclyde Council’s regeneration committee took place. There were a few interesting points of note in the meeting papers. Paragraph 2.5 of one of the papers states: “Members will recall that CoSLA negotiated the transfer of local regeneration/economic development functions and the Business Gateway from Scottish Enterprise (SE) in 2008. As part of that deal, CoSLA secured an ongoing commitment in SE’s budget to at least £12.5 million annually for Urban Regeneration Companies (URCs) throughout two Spending Review periods”. I found that to be of great interest, as I spoke to somebody in the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and they informed me that that is not true: the commitment was for one spending round and not two. Either I have been informed incorrectly, or the papers that Inverclyde Council has published are factually incorrect. As a result, I have written to COSLA officially to establish the situation. The second point of note concerns the financial amounts that have already been provided to Riverside Inverclyde for its work. Between 2006 and the current financial year, the Scottish Government provided £25.3 million, with £2.5 million guaranteed for next year; Scottish Enterprise provided £13.9 million; and Inverclyde Council provided £13.1 million, with £4.7 million earmarked for the next two years. That is a massive £52.3 million already spent in Inverclyde solely through Riverside Inverclyde since 2006. In the Greenock Telegraph of 3 November, Duncan McNeil is quoted as saying: “Riverside Inverclyde has only just begun its mission to attract jobs and business to the area, and it appears the Scottish Government is pulling the rug from under their feet.” If Mr McNeil—

I will go on with my point first. If Mr McNeil actually believes that comment—and I dare say that he does—it just goes to show the state in which decades of Labour misrule in Inverclyde have left our community. Added to that were the lost years in which the Tories tried to close down shipyards on the Clyde, including in Inverclyde. Thankfully, they failed in their mission to totally deindustrialise the Clyde. The announcement two weeks ago that Ferguson shipbuilders in Port Glasgow—the town in which I grew up—will build the world’s first two hybrid ferries for CMAL, safeguarding 75 jobs and creating up to 100 more, including up to 20 new apprenticeships, was fantastic news. I told the cabinet secretary that it was excellent news that will be warmly welcomed in Inverclyde. That order amounts to £20 million, which is funded by the Scottish Government. The context of the comparison is stark: £20 million guarantees those shipbuilding jobs at Ferguson, and yet according to Duncan McNeil, £52.3 million has not provided any jobs as the mission has only just started.

I have placed on record many times in the Parliament my support for Riverside Inverclyde—I make no bones about that, and I will continue to support it. Riverside Inverclyde has done a very good job despite the state that Inverclyde was in when it came into being.

Mr McNeil is shouting and bawling from a sedentary position, but decades of the dead hand of Labour misrule are obvious and apparent in Inverclyde. Mr McNeil needs to acknowledge that. The £52 million that has so far been spent has improved parts of Inverclyde and made them more attractive for future private investment. As I said, I will continue to champion Riverside Inverclyde and the regeneration. As part of the regeneration, this Government has invested £99 million in social housing; £18 million in the fairer Scotland fund; and £2.2 million for the town centre regeneration fund. It has also invested £5.5 million, which is half of the money for the new additional needs school to be built in Port Glasgow, and half the cost of the new Wellpark centre, which deals with addictions. For those latter two projects, the Government was lobbied hard by the SNP council in Inverclyde. Under the SNP Government, 817 small businesses in Inverclyde have received the small business bonus. There are many more examples of why this Government has done a good job. However, we cannot rest on our laurels, as there are still many more challenges ahead. I know that. Mr McNeil is sitting there laughing, but I do not think that the decades of Labour misrule in Inverclyde are a laughing matter. He knows that, and he has to admit to it—

Inverclyde has made great leaps forward in the past four years under the SNP, but the challenges remain. It is vital that we build on the progress that has been made and ensure that Inverclyde continues to develop and prosper.

Okay. Thank you.

Does the member agree with the Labour councillors in Inverclyde who said yesterday that money should be diverted away from the Commonwealth games to go elsewhere?

The debate has been somewhat disappointing so far—apart from Hanzala Malik’s speech. We have heard the usual scaremongering from Labour about the state of the NHS in Scotland. I for one do not recognise the image that it presents of an organisation on its knees; I recognise an organisation that is delivering for the people of Scotland. I do not think that the NHS is perfect—I do not have a blinkered view on that. The NHS needs to change, and reducing its senior management by 25 per cent over this session of Parliament will be a welcome change. It will certainly make the organisation more efficient and I am sure that the public will be happy with that, too. Jackie Baillie spoke about the SNP playing the blame game—I think she used the phrase “it wisnae me”. I know that there are financial difficulties across the UK. This Parliament received a £500 million cut to the budget from the previous Labour Government and a £1.3 billion cut to the budget from the current Tory-Lib Dem UK Government. So, with less money coming to Scotland, the funding allocated to the NHS in Scotland by this SNP Government is actually a good deal. I know that Labour does not appreciate the issue of balancing the books. The situation that the UK Government—and the whole of the UK—is in is not all the fault of the banks, but Labour does not understand that. At least Alistair Darling had the decency towards the end of his term in ministerial office to be honest by telling us that the cuts that he would initiate would be tougher and deeper than those of Thatcher. Labour members might not want to hear that unfortunate truth about Alistair Darling. I hope that they are not proud, but ashamed, about what we have heard this morning about the NHS in England. The cabinet secretary spoke about the first moves to privatise NHS facilities down south. Unfortunately, there is no Lib Dem in the chamber this morning, which just shows what they think about the NHS. Labour needs to accept that the Tories and the Lib Dems are moving on, at pace, the project of privatising the NHS, which was started by the previous Labour Government. I firmly believe that the NHS should remain free at the point of need. Of the range of public services over which this Parliament has control, our NHS is, for me, the jewel in the crown. Every member should be proud of what the men and women in the NHS deliver for us on a daily basis. Some of their achievements need to be highlighted again. Waiting times are at record lows; cancer waiting times are being met for the first time; day case rates are at an all-time record high; and the length of stay in hospitals is at a record low. I said at the beginning of my speech that the NHS is not perfect—no organisation is. The NHS can still improve, because there is always room for improvement. Unfortunately, in their speeches today Labour members provided no suggestions for how to improve the NHS, apart from the usual mantra of “more money”. I mentioned Hanzala Malik’s speech in my opening comments; his was the exception. Every person in Scotland and the UK is now suffering on a daily basis as a result of the profligacy of Labour colleagues in the previous Government in London. Throwing money at an organisation is not always the answer. I know that the NHS in Scotland is safe in the hands of Nicola Sturgeon. I also know that the population in Scotland trust Nicola Sturgeon to safeguard the NHS. Yes there are challenges, but nobody outside this Parliament wants to go back to the dark days of Labour in control not delivering for the benefit of Scotland and not delivering the NHS that Scotland needs.

I congratulate Jenny Marra on securing this members’ business debate on an issue that is vital for the whole country. We all know of constituents whose lives are severely challenged because of increases in the price of energy. I am a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, and at an early meeting of the committee we heard from representatives of the six energy companies. We listened to their attempts to justify what has been happening. With familiar regularity, one energy company increases its price and the others do the same shortly afterwards. The motion highlights the fact that 900,000 homes are in fuel poverty. Only today, at the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, we heard of the challenges that face Governments in attempting to deal with fuel poverty. With prices increasing, the Scottish Government will always be chasing a moving target in trying to reach its 2016 target. Scotland is a fuel-rich nation; no one in Scotland should be living in fuel poverty. How much could have been done if successive Westminster Governments had not squandered the billions of pounds of revenue from the North Sea since the 1970s? How much of that money could have been invested in housing stock in Scotland? Fuel poverty did not start in 2007; it has always been there. It is just a shame that over the years Labour and the Tories, when they were in power in London, did not do much about it. Jenny Marra talked about the Scottish Government doing more. Yes, the Scottish Government could do more. Every Government could do more. We need the powers to ensure that we can get the job done. This morning at the committee we heard about the provision of free insulation. The offer was not fully taken up. Let us think about that—something was being given away free, but not everyone took up the opportunity to get their home fully insulated.

No, I am sorry. I do not have time. If people will not take up something that is free, that highlights how difficult things can be for a Scottish Government—whether of the SNP persuasion or the Labour-Lib Dem coalition pre-2007. On an issue of such importance, I am once again disappointed that Labour cannot rise to the occasion. Time and again in the Parliament, Labour talks about spending more money; yet, in local government, it votes against spending more. In recent years, Labour on Renfrewshire Council voted against the administration’s investment in housing to reach the SHQS, and against the administration’s anti-poverty strategy. Instead of playing party politics, perhaps Labour should acknowledge its hypocrisy and try to bring more powers to this Parliament so that the necessary investment can be made.

I am in my final minute. Borrowing by local authorities is a good idea. The Scottish Government should have the powers to borrow money—as normal independent nations do. Rhoda Grant mentioned Sweden—a normal independent nation—and that is a good example to follow. I look forward to the day when Scotland can become a normal independent nation.

I am sorry. I am in my final minute. We have to get the powers to allow us to do much more to eradicate fuel poverty in Scotland.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had in relation to establishing an enterprise zone in the West Scotland region. (S4O-00188)

The minister will be aware of my comments during last week’s economy strategy debate about the potential to link an enterprise zone with the national renewable infrastructure fund to help an area such as Inverclyde in West Scotland. Will he agree to meet me so that we can discuss my proposal further?

Everyone in the Parliament knows that Scotland has the potential to be a major player in the low-carbon economy. We have already heard about various aspects of how Scotland can contribute while having a massive economic advantage. I will not go over all the points that have been raised, but I will touch on a couple of the issues. It is relevant to highlight the launch of the Scottish Government’s new economic strategy and to welcome the commitment that it shows by setting the low-carbon economy as a new strategic priority. It sends out a powerful message not only to Scotland but to the wider world that the country is open for business. A number of large-scale investments have already brought high-quality jobs to Scotland in recent months. Page 51 of the strategy sets the criteria that I find optimistic. It reflects on that new priority and says that we have “the opportunity to place Scotland in an advantageous position within the global economy and ensure that the benefits of this transformational change are shared across the economy and all our communities.” With that in mind, I will discuss the transmission charging regime. My colleague Aileen McLeod questioned the First Minister on that earlier this afternoon and my colleague Maureen Watt touched on it in her speech. We all know that it has been a long-running saga. One of the reasons why the upgrading of the infrastructure is so important is that we need to ensure that our communities, irrespective of where they are, have the opportunity to benefit from the electricity that they generate and put on to the grid. I understand the argument for the system that we currently have and the points about the costs of transporting energy from a rural part of Scotland to somewhere in the central belt, but it is not fair. The current regime is a barrier to renewable energy generation in Scotland. My second point is about the more localised matter of the national renewables infrastructure fund, what it can do and how it can best be used to provide sustainable economic growth. Last week, in the debate on the economic strategy, I proposed tying the NRIF in with one of the new enterprise zones. I used the example of Inverclyde, because it has been an enterprise zone in the past. Some would suggest that it should not be in the running again, and some criticise the whole idea altogether—we heard some sceptical comments about enterprise zones from the Labour members during question time. However, I am happy to reiterate what I said last week. The last time that Inverclyde had enterprise zone status, the Tories were in power at Westminster and Labour was in power in Inverclyde Council. It was not a success. In fact, it was a 10-year opportunity wasted. We now have the urban regeneration company Riverside Inverclyde, which is working hard to turn round years of declining population and hope. As with everywhere else, there are massive challenges facing Riverside Inverclyde because of the economic situation. I would therefore be grateful if the minister would consider designating Inverclyde an enterprise zone, while linking it with the national renewables infrastructure fund. Inverclyde’s location and industrial expertise put it in a strong position to become an economic player in the renewables sector. The workforce will come back to Inverclyde. Many of its people are dispersed across Scotland, the rest of the UK and the rest of the world. However, the skills base still exists and many people would like the opportunity to get back to work and contribute to society. Making Inverclyde an enterprise zone would be a good chance for them to do that. It is not inconceivable that the creation of a new enterprise zone with a focus on low-carbon manufacturing opportunities aligned with investment from the NRIF would provide Inverclyde or a similar area in the west of Scotland with a sustainable economic future. Employment would increase, including more modern apprenticeships, which would help to increase manufacturing output and assist the Scottish economy. More money would be in the local economy, and that would help to sustain businesses and traders. Commercial traffic on the Clyde would increase as manufactured products were transported. Those are just some of the potential sustainable outcomes that could benefit an area such as Inverclyde, if it was fortunate enough to get the opportunity. I raised the matter at question time before this debate and was pleased that the minister agreed to meet me so that we can discuss the proposal further. Whether it is in west Scotland or in the whole of Scotland, we have a wonderful opportunity to make a long-lasting and positive difference to the country and the population. I am pleased to see that Alex Johnstone has come back into the chamber. I always enjoy his contributions. I might not always agree with him, but he tends to bring a bit of humour to the debate, whether he means it or not, and he always gets a wee laugh. However, I was a wee bit lost when he was talking about the investment in renewable energy only surviving because of public interventions. I might be wrong about this, but surely there have been public interventions over the years to create the nuclear power stations that exist in the UK. If he is going to use that argument, he must be consistent and apply it to nuclear power as well. I am conscious of the time. I am happy to support the motion in the minister’s name. I look forward to hearing the rest of the debate.

I also welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement. I draw her attention to the Royal Pharmaceutical Society’s pharmaceutical care and care homes working group, which is examining a number of issues around prescribing of drugs for care home residents. Given the recent media stories alleging excessive use of drugs in care homes, will the cabinet secretary undertake to consider the working group’s recommendations when it publishes its report later in the year?

I warmly welcome this debate, and congratulate Hugh Henry on bringing it to the chamber. An event as iconic as the UCS work-in, which helped to shape the generation then and future generations, is worthy of commemoration in this chamber as well as in any other chamber in these islands. I was not born at the time of the UCS work-in—I was born in 1972—but I have seen the pictures many times on television, including the recording of Jimmy Reid’s famous “no bevvying” speech. I will come back to him shortly. I grew up in Port Glasgow, and my father and other family members worked in the yards. I have always had an affinity with the yards and admired those who went to work in even the harshest conditions to build high-quality ships that sailed across the globe. During the late 1970s and the early 1980s in particular, when there was uncertainty in the industry—especially from 1979, when the Tories won the United Kingdom election—and there were resultant effects on shipbuilding in my community and elsewhere throughout Scotland and the UK, there was a sense of déjà vu. There was a sense of a UK Tory Government setting out to damage hard-working working-class areas. The final nail in the coffin for shipbuilding in Inverclyde was hammered in by the Tories—make no mistake. In those early years, looking at what was happening to my family—my father was unemployed for three years around that time—certainly got me interested in events outside my home. During those times, it was commonplace for the UCS work-in to be shown on the television and retold in the newspapers. Although I was young, seeing those pictures and linking them to what was happening at the time were extremely formative. I turn to Jimmy Reid. I remember that when I was a boy growing up, I watched some programmes that Jimmy Reid either presented or narrated—I did not take to reading too many books about what was happening, because I was only 10 or so at the time. It was obvious that he was a man of great intellect and an orator of great skill, although he kept his feet firmly on the ground; until the day he died, he always put the people first as his main concern. I got to know Jimmy Reid when he campaigned with me in the Westminster election in 2005 and in the Scottish Parliament election in 2007. I know that I was fortunate to have spent time with him, learning a bit more about the events of 40 years ago and about the events of 2007 in particular. Jimmy Reid, Jimmy Airlie, Sammy Barr, Bob Dickie, Bob Cook, Sammy Gilmore, Willie McInnes and everyone else involved at the time deserve every plaudit that has been given to them over the past 40 years. I thank them for helping shape me and my political life and for the courage that they showed in standing up against a Tory Government that was hell-bent on destroying the shipbuilding industry in Scotland and across the whole of the UK. Once again, I thank Hugh Henry for bringing this debate to the chamber.

I warmly welcome the Scottish Government’s refreshed economic strategy and its many aims to help the Scottish economy and population. It is timely that the strategy be refreshed, as the economic conditions in which we all live are challenging to say the least. With the UK Government now cutting public spending too far and too fast—including an £800 million cash cut to the Scottish Government capital budget this year alone—the lack of a plan B from the chancellor is frightening to say the least. No one can deny that the UK public finances are in a shocking mess. That is largely due to the ineptitude of Labour prior to the last Westminster election, as well as the crash, but the earth-scorching policies that the Tory chancellor—aided and abetted by his Lib Dem chief secretary—is inflicting on public sector spending are causing alarm throughout Scotland. The new Scottish Government strategy is to be welcomed, although I invite members to think how much more could be done if the Parliament had more powers than the limited competence that we have. This week, Reform Scotland published its submission to the Scotland Bill Committee. It highlights clearly the funding anomaly that exists between Holyrood and Westminster. Currently, Holyrood has devolved responsibility for nearly 60 per cent of Scottish public expenditure. However, it has control over raising only 6.4 per cent of the funding for that expenditure. Some people might say that it is tremendously generous of Westminster to save the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government the time, bother and money that are necessary to collect the taxes, but that is an irrelevant argument. I suggest that Scotland be given control of key taxes—such as income tax or corporation tax—that could be used to influence the direction of the Scottish economy as part of a wider economic strategy. Those are not my words, but the words of David Steel in the Steel commission’s report. If John Swinney had those levers, he would have more flexibility and more tools in the box with which to do an even better job than he currently does. The strategy has many positive points that, I am sure, can be supported across the parties. I am particularly interested in the location of enterprise zones and whether they could be tied into other measures, such as the national renewables infrastructure fund. As the cabinet secretary is aware, under the Tories at Westminster and with Labour in control of Inverclyde Council, Inverclyde became an enterprise zone. It is fair to say that that was not a success; in fact, it was a 10-year opportunity wasted. We now have the urban regeneration company Riverside Inverclyde, which is doing good work. However, with the slowdown in house purchasing and building, much of which is due to the lack of access to finance, the URC faces challenges. Similarly, every organisation that is in receipt of public money faces challenges. Therefore, I would be grateful if the cabinet secretary would consider linking the aforementioned enterprise zones and the NRIF. That would aid Inverclyde’s potential to become a sustainable economic player in the renewables sector. Members should make no mistake: the workforce will come back to Inverclyde, as many people are currently dispersed not only throughout Scotland and the UK but throughout the world. The skills base exists. All that we request is the opportunity for people to come back. It is not inconceivable that the creation of a new enterprise zone with a focus on low-carbon manufacturing opportunities, aligned to investment from the NRIF, would provide Inverclyde or a similar area in the west of Scotland with a sustainable economic future. Employment would increase—including more modern apprenticeships—which would help to increase manufacturing output and thus assist the Scottish economy. More money would be in the local economy, which would help to sustain businesses and traders. Commercial traffic on the Clyde would increase as the manufactured products were transported. That is not to mention the added interest in leisure activities that would occur as people took an interest in the manufacturing facilities by the coast. Those are only some of the potential sustainable outcomes that could benefit an area such as Inverclyde if it is fortunate to have the opportunity. I am sure that other members will argue for similar measures for their areas, but that is entirely up to them. On page 6 of the economic strategy, in the foreword, the First Minister states: “Our economic and financial competence has been recognised by households and businesses across Scotland.” Given the SNP’s excellent record of freezing the council tax, ensuring that more than 64,000 small businesses no longer pay rates, creating record numbers of modern apprenticeships—25,000 are to be provided each year throughout this parliamentary session—the creation of the Scottish Investment Bank, and many other actions, I would go as far as to say that the First Minister was probably downplaying the success of the first Scottish Government in the past four years.

The member disagrees, but he should look at the result of the election in May. That tells a story.

No—I am in my final minute. I was speaking to someone on Saturday who said that his organisation spoke to every party before the election and the thing that differentiated the SNP from the others was our attitude to dealing with the current economic climate. We offered a sense of direction and provided hope, while other parties offered no solution and no plan. The greater the powers that the Parliament has, the better our chances will be of propelling Scotland forward. With independence, we will not have our hands tied behind our backs. I commend John Swinney on the refreshed strategy, and I know that the economy could not be in safer hands.

Enterprise zones were a failure the last time round, but if lessons can be learned and we ensure that a different process is put in place for future enterprise zones, they could have an economic benefit, which would be advantageous for Scotland.

As an ambassador for Ocean Youth Trust Scotland, I know how beneficial and welcome cashback funding has been to that organisation. Will the minister give even more assurances that additional funding can be provided to other water-based activities throughout Scotland?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what it considers the impact will be on ferry services and regeneration in the west of Scotland of the proposal to close the Clyde maritime rescue co-ordination centre. (S4O-00123)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer. I was happy to hear his comments on the understanding and the local knowledge that the first-class staff have and the point that, if that local knowledge goes, it will put added pressure on the people in Stornoway and Belfast who have to undertake the work. Does the cabinet secretary therefore agree that the Scottish Government and the cross-party supporters of maintaining the Clyde MRCC should highlight the point about local knowledge in the strongest possible terms, with regard to both continuing that facility and making the point that, if that facility were to close, there would be a threat to investor confidence in the west coast of Scotland, which has high-volume ferry routes from Gourock and half of Scotland’s marinas?

I warmly welcome the Scottish Government’s legislative programme for the year ahead. The 16 bills—including the sectarianism bill that is already before the Parliament—will certainly ensure that the Parliament works hard to deal with the many issues that face the nation. Until we have the bills in front of us, it is difficult to speak in depth about what they contain. However, it was anticipated that the alcohol bill would come back to the Parliament. I am happy that it will and I know from speaking to many constituents and representatives of organisations that it will be warmly welcomed. Alcohol misuse is a blight on all Scotland from many different perspectives, including the health of the individual, the health of others who are affected by the misuse, the costs to the health service and the justice system and the economic effects. As a nation, we need to examine the problem and try to improve the situation. Minimum unit pricing is not a silver bullet—the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy knows that and has never claimed that it is—but if its introduction helps to save people’s lives and, as a consequence, saves public money to be reinvested in the health and justice budgets, it is surely worth while. Of course, any measure that Parliament introduces must be fully justified and scrutinised.

I will give way in two seconds. I dare say that many of the arguments that were used for and against minimum unit pricing the last time will be used again.

That was discussed during the debate on the previous bill in the last parliamentary session, so it will come up in due course. Whichever committee examines the proposed alcohol legislation, I hope that it endeavours to obtain information from young people and groups that deal with alcohol addiction in young people. I have spoken to such people and the evidence that they provide, along with the anecdotal evidence, is frightening. We should make no mistake: the public in Scotland want to ensure that we tackle this most serious of issues. I welcome the Liberal Democrats’ change of position and we will see what transpires from the other parties, whether it be Murdo’s Tories or the Tories. However, I will say one thing this afternoon: the Scottish public are watching. They expect the issue to be taken seriously and not used as a party-political football. The NHS Scotland statistics that were published on 31 August were staggering. Some have been touched upon already today. It is unfortunate that Murdo Fraser has left the chamber, because he spoke about alcohol sales in Scotland being 23 per cent higher than they are in England and Wales. He also went on to say that, because of the difference in salaries, it might be cheaper to buy alcohol in England than it is to buy it here. First, not everyone in England earns more money than people in Scotland. Also, there are areas of deprivation and poverty in England as well as in Scotland. I thought that Murdo Fraser’s comments were just an ill-informed presumption.

I need to make some progress; I am sorry. My tipping point on the issue came a couple of years ago. A supermarket chain was selling four bottles of a well-known international lager for £1 during the weekend of an international football tournament. There is also the selling of three cases of beer or cider for £20. In June this year, a supermarket in Inverclyde made a pricing error. Instead of three cases costing £20, they cost £11. Unsurprisingly, the supermarket sold out and the headline on the STV website was “Beer pricing glitch leads to stampede at ...” and the store was named. I would have thought that, when they realised that the error had been made, they could have stopped selling the alcohol until the problem was fixed. When and if the minimum unit price is introduced in the future, I hope that the headline writers do not need to write similar headlines regularly. I want to touch on the proposed legislation to deal with extending the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. I look forward to that bill because I am sure that there have been occasions when MSPs from across the chamber have been frustrated when they have been trying to assist constituents, only to be thwarted. I do not know what will be in the bill, but I hope that it will be as wide ranging as possible. I state for the record that many organisations that are not covered by FOI operate an extremely efficient system of helping parliamentarians when they are trying to obtain information, and I commend those organisations for maintaining such a positive working relationship. However, I suggest that extending the legislation should guarantee that the information can be obtained, as opposed to having to rely on the good will of bodies and organisations that receive and spend considerable amounts of public money.

The legislative programme is exciting and challenging. The First Minister’s announcement about the opportunities for all initiative once again proves that things can be done without a plethora of bills going through Parliament. I look forward to the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning’s statement providing more information on that initiative. Against a backdrop of savage cuts from the UK Government because of the financial crash and the shameful mismanagement of public finances by its predecessor, not to mention the civil war between 10 and 11 Downing Street a number of years ago, the Scottish Government is working hard to improve Scotland’s health and wealth. With greater powers, we can do more, and with independence, we could do even more. I welcome the legislative programme and look forward to shaping an improved Scotland and helping our citizens.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what measures the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment will introduce to help the Scottish Government achieve its 100 per cent renewable electricity target by 2020. (S4O-00072)

What specific assistance does the cabinet secretary intend to introduce to help community organisations to develop small-scale community hydro schemes, which will help us to reach the 100 per cent target as well as tackle flooding in our communities?

It is important to highlight a couple of points at the outset of the debate. First, the publication of the Transport Select Committee report at Westminster this morning has somewhat superseded the motion before us. It rejected the proposals and called on the United Kingdom coalition Government to withdraw them—I will return to that point shortly. Secondly, I received a communication from the chief executive of the David MacBrayne Group in which the group highlighted its concerns with aspects of the motion and the potential misinterpretation of what the group had stated in its submission to the Transport Select Committee. I read the motion thoroughly a number of times after I received the e-mail, and I can see how the group might have interpreted it. The title of the motion was also mentioned. I appreciate that the David MacBrayne Group would not offer any political support on campaign issues, but its valid point of ensuring that any proposals should centre on saving lives and not saving money is in my opinion supportive of attempts to save the services. My motion takes the usual format, and I did not in any way mean to cause either direct or indirect misinterpretation. The group’s reading of the motion was certainly different from mine, but I am happy to put on record my thanks to it for raising its concerns about the motion and for bringing them to my attention. I will summarise a couple of the proposals that the UK Government has put forward. First, there is a proposal to reduce the number of maritime operation centres in the UK, leaving only two 24-hour centres: one in Aberdeen, and the other in Southampton or Plymouth. There would also be seven sub-centres, only one of which would be in Scotland—in either Shetland or Stornoway. The result of those proposals is that the five operation centres in Scotland would be reduced to two. Along with other members, I have met coastguard representatives a few times. I am sure that everyone in the chamber will know that they are absolutely committed to the job that they do. They understand the areas that they cover, and it would be very difficult for people from other parts of Scotland or the UK to understand the nuances of the territory in different parts of the country. We debated the issue back in January in a members’ business debate secured by Alasdair Allan. He has given me his apologies that he could not make this debate, but he said that he still has the same concerns that he had in January and remains supportive of what the Parliament said then and what has been said recently. In the debate in January, the political consensus was that the UK Government’s proposals were dangerous. Every MSP who spoke highlighted the importance of the coastguard service in their area; as we know, though, getting involved in a divide-and-conquer exercise only assists the UK Government. Obviously, I want the Clyde base to stay in Greenock and to remain open, certainly for the west coast. There are many arguments for that, the main one being that nuclear submarines are based on the Clyde. While those submarines remain there, the best possible security must be available close by. Secondly, the west of Scotland has some of the best sailing waters in the world. It is the UK’s second most popular area for such activity, coming behind the Solent, and our recreational boating sector is increasing year on year. However, the proposals will reduce safety across the west of Scotland. As far as the coastguards are concerned, any modernisation of service delivery should always be about saving lives, not saving money.

That very valid point has been made on a cross-party basis for a number of months now. Coming back to the publication today of the Transport Select Committee’s report, I note that the committee’s webpage says: “The Government should withdraw its controversial proposals to modernise the Coastguard Service, says the influential cross-party Transport Committee. Serious concerns were raised that the safety of people at sea, on cliffs and beaches will be jeopardised if the proposals proceed in their current form.” I do not know about anyone else in the chamber or anyone who might be watching the debate online, but I find that quite a damning indictment of the UK Government’s proposals. It is abundantly clear that there is no support in the UK, let alone in Scotland, for a reduction in services. Ultimately, any change should primarily be about the determination to save lives, and no one genuinely believes that that will be realised under the current proposals. I will raise a number of points about the Clyde base, which is in the west of Scotland region that I cover. First, has the Maritime and Coastguard Agency looked at alternative premises for the facility? When we attended a briefing at the navy buildings in Greenock a few months ago, Duncan McNeil and I saw for ourselves how rundown they were. Secondly, I should point out that the facility has no problem with personnel. In fact, a high number of people are applying for positions at it. Thirdly, it seems as if the coastguard is taking the brunt of the cuts. What of the management? I should also note that Inverclyde Council had offered to help find new premises if the facility was going to remain in the area, but I know that that will be a big challenge. This has certainly been a big issue for a number of months across the whole of Scotland; indeed, it was a big issue in the Scottish parliamentary election campaign and has certainly been so in the Inverclyde by-election campaign. Irrespective of who wins next Thursday’s by-election—I hope, of course, that it will be Anne McLaughlin—I expect that individual to go to Westminster, fight our corner and ensure that the Clyde base remains on the west coast and within Inverclyde itself. I firmly believe that, if that does not happen, security on the west coast will be reduced. I hope that the chamber will continue this fight, speak with a single voice and make it clear that the UK Government’s proposals are not supported by anyone here or any party in Scotland. Indeed, I hope that we continue to hear that single voice this afternoon.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what support is available to members of the public who are unable to obtain legal representation in a civil law case. (S4O-00029)

I have some constituents whose lawyer is no longer practising—the firm is no longer practising—and who have been through a myriad of organisations to try to get a lawyer to take on their case. Bearing in mind the information that the minister has provided, will she please meet me to sit down and discuss providing further information or assistance to my constituents?

I am concerned that the price rise will add to the 50 per cent of senior citizens in Inverclyde who already live in fuel poverty. Does the First Minister agree that the estimated extra £20 million in VAT receipts would be far better spent on tackling fuel poverty in Inverclyde and throughout Scotland, as opposed to propping up the Treasury’s coffers?

I have a personal interest in the matter as my wife is currently a CalMac employee on the Gourock to Dunoon route. Does the cabinet secretary think that the proposed new working hours and shift patterns are sustainable, especially given that no part-time opportunities are available on the route? In addition, there will be only one person to do the pier work, which particularly concerns me with regard to late-night travellers on Fridays and Saturdays.

I have been looking forward to taking part in this debate with my first speech in this new session. First of all, though, I wish every member well for the new session, particularly new members and those who are making their first speeches this afternoon. Politically, this session will be different—and, as an SNP member, I am obviously delighted at the chamber’s formation. However, the one issue that my Government and every member will have to address has been constant for some time now: the need for job opportunities and to ensure that the economy can grow sustainably. We all ran our campaigns and the electorate spoke. The population obviously liked the small business bonus scheme, the continuation of the creation of 100,000 training opportunities—including 25,000 apprenticeships—every year and the introduction of better funding methods for buildings and infrastructure, as well as the many other things that the SNP managed to achieve over the past four years and plans to do over the next five. I want to touch on a number of issues, the first of which is the small business bonus scheme. I am sure that every member will have spoken to many in the small business community about the importance of that initiative—after all, that sector is the rock of the Scottish economy and it is vital that it not only survives but progresses. For many small businesses that I have spoken to, the scheme has, over the past few years, been essential in keeping their doors open to ensure that people are working and contributing to society. Understandably, the scheme was not seen as a handout to the small business sector, but neither was it seen as a handout to the wider population. I found that the wider population actually realised the importance of the initiative to Scotland and were happy to maintain it in this parliamentary session. Another important issue for the sector, which came up on numerous occasions in my meetings with business representatives, relates to the procurement opportunities that are open to smaller businesses. Many businesses felt that they were too small to compete for larger contracts or that they did not have the expertise or knowledge to be able to spend time bidding for work. As a result, they perhaps thought that they were being left behind with some opportunities. Now and again, I heard comments that priority should be given to local businesses to take up local work opportunities. I understand and sympathise with comments that were made to me, but I also realise that there is EU legislation and that tendering and procurement must be open, transparent and available to all.

I am just coming on to that. As I was saying, I understand the comments that were made and I am looking forward to learning more about the proposed sustainable procurement bill. It would be helpful if the minister provided a bit more information about that in his closing speech, if that is possible. I am sure that many members can put forward arguments about the environmental and sustainability benefits of awarding work to smaller local businesses compared with offering work to everyone. I am also sure that every member will know about new builds or refurbs in their constituencies or regions in respect of which outside labour has undertaken most of the work. Could local people have undertaken some of that labour? That approach would have a positive effect on our local communities. The third issue that I want to touch on is exporting. I recommend that members across the chamber read the report on the internationalisation of business that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee produced in the previous parliamentary session. One way in which we can fully ensure that the Scottish economy drives forward is through making more things and selling them abroad. We need to bring more money and new money into Scotland. I grew up in Inverclyde, and I stay there. I am sure that I will see quite a lot of members there over the coming weeks, and they are certainly very welcome there as political tourists. However, they will have an obligation to help the local economy when they visit. If they want ideas about places to visit or eat in, they should speak to me later. Inverclyde is famous for making many things, including ships, engines, computers and sugar. There is still a manufacturing base there and things are still made there, although perhaps not in the same quantity as in the past. Can Inverclyde make more? Absolutely, provided that the conditions are right and people want to buy the products. Can Paisley, Glasgow and Aberdeen make more? Absolutely; Scotland can manufacture more. Given that the conditions for manufacturing in Scotland and the UK are less stringent than those in Germany, Sweden and France, where the cost of living is higher, wages are higher and labour laws are more stringent, we need to establish what we need to do to improve our exporting capabilities in Scotland. I therefore welcome the closer working partnership between the Scottish Government, Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and SDI that the cabinet secretary mentioned earlier. To conclude, during the election campaign the SNP campaigned on the reindustrialisation of the Scottish economy. I greatly look forward to that. Obviously, the focus of that reindustrialisation is on the green energy sector. I recommend that the Government and the Parliament look a bit westwards at the industrial history of, and the industrial opportunities in, the west of Scotland.

I congratulate Duncan McNeil on securing the debate. I was an eight-year-old at the time of the sit-in and do not really have a clear picture of what happened, but I remember growing up in Port Glasgow and viewing the decimation of the area as thousands of redundancies occurred with the closure of the shipyards and the engineering companies. There was no sign whatsoever of a bright future. Duncan McNeil touched on the unemployment statistics. It was reported at the time that there was 25 per cent unemployment in the Greenock area. Much of the consideration of job losses then focused on men but, as our discussion shows, women, too, were adversely affected. In preparing for the debate, I spoke to a range of people within and outwith the Scottish National Party to get a bit more understanding of elements of the campaign. One local member told me that the campaign was very much community oriented and that the whole Inverclyde community rallied round. I was told that there was political and financial support from throughout the United Kingdom, which highlights the effect of the campaign not just on the population of Scotland but on that of the UK as a whole. Jim Sillars told me a couple of things about the campaign. He said that it was a genuine community and working-class campaign. That highlights the strength of the population of Inverclyde and how our community spirit rallied to fight on local issues. It still does. He also said that there was no political sectarianism whatsoever, which demonstrates how parties and people who are not aligned to parties can and do work together for the public good. One of the 240 women involved in the sit-in, Ellen Church, was a distant family member of mine. Sadly, Ellen has passed away, but I asked one of her sons, Paul, whether he was happy for me to mention her name in the debate. Paul was happy for me to do that, and he told me about Ellen’s contribution to the campaign and the hardship that women and their families in the Inverclyde area—particularly those involved in the campaign—had to contend with at the time. Paul was greatly proud of his mother and her contribution, but he was also proud of all 240 women for their fight and what they achieved. The campaign highlighted various things. It demonstrated the battle for jobs—a battle that continues—on the part of the working class. It showed that the working class in industrial areas are prepared to fight for a better future for themselves and their communities and that the all-female campaign resonated with many people. It highlighted the strength of the Inverclyde women. Once again, I commend Duncan McNeil for securing the debate. It is not only a fitting tribute to the 240 women but a fitting way to highlight an important part of Scotland’s industrial legacy, and that of Inverclyde in particular. I hope that there will be more debates about the campaign in future. As parliamentarians, we cannot let that history die. We must continue to promote it and to tell people what we fought for in the past.

I am sure that the minister will agree that enterprise agencies and the whole of the public sector play an important part in bringing business and success to Inverclyde. Does he also agree that, with higher fuel costs on the way, having higher fuel prices in neighbouring areas and lower ones in Inverclyde will benefit the area and its economy?

I am content with the Parliament’s scrutiny of the bill, on which the committee has done a tremendous job. I commend Bill Butler for his work on bringing the bill to the Parliament. He worked with others outside the Parliament, such as Thompsons Solicitors and Clydeside Action on Asbestos, which I am sure will be delighted with the result at 5 o’clock. I hope that everyone in the chamber will vote for the bill. I commend Bill Butler, the committee and other members for the collegiate manner in which they have dealt with the bill. That constructive engagement shows what can happen in the Parliament when parties decide to work together. Post the Scottish election, I hope—and am sure—that the Parliament can continue that constructive approach to damages issues with whoever is in power. In the stage 1 debate, I—along with other members—raised two issues: the 25:75 split in calculating compensation, and the income of surviving relatives. I am sure that the flexibility that is built into the bill on the first point will enable our citizens to achieve a sensible outcome, and I am convinced that the committee has fully addressed the second point. The Parliament has a strong record in dealing with damages issues. It is a typical Scottish trait not to be too self-congratulatory but, when it comes to damages issues, we can set that aside for a moment. We know that there are still inequalities and injustices out there—there will be more for us to deal with when we leave the chamber—but, with the bill, the Parliament, the Justice Committee, Bill Butler and the Scottish Government have done a tremendous job, and I look forward to the motion to pass it being voted for unanimously at 5 o’clock.

I am happy to take part in the debate and I welcome the opportunity to discuss the SNP’s excellent record on regeneration activities. The Labour motion talks about recognising “the importance of continued support from the Scottish Government for regeneration initiatives”. That is a welcome recognition by Labour that the Scottish Government is investing to help regenerate our communities. In the spirit of consensus, I can say that the creation of the urban regeneration companies, which were set up before 2007, has provided a focused approach to helping to turn around areas that were neglected. On 24 January, the Greenock Telegraph reported that Alf Young, the chair of Riverside Inverclyde, said: “I have always been told by the politicians and their officials this was a 10-year mission to take 20-odd years of dereliction and do something about it, and that they would back us.” I used that quotation in the budget debate, and I have no qualms about using it again. When I was growing up in Inverclyde, I was appalled to see the dereliction that engulfed much of the area. An attempt was made to make Inverclyde a better place, with enterprise zone status, but unfortunately that approach did not fulfil its potential. I hope that the URC, Riverside Inverclyde, creates an opportunity for Inverclyde to move forward and for the URC to help to empower the whole community. During stage 3 of the budget debate, John Swinney agreed to reinstate some of the money that was due to be removed from the URC budget. The £6 million, in addition to the planned £25 million, will certainly help the URCs; I know that it will help Riverside Inverclyde.

I wrote to Alex Neil about that a while ago and received a response. Riverside Inverclyde is ahead of the game. It has developed things sooner than was planned in its initial business plan. That is a positive. The announcement this morning that Riverside Inverclyde will receive a further £1.1 million in addition to the £2.9 million that it was due to receive is a positive step. I welcome additional money coming to Inverclyde. I voted for more money to come to Inverclyde in the budget. Labour did not. Mr McNeil did not. I am disappointed with that. Riverside Inverclyde has made great strides in trying to improve the area and, as I have said, is ahead of schedule, which is encouraging. However, it cannot and, I am sure, will not rest on its laurels. I have visited a representative of the Irvine Bay Urban Regeneration Company. I do not intend to say much about the company as I am sure that my colleague Kenneth Gibson will do so later. I saw the positive effects of the URC on the Clyde Marina in Ardrossan and was greatly impressed by the proposals. Representatives of the Clyde Marina are members of the cross-party group on recreational boating and marine tourism, which I convene. I understand the URC’s potential and the necessity for it to succeed. Regeneration takes many forms, from the money allocated through the town centre regeneration fund to moneys for local authorities, URCs—where they exist—new schools and new and improved housing. I will come back to that last example in a moment. As Alf Young said, there has been dereliction over 20 years. This is not just about providing shiny new buildings, although those are essential. There is another important element. Giving evidence to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee during its enterprise inquiry, Dr Ian Wall, who is from Scotland’s independent regeneration network, said: “Regeneration is about people, not things.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 26 January 2011; c 4694.] That can get lost in translation when regeneration is discussed. Shiny new buildings are all well and good but if no or little sustainability is built in we are just creating a rod for our own back and we will not address the complexity of regeneration in its entirety.

People, whether in the Coalfields Regeneration Trust or the URCs in Inverclyde and Irvine Bay, are the most important element here. I return to a couple of points that I mentioned earlier. On housing, the SNP campaigned against housing stock transfer in Inverclyde. I have no qualms about that campaign. I am delighted that the SNP has provided record funding for new housing in Inverclyde through River Clyde Homes and registered social landlords. The SNP Government has a tremendous record on housing for Inverclyde. There are issues at James Watt College, but those are wider than just the reduced money from the Scottish Government. The fundamental problem is the £1.3 billion cut to the Scottish Government this year, which is the result of not only the Tories and Lib Dems cutting the budget but the economic mismanagement of the Labour Party when it was in power in the previous Administration.

I, too, express my thanks to the clerking team for their hard work and dedication throughout the inquiry. The committee ensured that a wide range of voices and opinions was heard, which was certainly advantageous to the inquiry. The Equal Opportunities Committee has produced a piece of work that is helpful in relation to both the wider debate about migration in Scotland and the issue of trafficking. In the short time that I have been a member of the committee it has proven to be a committee with very little in the way of party politics, and for that I commend every member. The report is testimony to the committee’s joined-up approach to establishing the facts behind serious issues for today’s world. I am delighted that we have produced an evidence-based report that scotches the myths about migrants taking all the jobs and costing the taxpayer vast sums of money. The report, which was agreed by all parties on the committee, recognises that migrants can and do play an important social and economic role in Scotland. From employment to education and many more areas within Scotland, migrants contribute vastly to our country. One example that we did not touch on in the inquiry but which I want to highlight now is the importance of migrants in football. Most Scottish football teams either have had or do have players from outside Scotland. Celtic Football Club, Rangers FC and my own team, Greenock Morton, have all had players from other countries. Morton currently has a player from France and in the past we have had players from Finland. One thing about football is that we do not hear footballers being criticised for coming to this country to play football and nor should they be. Being involved in this inquiry opened the eyes of all members to some of the erroneous language used in the media, such as “bogus asylum seekers” and “illegal immigrants”. The issue highlights the importance of the power of the media and how they can influence public opinion—that has already been mentioned. The evidence that we received in the session with the minister was very direct and to the point, and I am sure that it struck a chord with not only parliamentarians in the chamber, but everyone outside the chamber who works with migrants and asylum seekers on a daily basis. As other members have made clear, the evidence session that we held in Glasgow city chambers, in which we spoke to many people from a range of nationalities and backgrounds, was absolutely fascinating. I always feel that taking the Parliament out to people, particularly in the way in which that session was facilitated, ensures that we get to the nub of the matter and extract the issues directly with a minimum of filtering. That can be only a good thing for policy makers and I hope that we can all learn lessons and work to improve the lives of everyone who lives in Scotland. The report has 159 pages and 700 paragraphs, and no member who speaks this afternoon has any chance whatsoever of doing its content any justice. Some members have already mentioned trafficking, and I am sure that we will hear more about it later. Clearly, more needs to be done to combat what is a disgusting and hideous practice but, as we will all appreciate, the task is not easy. The underworld is certainly intent on keeping this crime part of its empire but we parliamentarians and, indeed, everyone in the public sector must get to grips with the fact that lives are wrecked as a result of trafficking and must work to get those people back on track. Time is short and I must apologise for concluding on a negative point. I am disappointed that the UK Government has not responded to our report until today. Given that the report touches on devolved and reserved issues, it was right that it provided a response, but I suggest that waiting until the day of this debate to do so is not in the spirit of the report and does not reflect the consensual manner in which we approached the topic. Nevertheless, I am happy to say that we have produced a body of work that all members can rightly be proud of. This is just the start. The hard work of repairing broken lives and turning around the misconceptions held by many people starts now and we need to do more to deal with trafficking and to bring those responsible to justice. I commend the report to the chamber.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the budget debate. Given the £1.3 billion reduction in the Scottish Government budget for next year, which follows the £500 million reduction this year, I am sure that all members acknowledge that the cabinet secretary faced a massive financial challenge. John Swinney deserves every credit for producing a balanced budget in these straitened times. Today’s announcements include an increase in apprenticeship places to 25,000, an additional £10 million for the supported jobs fund in the voluntary sector, an additional £15 million for college bursaries, the £1 million post office diversification scheme, and the additional £2 million for freight facilities grants. My favourite announcement was about the reintroduction of moneys for urban regeneration companies in Scotland. The population of Inverclyde and Ayrshire will be happy to learn that the SNP Government appreciates URCs and, in particular, the excellent work of Riverside Inverclyde, which will continue. Alf Young, the chairman of Riverside Inverclyde, said in the Greenock Telegraph on 24 January: “I have always been told by the politicians and their officials this was a 10-year mission to take 20-odd years of dereliction and do something about it, and that they would back us”. Today, John Swinney continues that progress and the work of turning around 20-odd years of dereliction in Inverclyde, as Alf Young highlighted. The cabinet secretary knows of my genuine interest in safeguarding Riverside Inverclyde. I raised the issue with him in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee last week and met him last Thursday afternoon. In addition to that, I wrote to him and Alex Neil about it and raised it in the committee when Scottish Enterprise officials gave evidence on 19 January. The future of Inverclyde’s economic success depends on our regeneration. Other parties and individuals have made representations on the URCs and Riverside Inverclyde in particular. However, I am content that John Swinney and the SNP Government have listened to the arguments. On a different matter, I whole-heartedly welcome the increase in apprenticeship places to 25,000 for next year. That record number will provide new opportunities for our population. Those new modern apprenticeship starts will be welcomed throughout the west of Scotland and Scotland as a whole. Other beneficial aspects of the budget include the freezing of the council tax for the fourth year in a row, as already mentioned, and the maintenance—indeed, the extension—of the concessionary travel scheme. I know many people who value the travel scheme, which not only helps people to get out and about in their communities but helps the tourism industry in Scotland. Another welcome element concerns the health budget. Ensuring that the Barnett consequentials on health go to the NHS is a welcome addition to the budget. Many of my constituents warmly welcome it as they fully value the NHS and the services that it provides. During the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s budget scrutiny last year, I asked the panel of witnesses, which included Professor Brian Ashcroft and Alf Young: “What one thing would you recommend be changed in the budget? Obviously, there would be knock-on effects, but if the Government was to change one thing, what should it be?” Professor Ashcroft answered: “Can I get in first? The Government should not ring fence spending on health.” Alf Young’s response was: “I would choose the same thing.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 24 November 2010; c 4367.] There is much to welcome in the budget. I am sure that John Swinney would have preferred to have the additional £500 million, £1.3 billion and even the £30 million from the retail levy. Think how much more John Swinney could deliver for Scotland if he had that money. If he had more, I am sure that it would be invested wisely. The £30 million retail levy was contentious in the Parliament. In recent weeks, I spoke to many people in the small business sector. They were disappointed with how the Parliament voted last week, but they realise who is on the side of the small business sector in Scotland. John Swinney has proposed this Scottish budget to the Parliament in financially straitened times. However, I am sure that the Parliament can rise to the occasion and not only agree to the budget unanimously this evening but ensure that the Scottish people appreciate that it is a budget for Scotland in financially challenging times. I am sure that they will appreciate the hard work and effort that John Swinney has put into the budget. I hope that the Parliament will rise to the occasion and back the budget to ensure that Scotland and its economy can move forward.

Will the member give way?

The member mentioned Princes Street. Has he seen Princes Street in Port Glasgow, which has been decimated by the huge Tesco at the bottom of the street?

I welcome this members’ business debate, and I congratulate my SNP colleague Alasdair Allan on securing it. We have heard many strong and legitimate points from across the chamber. That can only help to send a strong and unified message from Scotland that we do not agree with the UK Government’s proposals. Like many members, I have received a lot of correspondence from members of staff who are affected by the proposals. I also met local west of Scotland coastguard staff this week to discuss the proposals further. I was impressed by their stance and the manner in which they have conducted themselves throughout the campaign. They have been extremely careful not to play one location off against another, as they know that that will only be divisive—as Charlie Gordon said, they know that the old adage of divide and conquer will only play into the hands of those who want to change the service. The staff are not against change itself. They realise that the only constant in life is change, and they know that areas of the service can be improved. As a Greenock resident, with the River Clyde playing a major role in the local economy, I am fully aware of how important the local coastguard service is. The Clyde station is the fifth largest in the UK in terms of the number of incidents that it dealt with last year, and it has also dealt with the highest number of incidents in Scotland. Despite that, the staff realise that how they deliver the service needs to change. One point that a few colleagues have mentioned this evening is safety. Safety is paramount. That point was raised last night at the cross-party group on recreational boating and marine tourism. The bottom line—which is what the bean counters understand—is what price a life has. Recreational boating and sailing are increasing, particularly on the west coast. Commercial traffic is increasing, whether from the cruise liner sector or for cargo. That is not to mention the nuclear submarines and missiles on the west coast, although that is a point for another day. Given the increase in traffic on the west coast, we must consider what the proposals will deliver, not just for the west coast but for the whole of Scotland. Whatever solution emerges from the consultation, safety must not be compromised. Alasdair Allan spoke about the understanding of local knowledge, which is vital and is one reason why I am disappointed by the plan to cut to two the number of full-time maritime operation centres in the UK. If a telecoms issue arose, how robust would the two-centre approach be? Not very, I imagine. How would someone in the Solent understand the colloquial terms that many communities in Scotland use? We have heard about some of that. I will raise an interesting point that was made last night and which has been touched on in the debate. What modelling did the UK Government undertake in preparing the proposals? What modelling has been undertaken for potential disasters, such as another Braer? Safety should be paramount, but the proposals will not guarantee the safety of our seas and rivers in Scotland.

What would have been the impact on the seizure of knives and other weapons if mandatory sentencing, as proposed by some parties, had been introduced? How would that have affected communities such as Inverclyde, where there has been a dramatic decrease in the number of knife-related incidents since the no knives, better lives initiative was established?

Lewis Macdonald said that Scotland punched below its weight on exporting and that several companies did not provide evidence to the committee because they felt that exporting was not a vital part of their business. That is exactly why committees need to have evidence from international sources whenever possible, to ensure that they have comparative information in order to move Scotland forward. I thank the clerking team for its hard work and dedication throughout the inquiry. The committee ensured that a wide range of voices and opinions was heard, which was certainly advantageous to the inquiry. The committee has produced a piece of work that is helpful to the debate about Scotland’s exporting and importing status. The debate is timely, coming, as it does, just a week after the announcement that Amazon is to create another 950 new jobs in Scotland—750 in Fife and 200 at the existing facility in Gourock—as well as 1,500 seasonal opportunities at Christmas time. Those jobs have been warmly welcomed—rightly so—and it is noticeable that SDI has been given tremendous credit for their creation. The committee’s report and inquiry dealt with many areas that I could touch on, some of which have already been addressed and some of which I expect to be addressed later, but I will touch on two. The first area is education and foreign languages. I studied French and German throughout school and university. I had the opportunity to study in France and Germany, as well as in Sweden, but I will not embarrass myself by saying anything in French or German, certainly not in front of Professor Harvie.

Maybe later. Studying abroad was a wonderful experience, but learning the language by living in the country was vital. It was an excellent experience for my personal development, and it is one that I would like even more people to have. At university, there were opportunities for non-language-course students to study abroad in English, not the host language. I found it extremely surprising that very few people took up those opportunities. I would have thought that it would have been clear that living abroad is a life-changing experience. The benefits of education and foreign language learning were always clear to me, but they were solidified during our inquiry. Scotland’s history is one of trading and Scots travelling the world. My experience at university indicated that we had lost some of that zest for trading and travelling. I was delighted that, at the outset of the inquiry, Dr Alison Hiley of Confluence Scotland highlighted the importance of language learning and translation services. Translation services are not cheap, and business translation activities go far beyond just being able to speak a language. Scotland faces a huge challenge in grabbing that bull by the horns and ensuring that foreign language education is fundamental in our education system. It is also vital that the public sector organisations that sell Scotland work towards ensuring that language skills are fundamental rather than just an add-on. Internationalising the nation through foreign languages will not happen overnight or in a four-year parliamentary session. The key point is that public perception needs to change. If we look at smaller European countries such as Sweden, Denmark, Norway and Switzerland, to name just a few, they realise that foreign languages are not just educationally beneficial, but are fundamental in business activities and selling their countries. There was a report on “Newsnight” last night on the teaching of Mandarin in an elementary school in Carolina. Jeremy Purvis mentioned China. The fact that pupils in such schools are learning Mandarin from the age of five is the result of a realisation that the world is changing and that being able to speak other languages, particularly those of Brazil, Russia, India and China—the BRIC countries—will become even more vital. My second point is about the SDI representatives who work for Scotland out in the field. It is welcome that when the report was written, Scotland had increased the number of such representatives from 51 in 2005 to 80.5. Having more people working to promote Scotland through SDI should provide greater rewards to our economy, but the extent to which SDI staff should have flexibility was highlighted in the report. Should they work in fixed locations or should they cover more countries? That issue has already been mentioned. Given that we will have limited and, indeed, shrinking resources in coming years, it will always be a case of prioritising those resources. We must ensure that we have effective cover in the target nations while ensuring that we do not spread ourselves too thinly or, conversely, fail to target enough countries. Other countries and regions have their own models, which we can look at and learn from. As one of the committee members who met representatives and, indeed, the President of Catalonia, I found it interesting to hear about what they perceived was the best way to promote Catalonia internationally. Closer to home, the Welsh Assembly Government brought its model in house to a department instead of having arm’s-length bodies undertaking the work. We need to find a Scottish solution rather than just replicate arrangements elsewhere. Our report indicates support for the current set-up of SDI, but we must not rest on our laurels. We can always strive for something better, although I am sure that the mess that is the global economy will provide some serious challenges for SDI, as will things that are outwith SDI’s control, such as the rising cost of raw materials leading to increased costs for exporting products that are made in Scotland. There are also the current issues of VAT increases, and increasing fuel costs leading to higher distribution costs and higher costs for the consumer, as well as potentially higher interest rates. It is clear that SDI is serving Scotland well but it has, and will have in the future, serious challenges to face. I look forward to the rest of the debate and the minister’s summing up. I hope that we can give unanimous support to the greater internationalisation of Scotland. Our economy needs to grow and we already have major iconic brands and industries. We are in a good position to weather the current economic storm but we must remain focused on the job.

Thank you, Presiding Officer, and happy new year to you and to everyone in the chamber. Much has already been said this afternoon, and in the media over the past couple of weeks, about  the UK Government's proposals for electricity market reform. I welcome the tone of the debate so far. In a few moments, I will focus on the fossil fuel levy, which the minister and my colleague Rob Gibson have touched on already. First, it is important to state that the related Ofgem review of the transmission charging regime, which is already under way, presents a wonderful opportunity to fully open up and harness the renewables potential that Scotland possesses. I am sure that all members, irrespective of party affiliation, want Scotland to enhance its credentials as a leading light—no pun intended—in renewables technology. I just hope that we do not miss the boat, certainly in the sense of financial benefit, as we have done since the 1970s, when oil and gas were found in the North Sea. I hope that we can work together in the Parliament to ensure that history does not repeat itself. The issue of the fossil fuel levy lies within the wider energy debate. It has been spoken about today and many other times in the chamber and in the Parliament's committees. Yesterday the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee had the UK Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, Chris Huhne MP, answering questions on UK energy policy. For my part, I thought that it was an extremely useful and worthwhile session, and it was a shame that it lasted for only an hour or so—a point that I made to the convener at the end of the meeting, as I thought that we could have discussed energy policy with the secretary of state for three hours or even longer. As members would expect, Mr Huhne promoted the UK Government's energy policy proposals extremely well, but he was open to other suggestions, which I thought was very useful. One issue that I am sure the secretary of state did not expect to be brought up in our discussion on energy policy is the thorny issue of bankers' bonuses, but I raised it with him yesterday. I appreciated Mr Huhne's honesty in his response, but I am left wondering about the green investment bank and the fossil fuel levy, which will be used to capitalise it. As I said yesterday, there is widespread political support for a green investment bank and it would be ideal for it to be established here in Scotland, as there is the financial expertise here—as well as Scotland's position in renewables. If the institution is to be established as a normal bank, as is the wish of Mr Huhne, issues of bail-outs and bankers' bonuses must be addressed at the very outset. If they are ignored, public support for such an institution will not be guaranteed. I would go as far as to say that in these times of austerity the public will never support the creation of any institution that might pay out obscene bonuses to even more bankers.  The direct link to this debate lies in the capitalisation of such an institution, with £250 million from the fossil fuel levy. Currently, Scotland's fossil fuel levy stands at more than £190 million, which, as we all know, can be taken at the expense of the Scottish block grant. However, the proposal from the UK Government is to forgo that money so as to be guaranteed £250 million from the GIB for 2013-14. If the fossil fuel levy were to be invested now, that could open up even more possibilities in my region. One prime example is that of Inverclyde, which narrowly missed out against more developed locations on resources from the national renewables infrastructure fund. I was disappointed that it missed out—but it was against other areas that were more developed. Who can say that if some of the fossil fuel levy were to come to Scotland now and find its way to Inverclyde, the area could not be helped to become the renewables hub that it has the potential to be? We have the core facilities and, with a bit of investment in the waterfront, Inverclyde could be on the cusp of a renewables boom. After yesterday, how can any politician sell to the people of Inverclyde and Scotland the idea that we should wait for a few years for the green investment bank to be established with capitalisation of £1 billion and guaranteed investment for Scotland of £250 million, when the bankers might well be paid obscene bonuses and the bank might have to go back to the taxpayer for a bail-out if it fails? I stress that I support the concept of a green investment bank, but we should not build it up to be a panacea. It might not be the answer to all our prayers. It goes without saying that the UK Government needs to work closely with the Scottish Government on electricity market reform and many other issues. The last thing that Scotland or any current investor in Scotland wants is the unintended consequence of lost investment and employment opportunities. Scotland can grasp the renewables opportunity and we are on our way. Electricity market reform by the UK Government, however well intentioned it is, must not hamper our growth and opportunities. The debate has been interesting and consensual—up to now; some members might disagree with what I just said. I hope that the Parliament will speak with a strong voice today. Collaboration between both Governments and Parliaments is essential for Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Government what support it makes available to juvenile pipe bands outwith the education sector. (S3O-12481)

The minister provided me recently with a very helpful response on funding  for pipe bands, but I would be grateful if she could clarify an element of the criteria. Every year juvenile pipe bands have a throughput of players: some reach the leaving age, new young players come in—some of whom are basic learners on the practice chanter—and some graduate from the chanter to the pipes. As a result, although the bands appear to qualify under at least two of the criteria for those who apply to the fund, the third element is up for debate. Will the minister provide some reassurance that juvenile pipe bands will not be penalised in their funding applications through Creative Scotland? Will she agree to meet me so that we can discuss the matter further?

I congratulate Robert Brown on securing the final members' business debate of 2010. I understand that the debate was to have taken place some time in January, but I am sure that Robert Brown's persuasion and the importance of the subject helped to bring it forward. I was only too happy to sign the motion, as I am one of the deputy conveners of the cross-party group on visual impairment, of which Robert Brown is the convener. Like other cross-party groups in the Parliament, it provides a valuable interface between the Parliament and members of the public, not to mention organisations such as RNIB Scotland and Guide Dogs. Robert Brown also mentioned Haggeye—RNIB Scotland's youth group—which is awe inspiring in what it achieves. That interface can only be a good thing in helping MSPs to understand the issues that affect the country. I do not intend to go over all the ground that has been laid out by Robert Brown, but I will touch on a couple of issues. Before I do so, it is important to stress the major strides that have been taken by the current Government and the previous Executive in eye care. The introduction of free eye tests has been a policy of which the Parliament and Scotland can be proud. It has followed the prevention model of intervention, which should be used more widely across the public sector. Prevention is always better than cure and tends to be cheaper in the long run. In these straitened times for the public sector, Scotland needs to work more on the prevention model. With neovascular age-related macular degeneration—AMD—accounting for more than half of all registered blindness in Scotland, there is obviously a problem to be dealt with. Wet AMD, which is the more aggressive of the two forms,  affects only 10 per cent of patients, but can be treated early. Saving the vision of one person is a gift that society can offer, but the value of saving the eyesight of potentially many more is incalculable. The issue highlights the importance of the NHS in Scotland as well as the importance that Scottish society places on dealing with sight loss. In 2009, there were 1,225 people throughout Scotland with wet AMD who required treatment. Although tremendous progress has been made in the NHS, there remain a number of challenges that need to be addressed. In any walk of life, nothing is perfect and there can always be improvements. Why should eye care be any different, particularly as such a low base was in existence until the free eye test was introduced? I cannot touch on all the challenges, but a couple of them are the regional inequalities in treatment and criteria, which Robert Brown touched on, and the need for improved services for follow-up patients—for example, patient counselling is deemed to be below the adequate standard. Through the cross-party group and, indeed, constituents, I have heard examples from life of how people were told that they were going to lose their sight. Obviously, their first reaction was utter shock, but one issue that has come up time and again is the lack of counselling or signposting to counsellors. There is no doubt that people who receive such devastating news require support—exactly the same applies to people who are told that they have cancer—and counselling is absolutely vital. I hope that Parliament will continue its good record on such matters. We should not beat ourselves up about not having the right solution at the moment; the truth is that we are nowhere near the summit in dealing with sight loss, including wet AMD, and with every day that passes our constituents are presented with life-changing experiences, which is bound only to increase with an ever-ageing population. I welcome the debate and the fact that the issue has been raised in Parliament. I am sure that the whole Parliament is committed to improving the service for everyone who has to deal with sight loss.

I welcome the debate on the stage 1 report on Hugh Henry's member's bill. As a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, I pay tribute to Mr Henry for introducing the bill and raising the issue in Parliament. I thank the committee members for their scrutiny of the bill, I thank everyone who provided evidence and I thank the committee clerking team for their endeavours. I am confident that the committee gave the bill a fair and thorough hearing, and we came to our conclusions and recommendations accordingly.  Every member who participates in today's debate will no doubt highlight their concerns about the protection of workers; we have heard some of those concerns already. Unquestionably, citizens in this country should be able to go about their daily lives and work in the knowledge that the law will protect them. The bill highlights the fact that existing legislation covers every citizen, but there is clearly an issue that affects public-facing workers. We had to ask ourselves in the committee, first, whether the bill would provide further protection and effective action to reduce verbal and physical attacks on public-facing workers; and, secondly, who qualifies as a public-facing worker. On the first point, if the bill is enacted as drafted, nothing new will be introduced and no extra protection will be created. Part 2 of the bill, which deals with penalties, suggests imprisonment of up to 12 months, or a fine, or both. That currently exists in legislation. The penalty of a sentence of up to 12 months is exactly the same as in the 2005 act, as we have heard, and in the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007. We therefore had to ask ourselves whether the bill would bring something new to the statute book. On the second point, I was not convinced by some of the arguments that were made about who qualifies as a public-facing worker. It is clear that shop workers, bar and restaurant workers and many others, as highlighted by Hugh Henry in his speech earlier, would qualify. However, I had concerns that people who work in factories on the shop floor would not be covered, while the management would at times be covered if they were out representing the business. I found it difficult to understand how people who work in shipyards and call centres would not be covered, while the management would be covered when they were out representing those companies. Paragraphs 65 to 71 of the report highlight the difficulty in defining who should be covered under the bill. The bill, like any other bill that comes before Parliament, would be subject to amendments, which was highlighted in the committee's evidence taking. However, if the bill was greatly extended to cover the examples that I have highlighted and other categories of worker throughout the country, it would lose the focus on what it is attempting to do. I whole-heartedly agree that more can always be done to protect all workers in Scotland. I do not think that the bill is the answer at this time, but I encourage the Scottish Government and the Parliament to work to address that important issue. Paragraph 64 and paragraphs 83 to 86 of the report contain important recommendations, and I look forward to hearing from the Government  on its proposals to address the issues that are raised in the bill and the stage 1 report.

To ask the Scottish Government what financial assistance it provides to retailers with the aim of creating jobs, supporting the local economy and bolstering tourism. (S3O-12424)

Recently, a constituent contacted me about the promotion of business and tourism opportunities in Inverclyde. His frustration at trying to move his project forward dates back to the time of the previous Scottish Executive, when money was sloshing about the enterprise agencies. Given the severe financial restrictions on the Scottish Government budget, what guarantees can be given to on-line businesses that are trying to promote economic growth and opportunities in Inverclyde and the west of Scotland?

I will support the amendment in the name of John Swinney this afternoon. I, too, acknowledge the hard work of everyone in Scotland who has tried to keep Scotland moving in the past couple of weeks. Much has already been said in this morning's debate, as well as in the media, about what happened in Scotland because of the weather in the past couple of weeks. I am afraid that some of what has been said is political opportunism, but some of the comments have been valid and legitimate. One thing is certain: last week's weather can only be described as appalling. However, it needs to be put in context. Last winter was the worst that I could remember, but this year the snow has arrived that much earlier. For many years, we have mainly had wet winters with a few days of snow. From my recollection, the few days of snow provided some challenges, but they could be overcome quite easily. I grew up in Port Glasgow. For any member who does not know the topography of Port Glasgow or Inverclyde, I say that it can be challenging to walk up the hill from the town centre even when the weather is fair. I know that the Presiding Officer knows the conditions of Port Glasgow very well, and she will be aware that walking up the hill in the snow and ice provides an even greater challenge. I no longer stay in that part of Inverclyde, but I was speaking to some friends who still stay up at the top of the hill and they were shocked by the conditions and the poor response of the local authority. However, they understood that the snow was extremely severe. Growing up in Port Glasgow, we could always tell the severity of the weather by how much snow lay down in the town centre. If there was a lot of snow there, we could guarantee that it would be  five times worse at the top of the hill. Unfortunately, last week's weather in Port Glasgow and across the central belt proved to be that bad. The higher ground suffered much more than the lower ground, but the lower ground was caught out by the severe weather conditions as well. I will give an example of the conditions in Inverclyde last week. Last Monday, a member of my staff travelled down from Glasgow to accompany me to the Greenock sorting office to learn about the activities of the Royal Mail staff in the run-up to Christmas. We arrived at 5 minutes past 8. It was raining outside and practically all the snow and ice from the previous few days had gone. When I left the house, it was snowing but, as I travelled down the hill to the sorting office, the snow turned to rain. When we came out of the sorting office at 20 past 9, there was approximately 1in of snow on the ground. While we were inside speaking to the staff and management, a few postmen came in with their heavy coats on and explained the conditions to one of the managers. Their coats had a fair amount of snow on them, which proved to me that they were telling the truth. I do not know which weather forecast Inverclyde Council was looking at, but it was clearly caught out by the conditions just as authorities across the central belt were. I could have played party politics and called for the resignation of the relevant councillor in charge of the roads, but I did not want to stoop to those depths. Could they have been better prepared? The answer is clearly yes, but to have councillors resign from councils throughout Scotland would not provide a correct solution. It is clear that there were failings in many parts of the country last week, and the former transport minister said that lessons had to be learned.

The point that has been made about a helpline is certainly an interesting one. I am sure that the member heard the response from the cabinet secretary earlier in the debate. Last week, there were many failures in parts of the country. We must learn the lessons from those failures. The Scottish Government recognises that some of the preparations that were in place were  not as robust as they were previously thought to be. I welcome the six-point plan that has been produced this week, but it is important to acknowledge a couple of important points. First, information from the Met Office indicates that last winter was the second coldest in Scotland since 1914, with only the winter of 1962-63 being colder. This year, snow has arrived earlier than last year. Secondly, there have been conflicting reports about what the weather forecasters were saying last week. I am afraid that, unlike Bill Kidd, who spoke earlier, I am not a weather forecast anorak. I may or may not catch the weather forecast on the telly—it is not a must-watch in my house. Also, this is December—it is cold, it is winter and it may snow.

I am sorry, but I am in my final minute. At the weekend, I had a chat with my brother-in-law, who thought that Stewart Stevenson was correct to resign. In contrast, my sister-in-law said that he should not have resigned, as he was not in charge of the weather. My brother-in-law stays in Inverclyde and recently started a short-term contract in Edinburgh, so he drives through every day. He told me that, on Sunday night, he checked the BBC website for the weather forecast, which reported some sunshine; snow was not mentioned. As a result, early the next morning he set off for Edinburgh, only to turn back when the blizzards came. A neighbour of mine who is a teacher told me that they managed to get to their school for 8.30, only to hear when they got there that it had been shut, along with all the other schools in Inverclyde. It is clear that there was a local communication issue. Clearly, there have been problems. We must learn lessons and ensure that we are better prepared for such conditions. I welcome the debate and congratulate my colleague Keith Brown on becoming the new Minister for Transport and Infrastructure. I am sure that he will deal with his post in the way in which he dealt with his previous ministerial portfolio.

I am happy to take part in this debate on the stage 1 report on the Damages (Scotland) Bill, which is being promoted by Bill Butler. I commend him for his efforts and determination thus far. Members will be aware of my interest in damages issues and my involvement as a member of the Justice Committee when it examined the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill earlier in the session. Although I am not a member of the committee any more, I signed the proposal for Bill Butler's bill after meeting him some months ago, and I have been keeping an eye on the bill's progress through the committee. I am keen to ensure that members of the public can have confidence in the Parliament and its course of action in dealing with damages issues. In my opinion, the Parliament has dealt with the issues fairly and justly, and thankfully previous bills have succeeded. I am, of course, referring particularly to the asbestos-related legislation in the current and previous sessions. The committee has recommended that the bill should proceed to stage 2, but members have spoken about a few issues that need to be resolved. I do not intend to go over old ground, but I will touch on one issue that I found of interest in the committee's report. With every paragraph, I was becoming more convinced that the 25 per cent compensation payment was the way forward, but then I got to the arguments against, and I thought that they were also logical and correct. I can therefore understand why the committee has recommended that Bill Butler and the Scottish Government should meet and attempt to resolve that vital issue. I was happy to hear Bill Butler's comments on the matter earlier in the debate. For me, this important aspect of the bill comes down to a couple of key points. The first is that we need to ensure that the claimant obtains their damages with as little delay as possible while also ensuring that they obtain a fair and equitable result. Secondly, we need to ensure that the fair and equitable damages award is just that for those who have to pay out. People might ask—I do not  know whether the issue was raised in the private sessions—whether it would be such a bad thing if the surviving relative or family was overcompensated by a small margin. After all, they have lost a loved one, and no amount of money will ever replace them, especially when they have been taken tragically through a wrongful death, but a slight overcompensation might not be a bad thing. There are various other issues in the bill that I would like to discuss, but time constraints prevent me from doing so. I fully appreciate that the bill, although short in page numbers, is not short in terms of the issues that it highlights and the questions that it raises for the committee, the Government, the Parliament and wider Scotland. I do not think that I am speaking out of turn when I say that every party in the Parliament wants to ensure that damages legislation is robust in order to protect our citizens. It could be argued that all three Scottish Law Commission reports on damages should be rolled up into one larger bill, and who knows what will happen post the election in May? However, the here and now dictates that the bill is trying to provide some solutions. It is clear that there are issues that require to be addressed, and I am sure that Bill Butler will have been working on them in anticipation that the bill will move on to stage 2. I will vote for the bill to proceed but, for the good of the bill and what it aims to do, it needs to address the many points and questions that the committee has raised. If it does that, it will be a thoroughly useful addition to the statute book.

The Christie commission has been set up to look at the future of public service delivery. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that the SNP intends to reflect that review in future budgets, and that it is important that financial details for future years are not fixed in stone, so that changes can be made to reflect any changes to services proposed by the Christie commission?

Is that what you are saying?

I welcome this debate because it is imperative that the Scottish economy moves forward to create employment opportunities, improve skills, increase the internationalisation of business and, in general, make the Scottish economic product the most innovative that it can be. There will be much that members across the chamber can agree on, as well as the usual party politicking that divides us. Nonetheless, I am sure that we can all agree with the famous political phrase, "It's the economy, stupid." That needs to be paramount in all our minds. The Lib Dems have every right to promote their policies, whether I agree with them or not, but I find it strange that they are pursuing their policy on yet more reorganisation of the enterprise agencies while we on the Economy, Energy and Tourism  Committee are undertaking an inquiry into the same agencies.

It was not actually a major criticism, if I may develop the point. The Lib Dems do not need to take any cognisance of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee and our deliberations because they are not in a position of power. They do not have to listen to anything that comes out of the committee. However, I would have thought that the evidence that we have heard up until now and which we will hear during budget scrutiny would be of use to the whole political process and to all parties in the Parliament. I hope that all parties keep an open mind instead of closing off potential opportunities that arise in evidence. The committee has not completed its inquiry and no report has yet been published, so I cannot predict what it will say. One thing that is evident is that there should be no further changes to the enterprise agencies so soon after 2007. We have debated that point already this morning and Gavin Brown commented on it.

I was just coming to that point. The evidence suggests that there needs to be some tweaking, partly because the process is still fairly new. The chief executive of Skills Development Scotland admitted to the committee that lessons need to be learned and that the process is not perfect. He also said that the agencies have been fully operational for only a short time, so why scrap them now and try to do something brand new? Yesterday in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, we heard some more interesting evidence. Unprompted, we heard that one thing that would make a massive difference to the Scottish economy would be for the fossil fuel levy to be allocated to Scotland immediately. The opportunity to boost the renewables sector in Scotland is vast and the feeling from both Scottish Enterprise and HIE was that it should happen now instead of waiting for the creation of the green investment bank. I am sure that all the parties in the Parliament want Scotland to deliver on its renewable potential. We have a wonderful opportunity to harness a sustainable energy future. The sooner we further progress that, the better. Throughout the country, we have the opportunity to create employment and to revitalise  economies and communities. Let us stop limiting our potential and get the renewable boon moving. Jeremy Purvis touched on the importance of education in our economy. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee has heard of the importance of foreign students coming to Scotland and the additional money that that brings into the economy. There is the knock-on effect of additional tourism from family and friends coming to visit a student here or the foreign national returning to Scotland for a vacation after graduation. Irrespective of that, education is vital to our economic position and our economic growth prospects. With that in mind, I question the Lib Dems and their Conservative colleagues in the Westminster Parliament on their proposal to raise tuition fees to up to £9,000 south of the border.

The direct effect of tuition fees of up to £9,000 for students in England and the knock-on effect on Scotland will be terrible—it will certainly be terrible for the Scottish economy. We in the Parliament would be foolish to think that such fees will not have a knock-on effect on the Scottish economy, although they will not have a direct effect on Scottish students. What would happen to the number of people in Scotland who could study in a Scottish university if Scottish universities had an influx of students from south of the border who could not afford to pay up to £9,000 in tuition fees or who did not want to pay those extortionate fees? Such an influx would make it more difficult for Scottish students to go to university here. If fewer Scottish students went to university, surely that would make the situation more challenging for the Scottish economy in the future—not to mention the life chances of the potential students. Increasing tuition fees will have a devastating effect on students, particularly those from less well-off backgrounds. In effect, it could punish people for being poor. I do not think that that is what the Lib Dems want. If the reports are true, the minister responsible—Vince Cable—might even vote against his own proposal. Some people would think that that was political opportunism in the extreme. Forcing through such massive changes on students will have a knock-on effect on Scotland, the Scottish economy and Scottish students.  A week is a long time in politics. I sincerely hope that the Lib Dems and the Tories will have a change of heart and will drop the education tax bombshell but, given the announcement last night that the vote will be brought forward to next Thursday, I have my doubts. Scottish students will suffer as a consequence. I hope that the Lib Dems will have a change of heart on several matters—their apparent narrow focus on enterprise, on which their minds are made up; their long-grass position on the fossil fuel levy; and their punishment of poor students. I will therefore back the amendment in Jim Mather's name and reject the Lib Dems' motion.

Three weeks ago, I took part in a debate in this  chamber on managing Scotland's public finances. It was not the Parliament's finest hour, if we leave aside Ross Finnie's contribution. I thought that such political knockabout was now out of the way and that today's debate would be a bit more constructive, and it has been, apart from a few gems of yah-boo politics such as "sacrificed on the altar of party politics"; "minority Government with a majority ego"; "blackmail"; "horse's head"; and "dishonesty and now dictatorship". We have also had Mr McNulty speaking about Wile E Coyote and blackmail and Robert Brown speaking about "the slaughter of SNP sacred cows". Earlier in his speech, Robert Brown said that the people of Scotland would appreciate the finance minister and the First Minister telling the people how things are. As we face cuts of 6.3 per cent, 1 per cent, 2.6 per cent and 1.8 per cent, that is how things will be in the coming years. I am sure that Mr Brown knows that because he will have looked at the CSR. Every one of us in the chamber is aware of the state of the UK public finances and we are all aware of the CSR that was produced recently by the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition Government in London. We are also aware of the effects that the CSR is having on the Scottish budget—a cut of £1.3 billion for next year, which equates to a 6.3 per cent cut. The challenge for the Scottish Government and the Parliament is how we deal with that. I will touch on other budget issues in a moment, but first I want to discuss one particular area. The Labour motion talks about the uncertainty that the presentation of a one-year budget will create. That would be a legitimate argument if it were the first time that such a budget has been undertaken but, as we know, the Parliament only ever produces a one-year budget. Further years are indicative and subject to change. A further point was made in comments from David Bell, who is the adviser to the Finance Committee.

I ask to make some progress. Mr. Bell wrote in his report to the committee: "However, if it is only a single year budget that is being presented, it is not clear what budgetary purpose is being served by looking beyond 2011-12. For example, it seems incongruous to include 'forecasts' of how long it might take public sector spending in Scotland to return to 2009-10 levels when these extend to 2026-27."

I was coming to that point. As our level of public spending is to be less than we wished for many years ahead, John Swinney deserves tremendous credit for commissioning the Christie commission to look at the longer-term position of our valued public services. Clearly, if the money coming to the Parliament is to be cut year on year and then take many more years to get back to the 2009-10 levels, it is common sense that we have no other option than to examine how best we can provide our public services. I can think of no better person than Mr Christie to look into that.

I have to make progress. As for the impact of the budget and how services will be affected, the debate about that is live in the committees of this Parliament as well as in wider Scotland. Yesterday in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, we heard that the Scottish Trades Union Congress would abandon the small business bonus scheme. We also heard Professor Brian Ashcroft of the Fraser of Allander institute and Alf Young state that if they could alter one thing in the budget, they would remove the protection from the health budget. They felt that, if cuts were to be made, the health budget should not be protected. Yesterday's evidence-taking session highlighted many more suggestions, but those two stood out. I disagree with the suggestions—I am sorry to say that I disagree with Mr Young, because it is not often in the Parliament that we find two Greenock Morton supporters in the same room at the same time. Everyone has their own ideas. The budget process is about putting them into the melting pot and moving things forward. As well as the uncertainty of the Scottish budget in the future, it looks as though the chancellor might alter Scottish DEL and AME in his March budget. Then there is the small matter of the election in May. It goes without saying that I believe the only sensible way that the Parliament can continue to progress is for the SNP to be returned, but I have only one vote and it will be up to the Scottish electorate who will manage our finances after the election. If it is Labour, which has different priorities from those of the SNP, the council tax freeze will be stopped, private finance initiative car-parking charges that it introduced will be stopped and, according to its policy document, it will purchase a newspaper for every 18-year-old. Budgets are about choices and parties have to stand on their record of what they have delivered. This budget, however, is unprecedented in the short history of this reconvened Parliament. With  massive cuts cutting too deep and too fast, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has the thankless task of trying to steer Scotland out of this situation with his hands tied behind his back. I will support his amendment this afternoon.

The continuation of the council tax freeze will be welcomed by people across Scotland, apart from those in the Labour and Liberal Democrat headquarters. Will all the money that is allocated to local authorities for the council tax freeze go towards the local authorities, even if at least one of them does not implement the freeze? That is to say, can the money that is allocated be distributed  to the other local authorities that implement the freeze, so that they will get additional funding to spend in their areas?

The minister might or might not be aware of my long-standing campaign to tackle flooding in Inverclyde, but I know that the minister to his left, Roseanna Cunningham, is. Given that much of the flooding is a result of years of neglect by the owners of the infrastructure in Inverclyde—including, I should say, Inverclyde Council and Scottish Water—is the minister able to guarantee that the development of micropower generation schemes will not be the sole preserve of Scottish Water and that small-scale community renewables projects that can aid the flood prevention  measures that have already been introduced by the Scottish National Party Government will still be able to take place?

To ask the First Minister what assistance the Scottish Government is giving to local authorities to ensure that roads are kept clear and safe in the eventuality of a repeat of last winter's weather conditions. (S3F-2698)

I am sure that the First Minister agrees that the conditions that we experienced last year were by no means new to Scotland and that the increase in admissions to accident and emergency units last winter was linked to the severe weather conditions. Does he agree that the use of people on community service to assist local authorities in clearing our roads and streets last year was a positive measure? Will he give an assurance that the initiative will be rolled out to the west of Scotland and throughout the nation this winter, if that is required?

When I read the subject of today's debate, I was a wee bit surprised. I actually had to check the calendar to make sure that it was not 1 April. Let us face it, I thought. If Labour members are talking about managing public finances, they are either being ironic or showing barefaced cheek, with selective amnesia thrown in for good measure. I continued to read the motion and realised that they are clearly out of touch with reality and with the electorate. Only last week we learned of the now infamous leaked Labour document with its wish list of uncosted proposals. We have already heard much of Labour's uncosted wish list and it warrants even further scrutiny but, as time is not on my side, I will be able only to scratch the surface of how Labour wants to provide a tax hammer blow to taxpayers in Scotland. Apart from being unionists together, the other thing that links Labour, its on-off coalition partners the Lib Dems, and the latter's masters, the Tories, is support for the disastrous Edinburgh trams project. This week, their pet project sank to a new low, and I am sure that next year the good people of Edinburgh who day in, day out suffer the shambolic trams project—or the no-trams project, as it should now be called—will remember who inflicted the disaster on them.

Certainly. As we have already heard this morning in the debate, the comment was attributed to John Swinney that the project should move forward as soon as possible. Everyone who pays tax would recommend that, too. If the Edinburgh farce was not bad enough, Labour is determined to reintroduce the GARL project in the west. Public opinion is not for it, and the money is not there—there has been an £800 million cut in the capital budget. Where will the money come from to build GARL?  Another item of public spending is free personal and nursing care. The Sutherland report highlighted that free personal care had been underfunded since its inception and Nicola Sturgeon was congratulated on providing an additional £40 million per annum to improve the operation of the policy. If Labour is now saying that it would remove that additional funding and, according to its wish list, spend it on providing recycling bins in town centres and buying free newspapers for all 18-year-olds, that tells the Parliament and the electorate in Scotland of Labour's priorities.

It is in the Labour wish list that it wants to provide newspapers to 18-year-olds and therefore to remove the money. Labour's motion also talks about 3,000 teachers who are out of work. I know that facts and figures are not Labour's strong point—otherwise, the shambles that are the UK public finances would not be getting slashed too far and too fast by the Tories and Lib Dems down in London—but I would have expected someone from Labour to read the Official Report of First Minister's question time last week, when the First Minister was challenged on teacher numbers. In reality, 575 teachers were claiming jobseekers allowance—not 3,000. That is 575 too many, but if Labour members are serious about employing more teachers, I suggest that they cease their politicking on this critical issue and tell the councils where Labour is in power to start employing teachers again. Of the fall in the number of teachers in employment, two thirds come from councils where Labour is in power.

I already have done, and I will now make some progress. Labour members also talk about the NHS and job losses. What they have conveniently forgotten is that there are more nurses and NHS staff now than when the SNP came to power in 2007. Added to that is the additional investment of the dental hospital in Aberdeen. The summary of today's debate is thus: a vote for Labour will stop investment in free personal care for the elderly, but it will buy newspapers for 18-year-olds. It will cut the number of nurses and doctors after the record numbers provided by this SNP Government. With GARL, Labour will introduce the farce of the Edinburgh trams to the  west of Scotland so that our economy can suffer too. It will scrap the Scottish Futures Trust, which has already brought in £111 million of savings according to independent reports, and it will extend the hugely costly PPP/PFI hammer-blow projects. Labour will scrap the council tax freeze, affecting the poorest and the elderly the worst, and it will introduce a basket of taxes to make Scotland the most heavily taxed part of the UK. The plans are estimated to cost Scottish households some £3,000 in additional taxation over the next four-year parliamentary session. There are many more examples, but I am sure that most of us in the chamber are depressed enough by the long list of despair that Labour will be offering Scotland next year. I am sure that the telephone lines out of the Parliament will be busy as MSPs and staff call their general practitioners to get a prescription for Prozac at the thought of Labour waging war against local communities and our constituents if it wins next May. Thanks to the SNP Government, prescription charges are down to £3 and will be free from next April. As we know, Labour wants to hike the prescription charge as well. I do not know what has happened to the air of optimism that Ed Miliband is talking about, but it certainly has not filtered into the Labour psyche up here. The bottom line is that voting Labour will seriously damage our health. I spoke in Labour's economy debate in April, and things have not moved much further forward since then. The only way in which progress can be made and that this Parliament and Scotland can move forward is with the normal powers of an independent Parliament, rather than the pocket money Parliament so favoured by the unionist parties. I urge the chamber to back the amendment in the name of John Swinney.

I, too, congratulate John and Elizabeth on the birth of Matthew. I am sure that they have many happy  years ahead of them and that, in the next month or so, the changing of nappies and looking after Matthew will provide a welcome distraction from the budget. This is the fourth time that the issue has come before the Parliament. All credit is due to the Lib Dems for their perseverance, but I have heard nothing new to indicate that the result of the vote at decision time at 5 pm will be any different from that on the previous three occasions. Every MSP will know of businesses in their electoral area that have benefited from the SNP Government's welcome actions. Many small business owners to whom I have spoken in recent years have benefited from the introduction of the small business bonus scheme. They were delighted that the SNP introduced the scheme, particularly given the timing. It has helped them through the recession and, in some instances, has helped their businesses to survive. Furthermore, even the Liberal Democrats should welcome the extension of the small business bonus scheme this year, which involves abolishing business rates for some businesses, halving them for others and reducing them by a quarter for others. However, in this Parliament, the Lib Dems have not been in the business of working together—well, not with the SNP Government, anyway. They are good at coalitions, right enough, either with Labour up here or with the Tories down in Westminster. Mr Kerr spoke earlier about alliances in the Parliament, but he obviously forgot about the five Labour-Conservative local authority alliances in Scotland, including two in the West of Scotland region, in Inverclyde Council and East Dunbartonshire Council. The motion highlights the Lib Dems' concerns about the business rates revaluation. In a perfect world, everyone would be a winner, but we do not live in a perfect world. The Lib Dems and their Tory masters in London proved that last week by introducing savage cuts to Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom. The Con-Dem cuts of last week will force just under half a million public sector workers on to the dole, with the private sector expected to pick up the pieces. The small business sector is the backbone of the Scottish economy, but how many small businesses here will be able to take on additional staff? I do not know the answer to that, but I know that if the small business bonus scheme and the extension had not happened and if the rates revaluation did not benefit the small business sector, there would be fewer small businesses in Scotland. As a consequence, fewer small businesses would have the opportunity to take people on to help with the recovery from the wreckage of the tougher and deeper cuts of Mr  Purvis's party and his Tory colleagues in Westminster.

As I said, we will all suffer because of the savage cuts that were announced last week and that are coming to Scotland and the rest of the UK. That is why the small business sector in Scotland, which is the backbone of the economy, is vital. I am conscious of time, Presiding Officer, so I will conclude. The SNP Government has an excellent record on helping businesses. It has the most generous rates relief package in the UK, with the small business bonus scheme, renewables rates relief and rural rates relief, and it has equalised the poundage rates with those in England. I would rather go to the electorate with a record of trying to help businesses in Scotland than with that of the Tory lackeys, who have introduced savage cuts in last week's comprehensive spending review and in the emergency budget in the summer. I hope that the electorate will recognise the true Lib Dem agenda of continuing to restrict Scotland's ambition instead of helping to choose a better way for Scotland by giving the Parliament the full powers of a normal independent nation.

And Inverclyde Council.

To ask the Scottish Government what actions it has taken to ensure that large-scale infrastructure projects benefit workers in local communities. (S3O-11636)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that we have discussed community benefit clauses before. In Inverclyde, three groups of organisations—the urban regeneration company, the local authority and housing associations—have such clauses in their infrastructure projects. However, this week yet another constituent—who is a joiner—told me that he has been unemployed for two years and just cannot get a job. Much of the work that is going on benefits people outside the Inverclyde area. What more can be done to strengthen or further utilise the community benefit clauses to ensure that local people in the communities where the work is taking place benefit from them?

The minister is well aware of my long-standing interest in flooding in Inverclyde. Can she provide any guidance to the council's current Labour-Conservative-independent administration that would force it into action, as opposed to the decades of inaction on the part of that administration and previous ones?

The minister highlighted the UK Government's establishment of a panel to explore what needs to be done to make local television commercially viable. What discussions has the minister had with Nicholas Shott and his team to impress on them the importance of any consultation process being genuinely public and of the need to ensure that consultation events take place in a variety of places in Scotland, which will allow a range of opinions to be heard from across Scotland and will, more importantly, ensure that the consultation does not have a remote and centralised appearance?

There is still an element of delay, as I am sure the member will agree, so we will see what happens in the future. We are where we are, and I hope that the fossil fuel levy issue can be sorted out sooner rather than later. Much has been made of the UK Government's respect agenda and its attitude  towards the Scottish Government, and this Parliament should reiterate its wish to have that large sum of money—which, as the minister said, is in the region of £189 million—brought back to Scotland to be invested in renewable energy projects. I note that my SNP colleague Kenneth Gibson has lodged a motion today—S3M-7055—on the fossil fuel levy, and I encourage every member in the chamber to sign up to it. The committee's second recommendation centres on transmission charges. Ofgem announced yesterday that it has launched a review of gas and electricity charges, and the SNP welcomes that as an opportunity to end the discriminatory transmission charging system that results in Scottish electricity generators paying the highest grid charges in the UK. The SNP has for years been pressing Ofgem to move away from the current charging model. We strongly dispute the assertion that it has served the energy industry well, as there have been serious concerns about its impact on renewable generation. However, I am pleased that Ofgem finally accepts that the present regime is not suitable for the encouragement of low-carbon renewable generation, given that generators have little option with regard to where they can site such developments. I am conscious of time, so I will touch only briefly on the area of energy efficiency, which I discussed with a few members in the Parliament last night. There are two areas that we must work on: the energy efficiency of commercial and business premises, and the energy efficiency of domestic properties. I will deal with the issue of commercial properties, as time is limited. I feel that there is a massive opportunity for retrofitting the aircraft hangar-type supermarkets that are sprouting up across the whole of Scotland and, with regard to building regulations, I hope that local authorities can consider placing stricter conditions on applications to build them.

The minister is aware of my interest in bringing renewables jobs to Inverclyde. I hope for a positive response to my letter in which I invited him to come to Inverclyde to meet a couple of renewables companies. Can the minister provide reassurance that places such as Inverclyde will not be omitted from consideration for renewables jobs that come to Scotland?

Obviously, we have heard quite a lot, both this morning and in the continuation of the debate this afternoon, about how Scotland will deal with the severe cuts from the Westminster Parliament over what is expected to be a long number of years. I will touch on Pauline McNeill's point that Trident is not relevant to this debate. If Trident is not relevant, it is certain that VAT and the other Westminster-related issues that she highlighted are not relevant to the debate either. Some of the accusations and arguments about the Government's failure to publish a draft budget have been, to be honest, quite staggering. When I spoke to constituents over the summer, the cuts that Westminster will impose on the Scottish Parliament often came up, but the people I spoke to were quite astounded at the proposal that we should publish a draft budget. When I pointed out that we do not know how much money we will have and that we could not really put forward proposals when we did not know whether they would happen, the vast majority of people agreed with me 100 per cent.

As Mr Swinney goes round the country, he can talk about the estimates that have been published, but there is nothing factual and nothing concrete. That is the key point about the scenario with the draft budget that Andy Kerr and Jackie Baillie have argued for. We have heard a great deal of talk from the Opposition but very little about how it will deal with the financial shambles that is the UK public finances. We heard some proposals from the Labour Party, primarily from Lord Foulkes. He certainly let the cat out of the bag when he said that he wanted to see the Scottish Parliament  increase tax using the tax-varying powers. In the past, Councillor Gordon Matheson has said that he wants to scrap the council tax freeze. There we have it, certainly from the Labour Party point of view. Labour wants to tax people even more; it wants to punish the most hard-pressed people in our society.

I need to make progress. I will try to let in the member in a moment. I read the Unison briefing note last night. I do not always agree with Unison. Indeed, I do not agree with everything in the briefing note except for where it says that, even when "it is appropriate to start reducing the deficit, spending cuts will not be the only way to cut debt" and suggests the introduction of a fairer tax system and "cutting out wasteful spending including PPP schemes, consultants and Trident." The point that Unison makes on PPP is interesting. I am delighted that it agrees that it is a foolish policy to saddle our population with an annual debt mountain of £1 billion, particularly when the current outstanding bill for Labour's PPP projects is £27 billion. PPP in Scotland was introduced by the previous Scottish Executive.

I need to make some progress. I turn to the CSR in October. One of the first things that John Swinney will have to account for in writing up his budget will be to ensure that the PPP bombshell is covered. The public-private partnership is a funding method that the former Executive and public bodies used. The correct way forward is to look at other methods that would be financially beneficial to the taxpayer. I therefore welcome the IBR and the call that is made in the report for the role of the Scottish Futures Trust to be expanded. On page 129 of the report, the panel suggests that "the Scottish Government should consider enhancing the role of the Scottish Futures Trust to allow it to lead improvements in capital procurement" and in paragraph 6.12 on page 122, that the Scottish capital budget "is projected to fall by £900 million by 2014-15". In paragraph 6.19, the report says that it is clear "that parts of the capital programme are more exposed to reductions in Scottish Government's capital budget". In its annual report, which was published last week, the Scottish Futures Trust said that last year's activities will accrue savings of £114 million.  If Opposition members do not believe what the SFT says in its annual report—which I am sure they probably will not—I hope that they respect the independent London School of Economics, which verified the Scottish Futures Trust figures. The Scottish Futures Trust is delivering for Scotland. As the Confederation of British Industry Scotland says, "the SFT is performing a useful role in delivering expert advice in areas of financing, procurement, housing and best value." That is positive support from an external body. The SFT is a welcome addition to the funding of capital projects. In future, I hope that more schools will be built using SFT financing as compared to PPP/PFI.

Apart from Lord Foulkes, we have heard much about nothing from Labour. Until we know exactly how much the Parliament will get—and, looking forward, until we get the full powers of independence and become a normal Parliament just like those in normal countries—we will not be fully able to deal with the problems that we have and those that we inherit from Westminster Governments past and future.

I welcome the legislative programme. I could say something about all the proposed bills, but I will not do that as much has already been said about some of them. Instead, I will focus on a couple. We have heard a lot of rhetoric from Opposition members, but there are a couple of points that it is important to highlight. First, I wanted to remind Mike Rumbles, who is unfortunately not in the chamber at the moment, that the SNP has already delivered 77 of its 90 manifesto commitments. Secondly, with the SNP Government being a minority Administration, it is a testament to the Government that it has worked together with COSLA, the STUC, the police and the National Union of Students. That can be compared with the approach that was taken in the past—an approach of working in silos. We discussed that point this morning at the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. Such work has been a positive step by the SNP Government. One of the proposed bills that I want to touch on is the reservoir safety bill. Members will be aware that one of the campaigns that I have undertaken during the past three and a half years concerns flooding in Inverclyde. I stay in Inverclyde. I grew up in Port Glasgow and I now stay in Greenock. Over the years, Inverclyde has been blighted by flooding year after year. I am not talking just about the past three years or 10 years. The problem has gone on for decades, but nothing was done about it until 2008, when the SNP Government introduced the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill. When I was growing up, the Blackstone roundabout in Port Glasgow was a big swimming pool when the autumn came, and further down the road at Ladyburn on the A8 there is still a bit of a swimming pool when the weather is bad. Part of the problem is the reservoirs at the top of Inverclyde, so I warmly and whole-heartedly welcome the proposed bill and the fact that the Government wants to deal with the problem.  I also welcome the announcement today that the Scottish Government is to provide £63,000 of funding to the Scottish flood forum. Over the past three and half years, the Scottish Government has established a record of trying to tackle flooding problems. Things will not change overnight and the problems will not be fully fixed overnight, but the Government has started to do the work and the bill will certainly continue that. I have dealt with many constituents as a result of flooding in Inverclyde, including constituents who worked for Scottish Water in whatever form, who raised many problems with reservoirs and their effect on the Inverclyde community over the years. I look forward to considering the bill. A bill that marries well with the reservoir safety bill is the water bill. It is logical to assume that both bills will result in renewable energy benefits for our communities and local economies. The water bill will also go some way to try to meet our climate change targets. I turn to the health (certification of death) bill. I am the co-convener of the cross-party group on funerals and bereavement, hence my touching on the bill. I welcome Jackie Baillie's comments on the bill. Des McNulty is not in the chamber to hear this, but I was slightly disappointed in his comments. I look forward to the bill coming on to the agenda of the cross-party group over the coming months. It is an important bill. We have only to consider its application to every member in the chamber and everyone in the public gallery. Every person has to die at some point. It is a fact of life that we all will die.

There is a serious point to be made. Dealing with death is a most difficult time for families. As they come to terms with what has happened, they are hit with different bills and do not know what they are for. Bringing together charges is a positive step forward, whether a burial or cremation is involved. Improvements in information gathering and the utilisation of information are also important. Those two important measures will make better the lives of the families of those who have passed away.

I will raise the matter with the cabinet secretary. We can also put it on the agenda of the cross-party group. The member will be most welcome to attend the meeting. I turn to the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill. I read with interest Duncan McNeil's column in the Greenock Telegraph this week. He said that the Parliament was re-established to deal with "Scottish solutions for Scottish problems". I could not agree more. We have a major problem with alcohol misuse in this country. Instead of passing it down to London and asking Big Brother to deal with the problem, I would rather that this Parliament dealt with such problems.

One of the problems is obviously price. I will give you an example of something that happened this summer. I was out on my summer tour with police officers in Kirkintilloch. They stopped their van to speak to a couple of lads walking down the street who had in a carrier bag what turned out to be two bottles of wine. When the police officer asked why they had bought that and not what they would normally drink, they replied, "It was a great deal—two bottles for £7." According to the police officers, those two individuals could not be put down as regular wine drinkers—they normally drink something else—so it is obvious that cost and the cheapness of some alcohol is the problem. It is one of the major problems that this Parliament must deal with. There is a debate tomorrow on the independent budget review, which I am sure will be interesting and I hope will be enlightening in respect of what some of the Opposition parties actually talk about. However, there is another key element: the constituents. Every single constituent whom I spoke to as part of my summer tour knows that there is a massive problem in the public finances. They are willing to take part and deal with that problem, but we as a Parliament, including every party represented here, must act responsibly to move things forward. You are giving me the signal to conclude, Presiding Officer, so I will. I am certainly looking forward to next May, when we can put the referendum issue to the Scottish people. As an English-born Scottish nationalist, I whole-heartedly believe in the Scottish people because I know that they will make the right choice. I look forward to  the election, and I know that Scotland will become independent so that we can stand up for ourselves, have some self-respect and take more decisions for ourselves, instead of continually having to look to London to get some direction.

To ask the Scottish Government what issues were discussed at its most recent meeting with ministers from the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. (S3O-11144)

I congratulate the cabinet secretary on securing further discussions on the devolution of animal health and welfare budgets following his recent talks with DEFRA. That is a major step forward for Scotland, which I hope that everyone recognises. Will the cabinet secretary explain the details of how those discussions will progress and the timescales for the budgets that are being devolved?

Is it not the case that the gathering and the wider homecoming celebrations were initially devised by the previous Labour-led Administration and that, as at May 2007, nothing had been done to progress the programme of events, leaving this Scottish National Party Government to pick up the pieces?

To ask the Scottish Government what financial assistance it provides to improve railway stations in the west of Scotland. (S3O-10908)

I have met representatives of groups that are involved in the adopt a station scheme, and have been impressed by their suggestions to reinvigorate and return to their former glory older and more traditional stations in the west of Scotland. Will the minister give an assurance that any public investment via the scheme will guarantee that the historic and architectural significance of the stations will be of paramount importance and that current branding can be adapted using traditional livery styles, thus guaranteeing the traditional appearance while promoting the current organisational branding?

It is no surprise that the tone of the debate has been a wee bit less than constructive. However, Ross Finnie made a valid point when he said that patients should be central to the debate. I am sure that he will find that my speech reflects that concern. Helen Eadie talked about the use of endowment funds when there is a shortage of funding. The League of Hospital Friends Inverclyde has operated at the Inverclyde royal hospital since 1973 and has donated more than £1 million to local health services. Last week it donated a £50,000 eye scanner to the health board.  According to Helen Eadie's logic, surely that means that there has been a shortage of funding in health boards in the West of Scotland since at least 1973. There is some amnesia on the Labour benches about the NHS in Scotland and about the financial implications for public services in Scotland and throughout the UK as a result of the shambles that is the UK public finances. Members should make no mistake: we will be paying for the debt that was left by Labour at Westminster for many years to come, and the population of Scotland and the UK will suffer. The best thing the Scottish Parliament can do is to try to find a united voice to speak out against further cuts to the Scottish budget. We had cuts of £500 million from the previous UK Labour Government, and cuts of £332 million have been deferred until next year. There are a few points that need to be aired. There are issues in the public sector; there always have been and always will be. Nothing in this world is perfect and the job of every Government, whatever its political hue, is to try to improve the services for which it is responsible. If Labour thinks that job losses "will inevitably have a detrimental impact on patient care", as it says in the motion, we must question why staffing levels in 2007, when Labour was in power, were lower than they are now. Surely if we follow Labour's logic we must agree that Labour underfunded and underresourced the NHS in Scotland for eight years.

I need to make progress. Labour wanted to close the A and E facilities at Ayr hospital, Monklands hospital and the Inverclyde royal hospital. However, I am thankful that all the units were saved: the first two by the SNP Government and the IRH by a vociferous campaign by the people of Inverclyde. If the units had closed, more staff would have been made redundant under Labour. Let us consider maternity units, particularly in the West of Scotland. The removal of consultant-led services at the IRH and the Vale of Leven hospital and the centralisation of services at RAH in Paisley during the previous session of Parliament had an effect on delivery of care. Pregnant women might well have been sceptical about the services that were available locally while they were being directed to go elsewhere, which left a question about the viability of services. I am thankful that Nicola Sturgeon agreed to instigate an independent scrutiny panel to consider the future of community midwife units. Recently, there was a record number of deliveries in the CMU at  the IRH, which proves that keeping the unit at the IRH was the correct decision. Labour seems to have forgotten about the services that were under threat when it was in power. It might also have escaped Labour members' memories that Labour attacked the programme to make and then to reinvest 2 per cent efficiency savings. The former Labour leader in the Scottish Parliament, Wendy Alexander, said that 2 per cent was not an ambitious enough target and that the target should be 3 per cent. During the Labour campaign in 2007, Jack McConnell said that education would get investment but other budgets would need to "cut their cloth". How can Labour seriously claim that the NHS in Scotland would have been in a better position under Labour? Labour's position on the NHS is somewhat opportunistic and typifies the negativity of which much of Labour politics reeks. No element of the public service is perfect—there is always room for improvement and greater efficiency. The taxpayer wants to know that they will get the services that they require and that service delivery will improve. There are three central points about the SNP Government's delivery of health services. First, we have 10,000 more NHS staff members than we inherited from the Labour-Lib Dem Administration. Secondly, funding for the NHS in Scotland is at record levels and, thirdly, the cabinet secretary has given a commitment that there will be no compulsory redundancies. Service redesign is happening across a range of public services, and more joined-up working is taking place, instead of the silo approach of the past. I do not for a minute think that any member would seriously argue that the old silo ways of working are acceptable in the challenging financial climate. We should be striving for more joined-up working, better service delivery for patients and better outcomes for patients and health care staff. I will continue to campaign for strong local service delivery in the West of Scotland, as I did before I was elected. Under Labour, campaigns to save services in the community in which I live were a regular occurrence, so I am thankful that there has been a period of stability since then, although there have been issues, for example the CMUs. There are challenges ahead, but I am sure that, with strong leadership, we can weather the storm while ensuring that the safe delivery of health services remains at the forefront of the health agenda.

I thank the members who have stayed behind for the debate and the members who signed my motion. World oceans day is on 8 June. Canada proposed the concept on 8 June 1992 at the earth summit in Rio de Janeiro and the day was celebrated unofficially every year until it was internationally recognised in 2009, when the United Nations declared officially that 8 June every year was to be recognised as world oceans day. Oceans provide most of the oxygen that we breathe and much of the food that we eat and help to create many of the medicines that we use to stay healthy. Oceans also provide us with incredible opportunities for recreational activities such as boating, diving and fishing. As we know, waters cover two thirds of the planet's surface. It is unfortunate that humans sometimes take the oceans and the seas for granted. As members from one of the most progressive countries in the world, it is our responsibility to recognise the ecological impact that we have on our oceans and to realise the vital role that they play in our lives. I am encouraged by Scotland's awareness of the situation and I congratulate the Scottish Government on, and commend every member of the Parliament for, the passage of the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010. I also congratulate the members of the UK Parliament in Westminster on passing their Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009. Those acts are major steps towards helping us to protect the coastal waters of the UK and  Scotland. The Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 has provided a framework to manage Scotland's seas and enforce the laws that are associated with the sustainable development of our waters. World oceans day encourages groups throughout the world to engage in events to celebrate the world's oceans and help to increase awareness of the role that our oceans play in everyday life. This year, events that are being held in Scotland to celebrate the day and increase awareness of it include those by the Macduff Marine Aquarium and the Solway Firth Partnership. I hope that an even bigger effort will be made next year to support world oceans day all over the country. World oceans day encourages sustainable and enjoyable practices for the environment and the oceans in particular. As the Presiding Officer might recall, I initiated in November 2008 the first members' business debate—and the first debate in the chamber—on the potential economic impact of recreational boating and marine tourism on the Scottish economy. That growing sector of our economy depends almost exclusively on the wellbeing of the world's oceans and people taking care of them, so Scotland must view world oceans day seriously. It would be prudent for Scotland to support the day zealously, as it strives to protect a vital element of the Scottish economy. Sailing and responsible recreational boating are some of the most environmentally friendly activities that one can enjoy. A sailboat does not use much fuel and certainly provides an entertaining way to enjoy our waters. Another wonderful activity to enjoy in our oceans is diving and snorkelling. Five years ago, on a trip to Australia, I went snorkelling off the coast near Cairns. The ocean there was stunning. Members should believe me when I say, after witnessing its beauty in person, that there is no high-definition television on the planet that can do the great barrier reef justice. World oceans day promotes awareness of what our oceans do for us and encourages us to show them respect. We need to call into question the practices that we as a people undertake, and how we react to man-made disasters such as the Deepwater Horizon oil spill that is currently wreaking havoc in the Caribbean, releasing a reported 1,600 to 13,600 tonnes of oil per day. It is not the first time that we have inadvertently done serious damage to our planet's oceans and ocean fauna in accidental oil incidents. In 1989, the Exxon Valdez tanker ran into a reef and spilled an estimated 35,000 tonnes of oil into the waters around Alaska. Although that spill was well down the list of the largest spills, its remote location made it extremely difficult to clean up and it  adversely affected all manner of wildlife, resulting in the deaths of thousands of sea creatures in the vicinity. In a significantly larger incident off the coast of Scotland, the MV Braer ran aground off the coast of the Shetland Islands in 1993, leaking 85,000 tonnes of oil into local waters. Quick action by volunteers in the Shetlands to walk the beaches and collect oiled animals, in combination with extremely stormy weather in the Shetlands at the time, helped to minimise the spill's impacts. The Braer was also carrying Norwegian Gullfaks crude oil, which is lighter and more biodegradable than typical North Sea oil. Those factors luckily prevented an even bigger disaster from occurring. Given the circumstances, Scotland can consider itself lucky that the ecological impacts were not worse than they were. The Braer spill is dwarfed by the gargantuan Ixtoc 1 oil spill in 1979 and 1980, which released nearly 500,000 tonnes of oil into the Bay of Campeche in the Gulf of Mexico and took nearly a year to clean up. It is unfortunate that this year's world oceans day will be celebrated during the largest oil incident in the past 20 years, and one of the most devastating disasters for the ocean and neighbouring ecosystems in recorded history. Millions of people have had their lives affected by the spill, and billions of organisms have been either killed or chased from their native habitat due to its magnitude. As the oil seeps inland into the marshes of the southern United States, it throws off the balance of that delicate ecosystem, which may never be the same. Such man-made disasters should highlight the importance of world oceans day. Hopefully, they will bring concern for the oceans to the forefront of our attention. We as a people need to be much more responsible in the way in which we interact with our surroundings. Oceans are a most precious resource, naturally beautiful and full of bounty. It is imperative that we treat them with the respect that they deserve.

At the outset, I associate myself with the committee convener's comments about everyone involved in the inquiry. The clerking team and Philip Augar did a tremendous amount of work assisting the committee, and I pay tribute to all of them. I am sure that in addition to the recognition that they are receiving in the chamber this afternoon the clerks would be only too happy to receive a small percentage of the bonuses given to the top executives of the part-nationalised banks. When the committee first discussed the idea of an inquiry, there did not appear to be a unanimous view on holding one, as regulation is still based at Westminster. However, two points were raised in that debate. I made the point that the population of Scotland would not forgive the committee and the Parliament for not investigating the impact of the crisis on them. The second point was the one that Gavin Brown mentioned, which is that, if we were to have an inquiry, it had to be forward looking. Thankfully, I would like to think, those two points helped to sway my fellow committee members, so I praise them for that and for the hard work that went into the report. There are too many areas in the report to highlight them all in only six minutes, so I will focus my comments on a few. I am sure that, by the end of the debate, many more of the issues mentioned in the report will have been raised by members throughout the chamber. First, I will touch on lending to small businesses. We heard a tremendous amount about the dramatic change in lending practices instigated by the banks—we have already heard comments about the issue in the debate—and by the part-nationalised banks in particular, resulting in even more hardship for the small business sector. The committee had a private session with representatives from the small business sector, which was extremely interesting and, when they spoke about some of the struggles that they have faced recently, very touching. We have recently come out of the recession, but the credit crunch still exists and recovery is extremely fragile. The credit crunch is alive and although the banks tell us that they have money to lend, small businesses tell us that they cannot get any of it as the new charges and conditions are prohibitive. I do not think that anyone in the chamber would be foolish enough to say that  lending practices should go back to where they were before the collapse, but I am sure that we all agree that the banks must turn around their models and practices to make them competitive once again. Their actions, which are stymieing growth at this vital juncture in the economic cycle, make no sense to me.

As one of the committee members who sat through all the evidence—I do not think that Mr Whitton did—I had to go through all the information that I had heard and make a decision. I met a small business owner a couple of weeks ago to discuss the current financial situation and the shambolic mess of the UK's public finances. He explained to me his business banking experiences and how they have changed. The saddest point is that although he has banked with a particular institution for some 20 years, had a great working relationship with it and never had to go to it for any additional services, his charges—even for the basic services that he requires—have risen out of all proportion and decision making appears to have been removed from the high street branch to some faceless superior at headquarters. The personal touch appears to have been lost, and that is impacting on the livelihoods of some of our small business owners. The second issue that I will touch on, which follows on from the first and from the massive rise in charges, is high street competition. A person does not need to be a derivatives expert to realise the folly of past business practices. As banks bought up competitors over the years, it was only a matter of time before the shortage of high street competition would come back to bite us. We live in a market economy in which competition is vital to ensuring that the customer gets the best deal. How can the customer and Scotland get the best deal when more than 70 per cent of banking goes through two institutions: RBS and Lloyds Banking Group? For those of us in the chamber who follow football, it is the same as the old firm winning everything year in, year out, with the odd exception when someone else gets a chance, such as Dundee United winning the Scottish cup this year. As Bill Shankly once said: "Some people believe football is a matter of life and death, I am very disappointed with that attitude. I can assure you it is much, much more important than that." Banking is far more important than football. A failing banking system can mean the life or death  of a business and therefore of individuals'—our constituents'—employment. Our report highlighted the lack of competition as a major issue that will need to be addressed. However, regulatory functions for the sector lie in London, not here. I welcome the FSA's response to the report, which has been mentioned. In it, it highlights the fact that it will increase the size of its Edinburgh office to supervise the large retail firms that are headquartered in Scotland, with a view to expansion in the future. The final point that I want to highlight centres on bonuses. Earlier, I made a rather flippant remark about banking executives' bonuses. In most walks of life, there is a culture of giving bonuses for excellent work that is over and above what is expected of people. However, I find it pretty disgusting that, when the banking crisis was in full sway, some high-ranking executives were being awarded ludicrous sums of money through bonuses, while those on the shop floor, primarily those who worked in high street banks, were wondering whether they would still have a job. Worse still is the uncertainty over the divestment strategy, as instructed by the European Union, and how it will affect individuals including, once again, our constituents. I agree whole-heartedly that our constituents should be paid a fair salary but, for someone working in the high street or a call centre, a bonus might mean the difference between having a special treat or not. It might mean a deposit for a new car, or it might go towards assisting their offspring with a deposit to buy their first home, or even a deposit for rented accommodation if their child is moving out of the family home to study or to work. Therefore, I found the union Unite's arguments on bonuses bizarre to say the least when it campaigned to scrap them. That appeared to me to be inconsistent with its approach to the British Airways strike, which is not yet resolved. As I said, six minutes was never going to be enough time, but I have touched on a few issues that are important for the future of banking in Scotland and which will have a knock-on effect throughout the UK. I commend the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's report to the Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it can provide to local authorities in collecting council tax payments. (S3O-10725)

The minister may not be aware that the Greenock Telegraph recently ran an article that claimed that some £600,000 of council tax was unpaid by council staff and another that claimed that some £22.5 million of council tax had been unpaid in Inverclyde since 1993. I fully accept that there will be many legitimate reasons for non-payment of council tax, and I would not expect anyone to keep council tax records that went back five, 10 or 15 years. However, is there a mechanism whereby best practice can be disseminated to local authorities, either by the Scottish Government or through the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, with a view to bringing in higher levels of payment of council tax, or whatever form of local authority tax will be in place in the future, on an annual basis?

Last week, I met a constituent who is a rail expert and has worked in the rail industry for more than 30 years. My constituent said that GARL was not economically viable and would not have the required passenger numbers and that, if the private sector was so positive about it, that sector should pay for it. Does Jeremy Purvis agree?

Will the member give way on that point?

Before I start, I will make a wee comment about Jim Tolson's remark about the Lib Dems being a respected organisation. I would say that that is stretching it a wee bit far, and I am sure that the public will tell the Lib Dems that next year in the elections to the Scottish Parliament. The debate has been interesting and it has been fairly consensual—

I said "fairly consensual". The one thing that has come out of the debate is that Scotland wants a high-speed rail link to the south of England. The economic benefits to Scotland, particularly the central belt cities, are unquestionable—and will be to other cities en route. For me, the most important aspect is connectivity between Scotland and elsewhere in the UK. Another important aspect is the link to the European Union. It is imperative that the high-speed rail links in the UK are not delayed. Britain has already fallen far behind many European countries, as we heard from Tom McCabe, whose contribution on that aspect of the debate was interesting—I commend him for that. We should seek assurances from the new UK coalition Government that Scotland will not be left behind when the high-speed rail timeline is finalised.  I will touch on a few statistics. Over the past 12 years, passenger numbers on the UK rail network have grown by 50 per cent, which is the fastest rate of growth anywhere in the EU. Long-distance travel has increased by 65 per cent since 1994, and the last time that rail was used by as many people was in the post-war period, when the rail network was twice as large as it is now. The economic benefits of a high-speed rail link would be extensive. Although we recognise and appreciate that "capacity issues" have a different complexion on networks in south-east England than on the journey from London to Scotland, the need for a new rail link is becoming dire, as new research shows. The west coast main line is likely to reach capacity by 2014 and demand is still growing, despite the recession. Recent studies have also shown that the introduction of a high-speed line between London and Scotland's central belt potentially would bring tens of billions of pounds into the economy. The same studies show that the benefits would outweigh the costs only if the high-speed line runs the entire length of the route between England and Scotland.

I must make some progress first. Over the past year, 7 million air and rail trips were made between London and Scotland's central belt, but only one in six of them was by rail. It is clear that rail cannot compete with air travel unless travel times are less than three hours. On that issue, I will touch on part of my personal life from a few years ago. From November 2000 to June 2003, I worked in London and went home most weekends. Usually, I flew home with whichever flight company was the cheapest that particular weekend. I took the train a few times, but I became disillusioned with it because of the problems that I encountered time and again. If the service had been better and cheaper, I would have used it more often. The argument that high-speed rail would be beneficial to modal shift are totally accurate. A journey of merely two hours and nine minutes from the centre of London to Scotland's central belt would provide an attractive alternative to a short flight. High-speed rail has the ability to be the equalising factor. Similar links between Lille and Paris and Barcelona and Madrid account for 85 per cent of travel between those cities. All those points, and the other points that we have heard in the debate, beg the question why the London-based parties have been so reticent to commit to the creation of a high-speed link between Scotland and England from the outset.

Give us the borrowing powers—actually, give us independence—and then we could try to work with the London Government to make high-speed rail happen even more quickly. Another aspect of my personal experience that I want to bring to the debate is that, when I was a student, I studied in Europe for a while and travelled extensively there. The joined-up approach, the efficiency and the value of the journeys that I made highlighted to me how much more advanced than Scotland and the UK some of our EU neighbours were. If we want Scotland and the UK to be more economically competitive, a high-speed rail link between Scotland and England is vital. Time will tell what the new coalition Government will do. It would be unfortunate if it decided to set up an entirely fresh study, as that might take 18 months just to complete and bring to the consultation stage. When we compare the UK with the rest of Europe, one wonders how we got so far behind. It seems simple to me that we have been held back by the complacency of the London parties at Westminster in the past—there is potentially complacency at present, too—and a lack of drive and ambition. If we are to modernise our railway, we must make progress quickly. It is noteworthy that, as other members have touched on, Spain and France have 60 times the number of miles of high-speed connections that the UK has, and that even Italy's limited high-speed network is 16 times bigger than Britain's. Should we praise Italy, France and Spain's developments, or should we look with contempt on the British Government's complete lack of ambition in the past?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Government when it plans to meet the Chancellor of the Exchequer to discuss the implications of any future cuts to the Scottish budget on the West of Scotland and Scotland in general. (S3O-10517)

Bearing in mind the financial disaster that is the UK debt mountain created by Labour, and the impending savage cuts that are expected from the new Tory and Lib Dem UK Government, does the cabinet secretary agree with Labour's David Whitton that we should limit  free prescriptions, free pensioner travel and free school meals, which would adversely affect many people in Scotland whose lives we should be trying to improve?

The minister will know that the Scotland and Northern Ireland Forum for Environmental Research conference took place at Our Dynamic Earth in February. Its promotional material suggested that policy makers and decision makers from local authorities should attend. What powers does the minister possess to require councils to participate in such events, particularly from a planning perspective? Not all Scotland's local authorities attended the conference and one absentee was Inverclyde Council, which has yet again proved its inadequacy in tackling the flooding problems in Inverclyde.

To ask the Scottish Government, in light of any financial constraints expected to be inflicted up on it by the next United Kingdom Government, what  action it is taking to make sure that Scotland's streets remain safe. (S3O-10425)

What changes, if any, at the senior levels in Scotland's police forces will occur or are planned in light of the next UK Government—of whichever colour—slashing Scotland's budget? What guarantees will the minister provide that the numbers of front-line police officers, including the welcome 1,000 extra police officers that the Scottish National Party Government has introduced, will be maintained?

The debate this morning has gone according to party lines, as we would expect. As there is the small matter of a UK election, it is no surprise that the Parliament is being used as a platform for all parties to promote their wares, and I am afraid that I will be no different from other members in that. We have already heard from some members the allegation of a lack of public contracts and, not surprisingly, that has been rebutted by my SNP colleagues. It a ridiculous position for Labour members to take in their motion bearing in mind the fact that even more public sector contracts could have been started and more jobs safeguarded and created if the Labour chancellor had agreed to accelerate £350 million of capital funding. Unfortunately, he did not see the sense in that.

I have just started, so I need to make some progress at the moment. We have already heard about the consequentials that came to the Scottish Parliament. Only two weeks ago, John Swinney announced how that money is to be spent. Sarah Boyack touched on the boiler scrappage scheme in her speech. That scheme was £2 million and it would have been wonderful if it had been more but, if Sarah Boyack wants more money for the scheme, we would have to consider, and she would have to answer, the question: from which consequentials would it come? Would it be from the £31 million of additional money that is going into housing?

I admit that I would rather trust John Swinney to handle our economy than Alistair Darling, to whom I will come in a wee moment. Under the current and previous chancellors' never-never economic policies, if the money was not there, they would just go and borrow it. Before anyone shouts about the money that went into assisting the banks, I point out that the full UK national debt cannot be attributed to the loans given to the banks. No amount of spin or bluster can deny that. The bottom line is that every person in Scotland and the UK is up to their eyeballs in debt. It is not so much personal debt—although some people are, of course—but the debt built up by two chancellors who threw money around like confetti with little regard for the return on investment.

I will make some more progress on this point. They also threw virtually £32 billion of PPP money around, which we in Scotland will be paying back for decades. My kids are eight months old and coming up for three. By the time that they leave school, they will have the privilege of paying taxes for the schools that they went to, which will still have to be paid off. The Tories, given their record, have nothing to crow about in Scotland or elsewhere in the UK. I grew up in Port Glasgow and remember the 1970s, when being outside a shipyard when the hooter went was frightening, as thousands of men  and women poured out. That was obviously not the heyday for shipbuilding but, nonetheless, thousands of men and women worked in the yards in Inverclyde as well as in engineering firms such as Kincaid's. When Thatcher came to power, she hammered the final nail in the coffin for the shipyards in Inverclyde.

I will make some progress on this point. Thatcher's policies resulted in a generation of people being lost to apprenticeships and training. I am afraid that the youth training scheme was nothing short of a cheap labour scheme. It paid people up to about £27 per week and did not train them fully. It was an affront to the youth of Scotland and elsewhere in the UK, and the Tories should be eternally shamed for it.

I am glad that the member asked that question because, let us face it, the economy in the late 1970s was an absolute shambles created by the Labour Government and Labour members should be ashamed of themselves. To go back to the Tories, Norman Tebbit called on people to get on their bikes, but that was not an option for some people, and others wanted to stay in a place they called home to try to rebuild their lives and communities. The latter point is something that Tories of that era probably did not understand and, thankfully, the electorate of Scotland continued to give them a bloody nose and ultimately humiliated them by electing none of them in 1997. The Liberal Democrats do not have much of a record to defend from London but, only yesterday, Homes for Scotland slammed their proposals to add VAT to new-build homes. Just in case the Lib Dems do not know, there has been a recession and the housing market is extremely fragile. However, they want to add to the already challenging house-building market. The electorate will see the madness of that proposal.

I am in my last minute, so I really have to finish off. With regard to the motion, it is absolute nonsense to say that the Scottish Futures Trust is not doing anything. My colleague Rob Gibson already mentioned a range of projects in which the  SFT is involved. Ron Hewitt, the chief executive of the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce, has said that the SFT "is absolutely the right thing to do. It will save public money." I would rather take Mr Hewitt's advice than the Hoddit and Doddit economic strategies of Gray and Kerr and the bankrupt partnership of Brown and Darling. We have had enough of Gray's guff, Tavish's tosh and Annabel's amnesia. Some members will say that Scotland is too poor, too wee and too stupid to be independent.

I say that Scotland simply cannot afford to remain as part of this bankrupt Britain and that our economy needs to continue to move forward with more economic powers.

To ask the Scottish Government what measures it has put in place to enhance the role of community safety in Scotland. (S3O-10051)

Is the minister aware that the Labour-Tory-run East Dunbartonshire Council has announced that it will be slashing the community safety budget by 63 per cent, which will damage the reputation that has been built up in recent years by the community safety team? Does the minister agree that those cuts in the community safety budget, which involve reducing the number of community support officers from 10 to three, could jeopardise public safety? Therefore, does he agree that the Labour-Tory coalition would be better suited to listen to David Whitton who, in his 2007 election leaflet, argued for a doubling of the number of community wardens?

I congratulate Elizabeth Smith on securing the debate and I welcome the Combined Cadet Force representatives to the public gallery. I was only too happy to sign the motion when it appeared in the Business Bulletin . I firmly believe that organised activities for younger people, such as are provided by the armed forces cadet movement, the Boys Brigade, the Girls Brigade and the scouting and guiding movements, play an important role in providing additional education, instilling discipline and enabling young people to learn a great deal about other people and cultures. There is also the small matter of having fun, through fantastic experiences and building up camaraderie, which helps younger people to develop. I was never a member of the cadet movement, although I was in the Boys Brigade. I am sure that cadets' experiences are sometimes more exotic than the experiences of members of other organisations. When I was researching the matter for today's debate, I read that there is an opportunity for cadets to go to Lesotho. In my previous job, when I worked for an MSP, we had a great deal of contact with the west lowland battalion A company detachment at Port Glasgow. The young people were a credit to themselves, their families and the company. They had won the award for best detachment for about four years in a row and the officers were rightly proud of them. They were invited to the Parliament  and they thoroughly enjoyed their day out. I was struck by their discipline. Every young person was impeccably behaved and respectful towards the officers and the Parliament. I had a similar experience earlier this afternoon, when I had the pleasure of meeting cadets from Mid Scotland and Fife, which is not my region. Once again, I was taken by the cadets' manners and discipline. One cadet, who has been a member for four years, started as a bass drummer in the pipe band and is now the drum major. His experience and leadership role will stand him in good stead in future. I am a piper myself, so I know only too well the demands that are placed on bass drummers and drum majors. I have every respect for what that young man is doing. The remarkable thing about him is his maturity. He is still only 16 years old, but his maturity is well beyond his 16 years. I am also very jealous of him. We chatted about some events that he has played at, and he told me about his experience of playing at the Edinburgh Military Tattoo at Edinburgh castle. My experience as a civilian piper in a Territorial Army band did not stretch to playing at the castle. I could not afford the four weeks off to rehearse and play all the time. Unfortunately, the way the tattoo is organised, people have to be there for the full four weeks; they cannot just do a week here and there. So I am extremely jealous that he, as a 16-year-old, has achieved something that I have not been able to achieve in my 37 years. That young man and others will have similar wonderful experiences with the armed forces cadet movement. I wonder how many people in the past 150 years have gone through the cadets and on to great things. I also wonder how many have gone through the cadets and, due to receiving a little bit of discipline, have managed to keep themselves on the straight and narrow and thus have not had an impact on other elements of the public sector. All in all, I whole-heartedly welcome the 150 years of the armed forces cadet movement, and I sincerely wish it every success in future.

Will the member take an intervention?

I and other members of the cross-party group on recreational boating and marine tourism heard that approximately a third of the berths in the west of Scotland are owned by folk from the south-east of England who fly up to Scotland. Improvements in the Irvine bay area therefore have fantastic potential, and I encourage everyone to push things as much as they can.

I commend the minister for his work on promoting tourism in Scotland since the Scottish National Party came to power, and I welcome the reiteration of his position in this debate. I am pleased that the SNP government has brought tourism into the finance and sustainable growth portfolio, which reflects the importance of tourism to the Scottish economy. We all know the main contributors to Scotland's vast tourism industry: some of the usual suspects, such as golf, have been mentioned this afternoon. Others include whisky, tartan and—my own personal favourite—bagpiping. There are four months of piping competitions every year from May to the end of August. Some competitions bring together 50 bands while others feature as  many as 160 to 200 bands, and not all of those bands come from Scotland—many travel here from across the world. However, I would like to concentrate on an often unrecognised contributor to the Scottish tourism economy: recreational boating and marine tourism. I have been delighted with the response to the establishment of the cross-party group on recreational boating and marine tourism, which I chair. I am only too happy to give the industry the recognition that it deserves. Recreational boating has been estimated to boost the Scottish economy by £250 million a year, and just before Christmas the Scottish Government-sponsored report on sea angling estimated that it brings around £141 million into the nation's economy and sustains more than 3,100 jobs. However, when we consider that recreational boating and marine tourism covers a host of participants, including surfers, kayakers, canoeists, divers and many more, we can start to appreciate the substantial benefits to the Scottish economy that the use of our marine resource brings. Using that resource in sporting and recreational activities provides a massive boost to our tourism sector. Last week, the cross-party group set out its immediate agenda to establish, as best we can, the current economic impact of marine tourism, broken down by sector, across the country. If we can gain an understanding of the current position, the cross-party group—as well as the country—will be in a better place to make suggestions to help make things even more successful as we work towards the target of a 50 per cent increase in tourism by 2015. This morning, in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, we heard about the benefits that whisky brings to the Scottish economy. Many have greatly underestimated the success of whisky tourism: more than 1.23 million people toured a distillery in 2008, which brought in more than £25 million for local economies and was tremendously important for rural economies. Furthermore, 23 per cent of Scotland's five-star visitor facilities are distilleries, which assists in promoting the image of Scotland and the image of whisky as a quality product. The most important thing that I have learned from the cross-party group is that the marine tourism sector in Scotland is vastly underrecognised. We in the Parliament must assist the marine tourism industry in promoting Scotland internally and internationally as a marine destination. The knock-on effects of marine tourists visiting Scotland hugely benefit us all. As I said a moment ago, yachting, canal-boating, kayaking, surfing and many other such activities have a base in Scotland, and it would be a shame if we did not make the most of that.  I have touched on the issue of whisky. If we can increase the links between marine tourism, the food and drink sector and other related industries, we will see even more improvement in the marketing of Scotland as a brand. With that input, the current boating landscape could be increased. I will give a few examples from the west of Scotland: Largs yacht haven has more than 700 pontoon berths, Kip marina has 620 and Troon yacht haven has 500.

In this country, we have to consider the health benefits that a minimum price will bring to the economy, as between £2.5 billion and £3.5 billion is spent on dealing with some of the effects of alcohol misuse. To return to marine tourism, there is, on a smaller scale, the Southbank marina in Kirkintilloch, which has more than 40 berths. Furthermore, there is the potential for even more berths on the Clyde, in Inverclyde and Glasgow city, given the riverside Inverclyde development and the regeneration of the James Watt dock—which will be the host location for the tall ships race in 2011—as well as the Clyde waterfront project in Glasgow. If next year's tall ships race is even half as successful as the one that was held in Greenock in 1999, it will be a fantastic spectacle. The 1999 race consisted of four days of glorious sunshine, hundreds of thousands of people flocking to Greenock and a carnival atmosphere. Who would have thought that we would hear the words carnival, sunshine and Greenock in the same sentence? Bill Kidd says, "Never," but every single person from Inverclyde who went to the tall ships race in 1999 would repeat what I have just said. It was a fantastic event, and it gave the whole of Inverclyde a massive boost. I encourage every member to go along to the tall ships race next year and discover Inverclyde for themselves. We all know the impact that the recession has had on the world economy. Scotland has not been immune, but there have been some positives—as we heard earlier this afternoon—particularly thanks to homecoming Scotland 2009. However, there are still massive challenges to be overcome. With a wide range of events already in the Scottish tourism calendar—spanning genres, from comedy festivals to golf tournaments and river festivals, such as the tremendous Kirkintilloch canal festival—I can only commend the Scottish Government for working hard to support tourism in Scotland.  I look forward to witnessing Scotland flourish as a tourist destination under the SNP Government, and I know that every member in the chamber has what it takes to help every tourism industry in Scotland to flourish.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it has considered introducing probationary tenancies for use by housing associations. (S3O-9754)

I have a number of constituents who are suffering from antisocial neighbours. It seems that, despite the involvement of community wardens, the police and other public service bodies, little can be done to deal successfully with antisocial tenants. I am mindful of what the minister said a few moments ago, but registered social landlords and housing associations in particular have expressed concern to me that the process of dealing with or removing antisocial tenants is extremely complicated. Will the Scottish Government consider amending existing regulations for RSLs and housing associations to allow them to deal with antisocial tenants in a more effective manner?

I welcome the debate. It is to Patricia Ferguson's credit that she lodged the motion. There are many issues that we can all argue about in Parliament and, dare I say it, there have been and will be occasions when all sides' engagement in partisan party politics gets in the way of real discussion of an issue. Sometimes there can be too much bluster and shouting in the chamber just for the sake of it, but the majority of the comments that have been made during the debate have been much more measured. The debate has been more reasonable than some that we have. Some of the comments that were made earlier made me worry that we would fall into the trap of engaging in party politics again but, thankfully, we have not done that too much. I will be frank and admit that I have been contacted by constituents on factoring issues, but I have not been inundated with people raising such issues. However, that does not mean that there is not a bigger issue across the country. I have lived in flatted accommodation, albeit briefly. I did so for a short time while at university and just after I got married, when I stayed in a flat in Greenock, which had no factor. There were six flats in our section, 12 flats in the block and numerous blocks in the street. To my knowledge, there was no factor anywhere in that locality. Between our six flats, we decided to club together and get some basic maintenance tasks undertaken. That was fine—the process was not too onerous, but there was still the issue of approaching the neighbours and asking them to contribute money. If we had had a factor, things would have been much easier for everyone who stayed in the block. That would have involved taking major decisions about how to proceed with selecting a factor, and there would eventually have been the added cost burden of employing one, but a benefit of the factor system is that the factor organisation is charged with collecting any  moneys that are due, which was not the case in the situation that I was in a few years ago. I rent a flat here in Edinburgh. Recently, residents and owners decided to change the development's property factor—I think that they were sick and tired of the fact that although bills would come in and the costs would increase continually, they saw little in the way of upkeep of the development. The process of change appeared to take quite a long time. Many things happened—various meetings were held, letters kept coming through the door and one night I got a visit from one of the folk involved, who wanted to progress matters. I am a tenant, so I passed on all the information that I received to the landlord, because it is the landlord who receives the bills and pays the factoring charges. The process appeared to be fairly seamless, but at the same time it was quite drawn out. I am aware that that situation will not be replicated across the country, and I will return to the issue of changing a factor. However, I am quite confident that the owners of those flats will have a better outcome in due course. The number of tenement properties and flatted developments in Scotland means that property factors are essential.

I fully accept the member's point. I did not want to give another example from my own experience. We went through a process of changing the land factor for the house that I stay in in Greenock only two years or so ago, so I am very much aware of those issues. The challenge that faces us is to decide whether to legislate or whether to have a voluntary accreditation scheme. I am sure that members of all parties agree that both options have merits and must be considered fully. As far as the legislative approach is concerned, it is difficult to consider what could happen and what the consequences could be without seeing the detail of Patricia Ferguson's proposals. That said, it is extremely difficult to disagree with the sentiments of Patricia Ferguson's motion. The voluntary accreditation scheme approach is the route that the Scottish Government, alongside  numerous partners, including Consumer Focus Scotland, has taken to providing a solution to the existing problem. The easy option and sometimes the greatest political hit is to call on the Government of the day to introduce legislation. I am not for one minute suggesting that Patricia Ferguson has taken that route. The fact that Ms Ferguson held a consultation in October 2007 shows that this is a genuine attempt to solve a problem, and she should be commended for that. I feel that legislation can sometimes be a blunt instrument and that every possible option should be considered and introduced, when justified, before legislation. Both the OFT report and the Consumer Focus Scotland briefing are interesting, and two points in the OFT report stand out for me. The first is that one third of consumers feel that they do not get good value for money, and the second is that there are low levels of switching. I gave the example of the flat that I rent here in Edinburgh. I am confident that switching will prove to be beneficial, but it was a long and drawn-out process. There may be people who do not want to participate in such a process, so I can understand why there has been a low level of switching in the past. If we consider the economic situation and the uncertainty about future budgets coming to the Parliament and the subsequent knock-on effects to wider Scotland, I hope that those two points—the lack of value for money and the low level of switching—will change in the coming months. Every penny will be a prisoner, and I am sure that owners of tenement flats will exert a stronger voice and act accordingly. I am sure that greater emphasis will be placed on value for money and, as a consequence, there will be more switching.

I welcome the minister's openness on Patricia Ferguson's proposal and his willingness not to reject it out of hand. The consensual approach allows for a greater outcome and better deal for owners who deal with factors.

To ask the Scottish Government what analysis it has made of the 620 responses to its consultation on high hedges and other nuisance vegetation. (S3O-9657)

The minister will be aware that I am one of the 620 people who responded to the consultation, as several of my constituents have contacted me with high-hedge problems. I am well aware of the Government's excellent record on delivery. I encourage the minister to continue to pursue the matter with great vigour. At this stage of the analysis, has the minister ruled out any legislative measures that might be implemented in order to find a resolution to this issue?

To ask the Scottish Government what consideration has been given to using people subject to community service orders, where appropriate, to work in alleviating flooding. (S3O-9533)

I am not sure whether the cabinet secretary is aware of my campaign on the issue in Inverclyde, which has had major problems with flooding in recent years. I agree that there are health and safety legislation aspects, but I am sure that, where there is a will, there is a way. Will the cabinet secretary therefore agree to meet me to discuss the matter further and, I hope, find a way of making progress on the proposal?

This afternoon's debate has been polarised between some members who will not back the budget unless GARL is reinstated, and others who live in the real world and realise the financial difficulties that face the cabinet secretary and the Scottish Government. Under normal circumstances it would be understandable that the cabinet secretary has taken a bit of criticism for cancelling the GARL project. However, as every member in the chamber must admit, these are financially challenging times. The UK officially came out of recession by 0.1 per cent only last week, but the whole economy is still perilously close to going back in, and it is nowhere near being back on stable ground, as we heard once again in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee this morning. There has even been talk of a double-dip recession if funding from London is slashed, which will happen next year and is expected to happen in a number of years to come. The bottom line is that tough decisions need to be taken, whether or not we in the chamber like it, and whether or not we are the cause of the problem. The decision to  cancel GARL is one of those difficult decisions that have been brought about by the failings of others, which the Scottish Government must try to deal with. As I said in a previous debate, a GARL project should happen when finances are better. I would consider running a line through Renfrew to ensure that more people had the chance to get out of their cars and on to public transport. In an ideal world, rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports would exist, but if the finances are not there, there is nothing that this Government—or any Government—can do. If the Opposition wants to give this Parliament the borrowing powers of any normal country so that we can work towards improving Scotland, it should by all means back the referendum bill when it comes before the Parliament.

Yet again—typical Labour. Members who do not want to give this Parliament the powers fully to tackle the recession cry crocodile tears when the Scottish Government needs to take tough decisions. I welcome the amendment from Labour—or new Labour, or whatever it is called these days—but, as usual, it is too little, too late. Labour members obviously think that the cabinet secretary has hundreds of millions of pounds tucked away and does not need to make tough decisions. If Labour really wanted GARL to go ahead, it should have lodged amendments to the bill to indicate what it would have cut and slashed elsewhere, but it has failed miserably to do that.

I am sorry, but no. Another aspect of Labour, or new Labour, is the student politics that are involved in the cancellation of the Renfrew ferry. It took us a while to find out what the retribution for the cancellation of GARL was going to be, but it came as no surprise that Labour members of the Strathclyde partnership for transport wanted to punish the SNP, the population of Renfrewshire and the population north of the river by cancelling the Renfrew ferry. That was Labour's target, and I assure Labour that that decision will come back to haunt it. The bully-boy tactics of new Labour are unfortunately alive and well, and hell mend anyone who goes against it. So much for the party of the working class. Thankfully, there is so much more to the budget than the GARL story. The provision yet again of funds to freeze the council tax will be warmly  welcomed throughout the country. There is also the annual increase in local government's share of expenditure; the additional £31 million for the housing budget, on top of the record £1.6 billion over the three years of the spending period; and the introduction of the boiler scrappage scheme, which we heard about from the cabinet secretary. He announced other measures, but I will not go into them all again. Much more can be done, but without the full fiscal powers to deliver an even better Scotland with independence, whoever is in power in the Parliament will always be hamstrung. Their ambitions will be capped as if they are to be kept in their place. One example of the capping of Scotland's ambitions was the UK chancellor's refusal to allow further capital acceleration of £350 million to keep more people in employment in these difficult economic times. The fact that the Parliament was required to go cap in hand for our money is a nonsense, but to be refused, even when the proposal had the backing of Iain Gray, was appalling. It shows just where Scotland comes in the food chain of new Labour in London. The bottom line is that Scotland more than pays her way, yet Scots have been punished for daring to vote for someone else in 2007 and for kicking new Labour out of power. Scots are being punished for Labour's mishandling of the economy, and John Swinney is left to pick up the pieces with the budget. The cuts that will come Scotland's way from 2010 are purely a result of Labour's failings. The Scottish Government's budget tackles them to the best of its ability, but with even more powers the Parliament and the Scottish Government could do even more to assist Scotland's economic recovery. The debate so far has been polarised, as I said, and I am sure that there are other polarisation aspects to come from other speakers. However, the budget represents the best that Scotland can do with the limited powers that the Government has at its disposal. I urge all members to back it this afternoon.

Like many members in the chamber, I grew up having a local newspaper in the house and I still do. In Inverclyde, where I stay, the Greenock Telegraph  is an institution. It has a large daily readership; the Tele is the main oracle in the area. Over the years, other papers have tried unsuccessfully to break into the Inverclyde market, but times have changed. We now have an online publication, inverclydenow.com. It is popular with those who read it, particularly those who commute to work outside Inverclyde, as it gives them a chance to read the news online before returning home. The national picture mirrors Inverclyde but, obviously, on a larger scale. Times have changed, for better or for worse. For journalists, information gathering is vastly different from what it was even 10 years ago. Similarly, the way in which we receive our news has also changed. Studies have repeatedly shown that newspaper circulation figures are in decline. Indeed, the trends state that they have been in decline for some years. Let us take the example of our main daily newspapers here in Scotland. Between 2008 and 2009, The Herald and The Scotsman circulation decreased almost by 10 per cent. The once staple newspaper diet—the Sunday papers—is also in decline. In the same period, the Sunday Herald circulation dipped over 12 per cent. Quite a few people tell me that they no longer buy any national paper—daily or Sunday—because they no longer trust anything that is written in them. They say that, although they are sceptical about their local papers, more often than not they buy them. Karen Whitefield spoke about the declining newspaper readership. Surely that means that fewer people have the opportunity to read public information notices. During its term in office, the Scottish Government has engaged consistently with all areas of the print media industry. In line with the concordat, that engagement involves consulting the local authorities. Indeed, it was COSLA that requested that ministers introduce the consultation that is the subject of the debate. Yesterday, every member received the letter from councillor Pat Watters, the COSLA president, in which he stated  that COSLA supports the proposals. COSLA recognises that there is a potential saving of at least £2.5 million to the taxpayer that can be invested in front-line services. COSLA also recognises that the consultation—and it is merely a consultation—will not prohibit councils from advertising in their local newspapers. I would be astonished if any council across Scotland stopped all public information notices from going into their local media. If the end result of the consultation is that the proposal proceeds, the local authorities that spend the money and that have the final say would then make a decision on what they advertise and where. Ultimately, we are talking about devolving more responsibility to local authorities. Local authorities want that; that is why the concordat has been a success. I have two points to highlight. First, research on public attitudes to broadcasting, undertaken by the Scottish Broadcasting Commission, found that fewer than 50 per cent of Scots trust their local newspaper. Secondly, if the figure is looked at alongside the Directgov figure that 50 per cent of people prefer to access Government and local authority information online, we see a much broader picture than that proposed by new Labour. Indeed, new Labour members have said much this morning to dismiss the proposal. I am glad that Ken Macintosh is in the chamber, as I want to quote a question that he put at the meeting of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee on 20 January. He said: "For example, Trinity Mirror paid substantial sums of money to its top executives at the same time as it laid off dozens of journalists. The real dilemma for people in the public sector is this: we want to retain the journalists' jobs and local papers, but— and this is the key point— "should local authorities not be allowed to make savings? Should public policy be skewed in a way that boosts the profits of big companies?"—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 20 January 2010; c 3076.] Those were legitimate questions; I am glad that the member asked them. I am afraid to say that not all members of the public are totally interested in the work of government—local, national, UK or European. Election turnouts prove that. Not everyone reads public information notices—the figure of 2 per cent has already been cited. People who buy newspapers say that they do so to find out about a range of issues, not to read public information notices.

The evidence that the committee heard was interesting. I thoroughly enjoyed reading the Official Report of its meeting. As the next and future generations grow up, the way in which they receive news and do research will change. We must be willing to incorporate those generations in any decisions that are made about the future of public information notices. Many of us complain about the seemingly widening gap between the generations. On issues such as this, we must be flexible and willing to adapt to accommodate new technologies and preferred methods of social and informative interaction. I fully support my local newspaper, the Greenock Telegraph . Tonight I will do what I usually do—when I go home, I will read this week's editions—

I am about to finish—I have spoken for more than six minutes. I also enjoy using new media outlets such inverclydenow.com, which has a different perspective on some issues that can be refreshing. I fully understand but am disappointed by the political nature of this morning's debate. I urge the Opposition parties to contribute to the consultation, to propose their alternatives and to take matters forward from there.

To ask the Scottish Government, further to the letter of 17 December 2009 signed by all 17 of Scotland's public health chiefs in support of minimum pricing for alcohol, what other support exists for its Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill. (S3O-9086)

I will add one more organisation to the cabinet secretary's list—Breakthrough Breast Cancer. Breast cancer continues to be the most common cancer among women in Scotland. Each year, 4,000 Scottish women are diagnosed with the disease and 1,000 die from it. Does the cabinet secretary share Breakthrough Breast Cancer's concern that unless action is taken now to reduce levels of alcohol consumption, efforts to reduce the number of women who are affected by breast cancer will be at significant risk?

rose—

I thank Mr Whitton for his kind comments. I return to an issue that I mentioned earlier. Does Mr Whitton disagree with the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee? In its report, that committee said that there would be a 0.9 per cent decrease in the Scottish budget next year.

That is what the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee said.

Does the member agree with the comments that Sir George Mathewson made at yesterday's meeting of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, that PPP schemes have been labelled as expensive and dishonest?

rose—

As this is the season of goodwill, I wish every member, their staff and everyone who works in the parliamentary estate a very merry Christmas and a happy new year. As I was unable to attend the debate on the pre-budget report yesterday afternoon, some of the issues in my speech may cross over into that debate. However, I am sure that the Deputy Presiding Officer will keep me in check in his customary fashion.

Bah! Humbug!  The Finance Committee's report was an interesting read. I commend all members of the committee, as well as the clerks, for their efforts in producing the report. I am sure that there were some lively debates in the committee, particularly around the Glasgow airport rail link, which has been touched on already this morning. The three options that were proposed by the committee highlight the fact that there was no consensus on that project continuing.

As I said, there was no consensus. On page 21 of the report, we are told that three different proposals were made by three different members of the committee, none of which was accepted by the committee. So, there was no consensus in the Finance Committee. Much has been said in Parliament and outwith Parliament about GARL, and I am sure that much more will be said about it in the future. However, the bottom line is this: the Scottish Parliament operates within a fixed budget from Westminster, and the Scottish Government of the day must put forward its budget as it sees fit and allow Parliament to decide on it accordingly. With that in mind, the Finance Committee highlighted a few things. It noted that the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee did not back the reinstatement of GARL; that not one subject committee proposed alternative spending proposals, despite politicians bleating to anyone who would listen that the budget is not the best for Scotland; and that all the subject committees acknowledge that the Scottish budget is being cut by the Westminster Government. That last is a key point, especially after last week's pre-budget report. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's report states that members of that committee agree that there has been a 0.9 per cent reduction in the Scottish Government's budget from the Westminster Government.

I direct David Whitton to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's report to the Finance Committee, which says that there has been a 0.9 per cent reduction in the budget. As the First Minister revealed at question time last week, Scotland's budget is to be cut by £814 million instead of the previously announced cut of £512 million. That figure comes from SPICe.

I have already given way twice. I need to make some progress. Now that there is consensus in the Parliament that the Scottish budget is being cut by Westminster and is expected, whether Labour or the Tories win the Westminster election, to be cut for many years to come, one thing is abundantly clear: Scotland can no longer afford to be part of this bankrupt union. I am sure that the next knock on the Chancellor of the Exchequer's door will be not carol singers singing festive songs and looking for donations but the International Monetary Fund offering a handout. It is obvious that Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling are bankrupt of ideas on how to fix the mess that they have created. Well done, Mr Brown and Mr Darling. I actually have a tinge of sympathy for the chancellor, because he inherited an almighty mess. However, although he was left to deal with the financial disaster that was created by Gordon Brown, he added to it during his tenure. I know that politicians are not known for their prophetic skills, but I have to query how Gordon Brown got it so wrong. In his last Mansion house speech, in June 2007, he came out with the following fantastic words: "I believe it will be said of this age, the first decades of the 21 st century, that out of the greatest restructuring of the global economy, perhaps even greater than the industrial revolution, a new world order was created." He also said: "I congratulate you Lord Mayor and the City of London on these remarkable achievements, an era that history will record as the beginning of a new golden age for the City of London." This is a good one, as well: "By your efforts Britain is already second to none ... we are flexible, and in being vigilant against complacency, we must be, as I believe we are ready to become even more flexible." Those words must stick in the craw of any traditional old Labour types on the benches—if there are still any there. With the failure to accelerate capital spending, the Scottish budget will suffer. More importantly, so will jobs. Putting in jeopardy 5,000 Scottish jobs is not a good legacy to take to the Scottish people in an election. A host of projects have been identified, but time is running short, so I will have to stop. In the election in 2010, new Labour will have a terrible legacy to take to the Scottish people.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his response to Duncan McNeil's question. I am sure that he will agree that Inverclyde's response until now has been nothing short of tardy, to say the least. I welcome the fact that the council has eventually decided to do some work on the issue. I offer the cabinet secretary the chance to come down to Inverclyde; I have made the same offer to Roseanna Cunningham in the past. Will he take into account fully the important issues affecting Inverclyde when considering the distribution of further moneys in the future?

To ask the Scottish Government, in light of the recent announcement of £200,000 funding for farmers markets, what support will be provided to farmers markets in the West of Scotland region. (S3O-8842)

I fully welcome the announcement. Over the past few months I have visited farmers markets in Kirkintilloch and Greenock, and I have learned a lot about their contribution to communities and economies. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that, when any funding is distributed, areas that might not necessarily be viewed as traditional farming communities, such as Greenock and Kirkintilloch, are fully considered?

To ask the Scottish Government what its housing priorities are for the next 12 months. (S3O-8742)

The minister will be aware that there are many challenges in private-sector housing supply. Only last week, Scotland's chief statistician published revealing statistics for the social rented sector showing that there has been a massive increase in the affordable housing investment programme and local authority home completions. Does the minister agree that continuing with accelerated capital expenditure could play a part in increasing housing supply in the social rented sector in the west of Scotland as well as in the rest of the country?

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the European Commissioner for Competition Policy concerning the proposed divestment of the Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds Banking Group. (S3O-8484)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that, as part of its banking inquiry, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee heard evidence yesterday from Irmfried Schwimann of the European Commission. Does the cabinet secretary consider that the divestment of jobs, branches and businesses, as agreed by Her Majesty's Treasury and the European Commission, could have an adverse effect on the Scottish economy and limit the potential of the institutions in the future?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that local authorities should prepare robust proposals for additional support needs education? Does she also agree that pupils who require such education must not be used as a political football and should be considered on their own merits and needs?

I, too, thank the clerks to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee for their assistance throughout the passage of the bill. As of 5 pm, Scotland will have a vastly improved regulatory position with respect to arbitration. I hope that Parliament will unite on that. From what we have heard up to now, that is probably what will happen. The Arbitration (Scotland) Bill will certainly promote Scotland as an international centre for arbitration. As I said during the stage 1 debate, it will be difficult to compete with the established players in arbitration such as London, New York and Geneva. However, I hope that, with an improved and consolidated law, Scotland will be in a better position internationally. A service that is more competitive and that can be sustainable is in the interests of every single community in Scotland, even though the perception might be that Edinburgh will be the main beneficiary. I do not see how any party that is represented in the chamber can argue against it. As with any other industry or service in Scotland, we should, when it comes to arbitration, want to compete at the highest level, while appreciating that we need to establish ourselves first. I am sure that, in time, the Scottish reputation for arbitration will grow and will further enhance our wider international reputation. Our committee's stage 1 report said that the bill was "not yet fit for purpose", so the bill has been amended with 60 amendments at stage 2 and 30 today. I remember gently urging my committee colleagues at stage 1 to temper their language—I was not aware of many bills that had appeared before the Parliament without being amended.  I was surprised that none of the amendments came from Opposition parties, even if they thought the bill was not fit for purpose. It is unfortunate that politics can sometimes be that way—criticising without offering any tangible solutions.

The collegiate way in which the Scottish Government proceeded with the bill certainly helped to improve it and to ensure its passage through Parliament. As I said, there were a number of amendments, and the Government listened to concerns that other parties in the Parliament raised, as well as to those of people outside Parliament. I congratulate the Government on holding the stakeholder sessions in August to help to progress the bill. Unfortunately, I was not able to attend either of those events because of the arrival of a new addition to my family, but I appreciated the Government's continuing openness to discussing and progressing the bill in a collegiate manner, which was beneficial to the Parliament as a whole. Various issues regarding certain sections of the bill have been rehearsed both in committee and in the chamber, and clarity on a couple of those points has improved the bill. The imposition of a mandatory rule for a tribunal to conduct arbitration "without unnecessarily delay" and "unnecessary expense" is an important step. That is in rule 23. To be competitive internationally, it is imperative that tribunals have a reputation for fairness and expediency, and that their procedures be as unobtrusive as possible. That can only be a good thing for anyone involved. Secondly, rule 24, which covers the duties of parties to tribunals, is similar to the rule that applies to the tribunal itself: they must act as efficiently as possible, and failure to do so could have financial consequences. I am sure that the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill will have a beneficial effect on the arbitration business in Scotland, and that it will make our industry more competitive internationally. I fully welcome this non-party-political bill, and I hope that it receives full support from across the chamber at 5 o'clock.

To ask the Scottish Government what action it will take following the European Commissioner for Competition's decision concerning the ferry service between Gourock and Dunoon. (S3O-8385)

As the minister knows, I have a longstanding interest in shipbuilding; I have raised with him in the past the issue of the age of the vessels on the service between Gourock and Dunoon. The MV Jupiter is 35 years old and the MV Saturn is 31 years old. Will the minister open dialogue with shipbuilders in Scotland to give them the opportunity to tender for any new builds that the route undoubtedly needs?

As I have only four minutes, I will not be taking any interventions. I congratulate Bill Butler on securing  this evening's members' business debate, even though I disagree with his motion. At the outset, I pose a question to all those who support GARL. What would they scrap to reintroduce the project? As the Parliament's committees are undertaking the budget scrutiny process, I look forward to reading how supporters of the GARL project would reintroduce it and by what means they would fund it. If GARL goes ahead, how many communities the length and breadth of Scotland will suffer as their funding is cut to pay for it? GARL supporters need to remember that, and they should also prepare their explanations of why they have cut local projects to fund a scheme that will transport a mere 11 passengers per train. The costs of GARL were increasing long before the SNP came to power—from £140 million to about £160 million, then to the figure that Tavish Scott gave in an answer to the Parliament, when he said: "The Glasgow airport rail link is on target to cost £170 million to £210 million".—[ Official Report , 16 March 2006; c 24050.] It is obvious that the costs of the project were wholly underestimated from the outset and, as a result, were not sustainable. Some constituents have told me that they welcome the decision because they do not want another Parliament building fiasco to take place. I do not want that either, as it would do nothing to build confidence in the people of Scotland. Glasgow has consistently done well from the Parliament. In 2009-10, Glasgow City Council received from the SNP Government the highest share of funding per head of population of any mainland council. Its share was 22 per cent above the Scottish average. Glasgow received more than £2,500 per head compared with the Scottish average of just over £2,000 per head. Aberdeen and Edinburgh receive just over £1,700 per head and Dundee receives just over £2,200. Glasgow is doing tremendously well from this SNP Government. I should also mention the money for the M74 extension; the Commonwealth games; the M80 upgrade; the new £842 million southern general hospital; which will be built with money from the public purse, not from the shameful public-private partnership and private finance initiative system; and the £1.164 billion for the Glasgow to Edinburgh railway improvements programme. I could go on, but I do not have the time. Glasgow has done and is doing very well from this Parliament and this SNP Government. It is getting the best share of resources of any other mainland local authority, so this "Poor Glasgow" political campaign is simply not factually accurate.  In fact, the more that new Labour goes on about poor Glasgow, the more votes the SNP gets across the rest of the country, including the west of Scotland region. Archie Anderson, the chairman of the Paisley north community council, got it right. In welcoming the decision on GARL, he said: "Common sense has prevailed. This is the right decision for the local area. It is good that the Scottish Government realise that the rail link was simply a case of the emperor with no clothes. There was no economic case for the project." In the future—[ Interruption. ]

In the future, let us have a GARL. Let us have a GARL that we can be proud of and can shout about. Let us have a GARL that actually takes people off the roads, compared with the 11 passengers per train that this project would have operated with. Moreover, let us have a GARL that will not require a £3.1 million subsidy every year. What we need is a GARL that is not a symbol of inadequacy and lack of ambition.

I am delighted to take part in the debate, not as a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee or as a scientist, but as someone with an interest in promoting Scotland—internally, and to the wider world—as a marine centre of excellence. I commend the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee for its valuable report and congratulate the Scottish Government on bringing the Marine (Scotland) Bill to the Parliament in the first place. I am delighted that legislation dealing with one of Scotland's major resources—the most important resource, of course, is its people—is being considered by the Parliament. I am sure  that, whatever the outcome by the end of stage 3, Scotland will have a legislative environment in which our marine resource will be cherished for the long term. As a west of Scotland MSP, I do not have to look far to see water. I grew up in Inverclyde and I still stay there. I honestly do not believe that everyone in Inverclyde, including me for a while, has fully appreciated the beauty of the Clyde as well as its positive economic impact on the communities both north and south of the river, and the recreational benefits that the river brings. As a result, I will focus some comments on the River Clyde. Much of the river's shipbuilding industry has been decimated, for reasons that include the UK Government policy that nationalised and then privatised the industry, and the lower Clyde being designated for oil platforms just as the bottom fell out of platform construction. The death warrant for yards, with thousands of men being placed on the dole queue, was sealed by the Tories in the 1980s. The river has therefore had a chequered history, to say the least. Thankfully, there is still a yard left on the lower Clyde—Ferguson's in Port Glasgow—but it does not seem to build many ships these days. It is clear that the river must not only be utilised in a different manner, but protected. My members' business debate in November 2008 on sailing and recreational boating was the first debate on that issue in the Parliament. I was stunned that it took nine and a half years to have such a debate, particularly given that the Scottish coastline is more than 13,000km long and therefore of substantial interest to many of Scotland's communities. Since that debate, I have established the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on recreational boating and marine tourism to ensure that a voice can be provided for everyone who uses the Scottish marine resource. Next month, the group will discuss the Marine (Scotland) Bill and I look forward to representatives of Marine Scotland coming along to the meeting. I fully welcome the bill for three reasons. First, it aims to simplify legislation by consolidating some 80 pieces of legislation. Secondly, the collaborative working relationship between the Scottish and Westminster Governments is to be commended. Thirdly, the Scottish Government's open approach during the consultation on "Sustainable Seas for All: a consultation on Scotland's first marine bill" was warmly welcomed outside this chamber. A representative of the Scottish boating alliance told me that asking the SBA for its views and opinions was an extremely positive approach that showed the Scottish Government's willingness to get stakeholders to participate in Scotland's legislative process. It also  showed that the Scottish Government wanted the bill to be the best that it could be from the outset. Having read the submissions from the SBA and the Royal Yachting Association Scotland, I know that those organisations have issues with aspects of the bill. I am sure that those issues will be discussed with Marine Scotland at next month's meeting of the cross-party group. Given the massive economic benefits—some £270 million—that recreational boating brings to the Scottish economy, not to mention the sporting and health-related benefits that it also brings, the Scottish Government should consider fully the input from the SBA and the RYAS. Further, as others have discussed, we learned recently that the Scottish Federation of Sea Anglers, which is a member of the SBA, estimates that sea angling brings in some £150 million to the Scottish economy. If we can get the bill correct, there is no reason why those substantial sums of money should not increase, thus benefiting communities the length and breadth of Scotland. I return to the subject of the Clyde. The Stornoway Gazette is not a publication that I read very often—we do not really get it in Greenock—but an article in the paper was brought to my attention as I prepared for the debate. The article—"First Class Facilities for Yachties Make the Clyde Attractive"—encapsulated what is excellent about the River Clyde and some of the facilities that it offers. I do not sail, but having had three opportunities in my life to do so, I have learned that one does not need to be an oil oligarch to enjoy the pastime. In fact, recently I met constituents from a community-based sailing club who reiterated that point. However, I do not know whether we fully appreciate what we have on our doorstep. The article highlighted the excellent facilities at Troon and at the Largs yacht haven, the latter of which I can vouch for. However, if one considers facilities such as the Kip marina in Inverkip, the Fairlie quay marina and Ardrossan marina, to name just a few, it is clear that we have an abundance of top-quality, successful marina developments, which have set the standard for the rest of the country. I am sure that the Marine (Scotland) Bill can and will deliver for the whole country. I look forward to it complementing the fantastic facilities that we have in place on the River Clyde. I am sure that they can raise the bar across the rest of the country.

I congratulate Irene Oldfather and the cross-party group on Alzheimer's and dementia on securing the debate. The fact that we are having it shows how useful cross-party groups can be, especially when they do what they say on the tin and enable  people from across the parties to work together. Irene Oldfather and the cross-party group deserve credit for that. I hope that Irene Oldfather will forgive me for the fact that, because I was on paternity leave, I was unable to take part in the parliamentary debate on Alzheimer's that took place on 9 September—I offer her my apologies. I do not see how anyone can disagree with the principle of a charter of rights for people with dementia. The motion states that "the charter of rights is based on internationally agreed human rights and is intended to promote the respect, protection and fulfilment of all human rights of people with dementia and their carers". It highlights exactly what this is all about and I do not see how anyone can disagree with it. In June 2009, I was asked to open a conference that the Inverclyde Alzheimer's group held in Greenock. The aim of the conference was to highlight ways of living positively with dementia. In my speech, I noted that approximately 940 people in Inverclyde had dementia. However, the recent briefing from Alzheimer Scotland states that that figure has now risen to 1,155. That rise, over a short period of time, shows that this is a massive issue that we must all work to deal with. Living positively with dementia does not mean warehousing people, which Cathy Jamieson highlighted during the debate in September. The conference that I attended highlighted what people can do to live positively with dementia, and how they can deal with the situation. During the conference there was a role-play session, a question-and-answer session and workshops. The role-play session really took people into the zone—as they say in football—and enabled them to understand and tune in to what life is like for anyone who has a family member with dementia. It made me think of my grandmother, who had dementia and stayed with my family when I was in my early teens. I remember the stages that she went through and the strains and stresses that were placed on the family. The role-play session was extremely powerful, and the conference was a tremendous event in which to take part. I have waffled quite a lot, so I will have to skip a few things that I had intended to say. The debate and the announcement of the charter are timely for me because the Alzheimer's group in Greenock has invited me to visit its Alzheimer's cafe tomorrow. I am delighted that I will be able to go there and take along word of the full support, long-term commitment and cross-party consensus that the Scottish Parliament has displayed on this issue. That message is powerful.  I once again thank and commend Irene Oldfather and the cross-party group. I also commend the Scottish Government for the work it has been doing—I look forward to reading the strategy document that is due to be published next year.

I thank all members from the Scottish National Party and the Conservative and Labour parties who supported the motion and therefore allowed me to bring this members' business debate to the chamber. It is a bit disappointing that no Liberal Democrat member felt the need to back an element of Scottish cultural heritage. Indeed, no Liberal Democrat member is in the chamber for the debate. Unfortunately, we will not hear what the Liberal Democrats think of Scottish culture. The motion congratulates the pipe band of Simon Fraser University in Canada on winning this year's world pipe band championships. To win the top prize in any competition requires hard work and dedication. I am a piper, so I appreciate the band's achievements. It is good that a pipe band from another country can win the world championships, because that demonstrates the internationalism of piping, but I look forward to the title returning home in the near future. The motion also mentions the Strathclyde Police pipe band and considers its future. I have the utmost respect and admiration for the pipers and drummers of the pipe band and for the band's history. I stress that I fully support the hierarchy of Strathclyde Police and the force's initiative to get more officers on the streets and away from their desks. It is imperative that as many police officers as possible are on the streets and that the increased police presence should be visible to the public. Constituents have told me that they have noticed a higher police presence on the streets. I wanted to get that on the record. The Strathclyde Police pipe band formed in 1883 as the burgh of Govan pipe band. It became  the city of Glasgow pipe band in 1912 and then Strathclyde Police pipe band in 1975, after reorganisation. As the Strathclyde Police pipe band, the band has won 12 world championship titles—most recently in 1991—including six in a row from 1981 to 1986. When I was growing up and learning the chanter and the pipes, I remember that every year the question was who would come second in the championships, because the Strathclyde Police pipe band was so good and always won. This summer, the band finished in fourth place at the world pipe band championships. Indeed, it finished in fourth place in all five majors: the Scottish pipe band championships, the British pipe band championships, the European pipe band championships, the Cowal pipe band championships at the Highland gathering and the world pipe band championships. After all the championships, the band was ranked as the fourth best band in the world—I repeat, the fourth best band in the world. That is a marvellous achievement by anyone's standards, but the band is also ranked as the best Scottish and British band. As members will easily understand, we are talking about a group of individuals who perform and compete on the world stage at the highest level. The band's results in 2008 were slightly lower than its results this year and its achievements this year have been all the more remarkable given the internal pressures that have been placed on it as a result of reorganisation within the force. The band is based in A division in Glasgow. Band members are on different shifts, which means that they have less time to practise together. Numerous grievance procedures have been lodged against the divisional commander—of course I will not comment on those. The band has been forced to scale back its community activities and allegations have been levelled at it, such as that its members spend too much time practising together and not enough time out on the streets doing police work. As members can imagine, that has not been a barrel of laughs for the players in this world-class band. Their achievements this year are therefore even more admirable and astonishing. I do not have time to go into much detail on all the points that I have mentioned, but I will delve into a couple of them. Of the 40 band members, only 13—less than a third—are serving police officers, so it is disingenuous of opponents of the band to claim that all 40 members should spend more time on the streets. Of the 13 serving police officers, three played in their own time 100 per cent of the time; the other 10 played when their police duties allowed. The serving officers operate at a ratio of 86 per cent of time spent on the street to 14 per cent spent on piping activities.  The pipe band is more than just its title. Its members are musical and cultural ambassadors. They have a community policing role when they are out on the streets. They also act as a recruiting tool. I have been informed that the band's existence has been the deciding factor for people who were considering which police force to join. There can be a greater return for Strathclyde Police on investment in the band than some people perceive to be the case. Members might have noticed that there are very few people in the public gallery. I have been told that some band members wanted to come to hear the debate but were fearful that there would be recriminations if they supported the motion. I have spoken off the record to a number of police officers, and almost to an officer they whole-heartedly support the band and realise what it contributes. Why is the future of a Scottish institution being threatened in the year of homecoming? How embarrassing is that for the police and for Scotland? What does it say to the rest of the world about how public bodies value Scottish culture and identity? The band can be compared to Chelsea Football Club. Chelsea is not the best club in the world—neither is Strathclyde Police—but it is not far from it. Nobody in their right mind would disband Chelsea, so why disband the Strathclyde Police pipe band? I have said that to a few people and they accept the point. Papers released for this week's Strathclyde police authority meeting highlight the costs of the band. I have information to dispute some of the figures in those papers. It is stated that the band earned £5,000 last year, but I have been told that it earned £23,000. There is no denying that costs for the band have decreased dramatically. It is not possible to run any pipe band on a just-in-time inventory system—that is not feasible at all—so the senior management should just accept the point. The College of Piping ran a campaign earlier this year and handed a petition with more than 3,000 signatures to the chief constable. The piping world is watching. I have written to Chief Constable House on a number of occasions asking to meet him to explain the importance of the resource that he has at his disposal. Unfortunately, to date, he has rejected every request. I make the offer once again. I fully understand that the minister will say that he cannot intervene because the issue concerns operational matters. I respect that position and cannot disagree with it, but I hope that he will undertake to raise the matter with the chief constable from a cultural perspective, so that the Scottish Government is not embarrassed by the actions of a public body.  I look forward to hearing other members' speeches and the minister's response.

What would the member do with the waste that is generated from nuclear energy?

I am delighted to take part in this afternoon's debate as the newest member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. When I became a member of the committee earlier this year, much of the research had already been done and a great deal of the evidence had already been taken, but there were still some areas to cover, as well as three fact-finding visits to be made—to the north of Scotland, to Berlin and to Sweden and Denmark. I will speak about the Berlin visit later. Before I continue, I would like to put on record my sincere thanks to the committee clerks for their support since I joined the committee, particularly during the energy inquiry. I remember thinking, when Stephen Imrie first gave me my folder of paperwork for the committee, "Well, that's my bedtime reading for the next seven months." The most obvious issue that came out of the report was nuclear power, and it will come as no surprise that that issue went to the casting vote of the convener and that the votes were split down party lines. I am sure that members of all parties considered the evidence properly but, in the end, we did not deviate from our respective party policies. I do not intend to rerun the debate, as I am sure that that will not progress today's debate any further. I will instead highlight other aspects of the report.

I am sure that any report that the Council of Economic Advisers produces will be debated through the proper channels. At one of the first evidence sessions that I attended as a committee member, we heard evidence from a representative of Community Energy Scotland. I was previously not too aware of what the organisation did, but I was impressed to learn of its activities. Only the week before, I had been contacted by a constituent who had a suggestion for a community energy scheme, and I was in the process of investigating the matter on his behalf. The committee meeting was timely to say the least, and the knowledge that such an organisation exists to assist local groups with energy proposals is vital, as it ensures that normal people can play their part in Scotland's renewable future. Paragraph 128 of the committee's report concerns the fossil fuel levy. I whole-heartedly agree with our recommendation, which calls on the Scottish and UK Governments to work together to release the £164 million that is currently held with Ofgem. However, there really is no point in this Parliament getting all or even some of that money if the resultant knock-on effect is a reduction in the Scottish consolidated fund. The £164 million would be a massive injection in renewable projects, which would allow Scotland and the UK to go some way towards reaching renewable targets. I was content that the committee did not divide over that issue—I am sure we all agree that Scotland can provide so much more in the way of renewable projects and that, as such, the fossil fuel levy should not be used as a political football. Paragraph 131 is an important section of the report, as it considers planning applications and the level of consent refusals. In two years, the Scottish Government has approved 26 applications, which are worth 1.8GW of capacity in  total, and another 33 applications are being considered. Those figures are significant. The Scottish Government response that it recognises the need for more renewables projects to be given consent is telling, but the point that stands out is that consent should not be at any price. Our local communities will not thank us, or any elected representative, if projects go ahead on a whim while local concerns are disregarded, irrespective of what the project is. I echo the Scottish Government's response that "the best applications are those that ... take care to resolve environmental and other concerns in advance." As is the case with other issues that we consider in the chamber, prevention is always better than cure, and I do not see how any party can argue against that response. I will touch on the carbon capture and storage section in paragraph 140. The committee is fully supportive of the concept of CCS technology, and our recommendation is self-explanatory. I look forward to reading the carbon capture and storage road map when it is published in the autumn. As I mentioned earlier, a delegation from the committee went to Berlin towards the end of the series of evidence sessions. The primary aim of the visit was to look at the CCS demonstration plant at Schwarze Pumpe. The site visit was fascinating, and all the visits during the two days were extremely interesting and worth while. I came away with a better appreciation of CCS technology and a better understanding of how the authorities in Germany have been tackling and plan to tackle energy issues. It is obvious that we can no longer allow carbon pollution to continue. All of us, irrespective of political party, must ensure that the legacy that we leave for future generations is far better than that which has been left to us. In effect, we are attempting to clean up the mess that we have inherited. I commend the report to Parliament for several reasons. First, it is a massive piece of work that has involved pulling together a whole host of information and attempting to break it down for public consumption. Secondly, although I know that the report is not a blueprint for a 100 per cent renewable energy future, I hope that it can be considered to be a framework for what should be possible. Finally, the report has ensured clarity of purpose for the members of the committee and, as the committee's convener said in his opening remarks, it should provide a clear and challenging agenda for Scotland's energy future.

I fully support Scotland's road safety framework to 2020—Scotland's first road safety framework— and I am delighted that the Scottish Government is implementing an ambitious road casualty reduction target. We should all agree that any deaths on Scotland's roads are too many. The priority is to eradicate all fatalities on Scotland's roads, but we need to start somewhere, so the interim target of a 40 per cent reduction by 2020 is admirable—it is higher than the target in the rest of the UK. Many of us will remember the Christmas campaigns to highlight road safety, and not just for drink drivers. However, road safety issues need to be tackled more regularly than just over the festive period. I have a high volume of correspondence from constituents in the West of Scotland highlighting their concerns about the speed of cars, infrastructure and the lack of adequate road signage, which shows that road safety is not a seasonal issue. I have been looking closely at the issue of road safety in my constituency of the West of Scotland, with particular emphasis on the A78 running past Inverkip and Wemyss Bay. The minister is aware of that, as we have had a lot of correspondence about it. In early 2008, I was contacted by a number of constituents who were concerned about the section of road at Inverkip. Since that initial correspondence, I have undertaken a consultation on road safety, which I have highlighted to the minister and to the Parliament. Recently, I undertook another consultation, because Scottish Power is considering selling the Inverkip power station site for 780 new homes. Both those consultations highlighted the strong local feeling on the issue of road safety and the need for vital improvements on the A78. I had an overwhelming 41 per cent response rate to my consultation on the A78, and I have received 721 responses to my current consultation on the Inverkip power station. It is clear that the A78 will struggle to cope with even more vehicles using it at peak times. In my current campaign to improve road safety on the A78, I have had numerous dealings with the Inverkip and Wemyss Bay community council. I also met Transport Scotland, along with Councillor Innes Nelson, which resulted in a safety review being undertaken by Transport Scotland and in planned upgrades to the Bankfoot roundabout at Inverkip. I thank Transport Scotland for commissioning the review; the papers arrived at my office this morning, so I am currently going through them. I was happy that Transport Scotland took on board all the concerns that were highlighted to it and has taken steps to examine the concerns further. However, as residents in Wemyss Bay and Inverkip know, this is not the end of the matter; I  will continue to fight for road improvements to secure a safer future for pedestrians and motorists in the area. It is vital to implement the recommendations of the road safety framework in seeking to influence young people's attitudes to road safety and increase awareness of the benefits of lower-speed driving in relation to health and road safety. It is well known that one in five young drivers are likely to be involved in an accident within a year of passing their test. That needs to change, and with it the attitudes of all drivers, however experienced. I have highlighted just a few of the commitments that are given in the framework, but having 90 pledges from the Scottish Government is a positive step to encourage people in our communities to do their bit to ensure that our roads are safer. The framework will ultimately allow existing funding streams from the Scottish Government, Transport Scotland, local authorities, the police and many others to be used in a more cohesive fashion. By working together, all parties can play a part in reducing the horrific death toll on our roads.

I am delighted to speak in this debate as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. It is my first official outing to speak on a bill that is going through the committee, and I am sure that it will not be my last. I thank the committee clerks: since I became a member of the committee, only a few months ago, their help and assistance has been invaluable. As we have heard, there was a debate about which committee was to examine the bill. I will not go over that ground, apart from saying that we are  where we are, and we have to deal with it. I am sure that I am not being unkind to my committee colleagues in saying that none of us, apart from Gavin Brown, are experts on the existing arbitration laws. Gavin Brown's legal expertise proved invaluable during the evidence sessions, and allowed those mere mortals with no legal background to understand the bill in more detail, so I thank him for that. Before I move on to the issues around the bill, it is important to note that the committee acknowledged that the Scottish Government conducted a transparent and accessible consultation. We were satisfied that the Scottish Government had sought to engage with as many stakeholders as possible in developing the bill. With regard to the economic benefits of the bill, I am a great believer in the KISS—keep it simple, stupid—management method, but I fully appreciate that that will not always be possible; it will not always be an option; and it will not always be wanted by those who have vested interests. However, in the case of this bill, it is possible, it is an option and the legal profession appears to want it. The evidence that the committee has received shows that there is consensus that a new consolidated arbitration bill may provide economic benefits. Increased economic activity is welcome, and will hopefully lead to Scotland becoming a commensurate player in arbitration. It will be difficult for Scotland to compete directly with the established arbitration centres of London, New York and Geneva, but I am sure that there will be increased opportunities for arbitration in Scotland. The committee suggests that it will be difficult to quantify the value of the potential arbitration business. We also suggest that it is important that the Scottish Government does not overstate the economic possibilities of the bill and, as has already been mentioned, we question the figures that relate to London in the financial memorandum. The figure of £3 billion in the financial memorandum can be compared with the figure of £250 million that the committee received in evidence. Those figures are obviously slightly different, and we must have clarity from the Government about which is the more accurate. It is important that the marketing of Scotland as an arbitration centre is fully established. We took the view that the Scottish Government should re-examine its position on the marketing of arbitration. Once the bill has passed through the Parliament, in whatever shape or form, it should be incumbent on all the stakeholders to market the improved service. I appreciate that the judiciary and the legal system are totally independent from the Parliament and from political interference, but as the bill is about business opportunities, the  Scottish Government could look at marketing for the next stages of the bill. Another issue centres on rule 24 and the general duties of the parties. Rule 24 is a mandatory rule that calls for the parties to arbitration to deal with it "without unnecessary delay" or "unnecessary expense". Those are laudable aims, and I am sure that the committee members agree with them in principle, but we have some questions about how realistic those duties are. We heard contrasting evidence about time limits and their worth and the realistic—or unrealistic—possibility of their being enforced. Personally, I have some sympathy with the arguments for enforcing time limits, particularly if they can reduce the cost of arbitration. However, I fully appreciate the arguments of those who say that a one-size-fits-all approach will not work. Every arbitration case will be different, and the parties involved will be of differing sizes and financial status, so there is a legitimate argument for time limits not to be introduced. Paragraph 79 of our report highlights our position quite clearly and our final point therein legitimately queries how those duties can be enforced. I look forward to the Government's response on that in due course. I have enjoyed my short time on the committee and the collegial way in which we have dealt with issues. I have been in the Parliament for only two years, but I have enjoyed that approach on the three committees on which I have served and I hope that that will continue to be the case. However, I was a touch disappointed with one aspect of our deliberations. Paragraph 128 of our report states that the bill is "not yet fit for purpose". There was a division in the committee about that paragraph. At the time, I argued that almost every bill that has gone through the Parliament has been amended at some point—yesterday, we spent a whole day in the chamber dealing with amendments to the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill—and I am sure that that will continue to be the case, even in the distant future when the Scottish National Party is no longer in power. Bills will continue to need to be amended, whether substantially or not. I suggest that saying that a bill is not fit for purpose creates a dangerous precedent and downplays the Parliament more than the Government of the day. In this morning's debate about the future of the Parliament, all parties said that they want it to have more powers. However, with more powers comes added responsibility—that applies to MSPs as well. I gently suggest that MSPs should watch their language from time to time, and I think that having that phrase in the report is quite dangerous. Everyone on the committee appreciated that the bill needs to be significantly  amended, and we were unanimous on that in our report. However, we should be careful about our language, particularly when we are dealing with a bill that is not, as Wendy Alexander and Lewis Macdonald have already mentioned, party political. With that, I commend the committee's report to Parliament. I look forward to the bill making progress through Parliament.

The last thing I would ask the cabinet secretary to do would be to get involved in the operational matters of Strathclyde Police. However, I would like the cabinet secretary to raise with the chief constable the wider community policing role of the Strathclyde Police pipe band, as its future appears to be under threat, which might result in the loss of a community policing tool as well as a Scottish cultural icon.

During the trial, I visited the Asda in Bishopbriggs where I learned more about the excellent a bag for life scheme. As the cabinet secretary will be well aware, in September 2007 Audit Scotland published the report "Sustainable waste management" on reducing, reusing and recycling waste. Does he agree that one way to increase the reuse of carrier bags would be to have a longer, more concerted campaign across all the major retailers in Scotland, in conjunction with more educational resources?

I have a strong interest in the debate because there have been six confirmed cases of swine flu in Greenock, which not only forms part of the region that I represent but is where I live, as Ross Finnie alluded to. I hope that all members will recognise that the way in which confirmed and suspected cases across Scotland have been handled by the Scottish Government and NHS staff has been a credit to the Scottish system for dealing with such outbreaks. That has certainly been recognised so far, but I am keen for there to be unanimity on that point throughout the debate. Although media coverage of the outbreak has slowed down somewhat over the past week or so—other items appear to be leading the media agenda—we should not expect anyone to become complacent or assume that the issue has gone away. In her opening speech, the cabinet secretary highlighted the case of the individual who is in the Victoria hospital in Glasgow, and people are still being diagnosed in Scotland and elsewhere. I am pleased that the Scottish Government has not opted to overplay or underplay any of the dangers surrounding swine flu. We have been able to cope admirably so far because we have had a pandemic flu framework in place since November 2007. The swine flu outbreak has been a test of that framework, which has proven to be successful so far. I am one of the co-conveners of the cross-party group on funerals and bereavement; the other co-convener, Nanette Milne, is also in the chamber. The membership of the group was grateful to the previous Scottish Executive and the current Scottish Government for their work on the framework, which is important, and was content that the funeral services industry had an input into it. The swift action of working together with the UK Government and at European Union level appears to have allowed the Scottish response to be prompt and extremely efficient—so much so that  the Scottish Government has been able to make just fewer than 1.5 million surgical face-masks available to England and Wales to cover the shortfall there. There are obvious public concerns, some of which have been touched on, about the possible resurgence of flu-like symptoms in autumn and over winter. However, the calm way in which all of us—especially the cabinet secretary and her officials—have conducted ourselves should be commended. I expect that to continue and that there will be no scaremongering tactics from anyone—politicians and the media alike. Such an atmosphere would not help in any circumstances. The fact that the Scottish Government is prepared for the possibility of a future pandemic reaching WHO level 6 should be welcomed as a precautionary measure. The Scottish Government has advance agreements in place with manufacturers, should a vaccine be developed and pandemic level 6 be reached. I welcome the fact that we are going beyond that and buying supplies for the entire population early, as a precaution. As we have heard, the vaccine can be expected by December, but perhaps as early as September. We know that it will be offered on a voluntary basis in addition to the normal seasonal flu vaccination. All of us are now well aware that the symptoms of swine flu are no more dangerous than those of common flu. As I said earlier, like Ross Finnie, I live in Greenock. The way in which the Inverclyde public, education staff, Inverclyde Council and all local health professionals have dealt with the situation has been nothing short of highly commendable. There has been no hysteria, but a tremendous amount of understanding and appreciation of the need to do whatever needs to be done. Coverage in the local newspaper, the Greenock Telegraph , has not overplayed the situation in any way, shape or form. People to whom I have spoken who have links, in one way or another, to local individuals involved in the situation have been tremendously appreciative of what has been done. Ultimately, the episode has shown the people of Greenock and the whole of Inverclyde at their best. I am sure that that will continue to be the case if other cases are uncovered in the future.

I welcome the opportunity to participate in this important debate. As everyone knows, we are in the midst of a recession that is having a devastating effect on many families in Scotland, the UK, Europe and the wider world. Only this week, we heard that the Japanese economy shrunk by 4 per cent in the first quarter of 2009. That highlights the global situation that we are facing. We are discussing the situation in Scotland, but it is important to highlight the Japanese example. The Scottish economy is in a downturn, but we are faring well compared with the rest of the UK. During the first quarter of this year, unemployment in Scotland was 5.9 per cent, compared with 7.1 per cent in the UK—I would be the first to admit that that those figures are 5.9 per cent and 7.1 per cent higher than they should be. Labour has told us that 20,000 jobs have been lost in the construction sector alone this year. According to the Office for National Statistics, construction activity fell by 3.8 per cent in Scotland, 11.6 per cent in Wales and 6.4 per cent in England. The latest figures from the ONS—they are from 7 May—show that there was a 0.4 per cent increase in construction orders in Scotland from the last quarter of 2008 to the first quarter of 2009, compared with a 9.3 per cent decrease in England over the same two quarters.

I accept that point, which leads into what I am about to say. I have family members who live in England and work in the construction industry there. When I have spoken to them in recent months, they have told me about the devastating downturn that is affecting them. Some of my relatives stay in the midlands. In the past, they have had no problems whatsoever in obtaining work. Now, the situation that they face is similar to, but worse than, that in Scotland. I do not wish to see anyone lose their job through no fault of their own. However, in light of the statistics that I have just mentioned, it is clear that Scotland is suffering a wee bit but that it is certainly doing better than the rest of the UK, as I have said. I wonder what devastation would have befallen the Scottish economy if the Scottish Government had not brought forward capital funding in the budget. Recently, the Scottish director of ConstructionSkills, Graeme Ogilvy, stated: "there is still short-term growth in the industry, assisted by public sector spending". Councillor Steven Purcell stated recently: "there's so much work going on in Glasgow just now". Some of those projects will be at least part funded by the Scottish Government. Numerous announcements have been made about new building projects throughout the country. One of those projects is in the Inverclyde community that I live in. New schools have been commissioned by the Inverclyde Council Labour-Conservative-independent coalition and signed off by the Scottish Government. There is some £80 million for four new schools. Announcements have been made throughout Scotland to try to maintain jobs in these trying times. Members keep hearing about the 20,000 job losses in the construction industry, and Labour continually attempts to blame the Scottish Government. I must have missed the furore when Chancellor Darling announced £500 million-worth of cuts for Scotland next year. That is expected to cost 9,000 jobs in Scotland. I congratulate John Park on lodging a constructive motion, and welcome his acknowledgment of the ProAct scheme. I think that that scheme will bring benefits to Wales, and I hope that the Scottish Government will consider it. I am sure that John Park acknowledges that the scheme was introduced in Wales when Plaid Cymru became a partner in the Welsh Assembly Government.

To ask the Scottish Government, in light of recent changes to the central heating programme, how it is addressing the issue of fuel poverty. (S3O-6960)

I have been contacted by several elderly constituents who are concerned that they do not meet the Scottish Government's criteria for energy assistance. What is the Government doing to help those people, who are not eligible for a new heating system under the energy assistance package but who are still highly vulnerable and require assistance?

I thank the cabinet secretary for her statement. I was content to hear the positive remarks about Inverclyde Council, but what impact has the suspension last Friday of the council's corporate director of education and social care had on communications and activities between the council and the Government?

I, too, congratulate my Scottish National Party colleague Jamie Hepburn on securing the debate. According to the Labour back-bench MP John Grogan, there will soon be a climb-down on the Postal Services Bill because more than 100 Labour MPs are prepared to vote against that part-privatisation bill. In addition, more than 140 Labour MPs have signed the early day motion at the Palace of Westminster. I fully congratulate all MPs who have signed that motion, but particularly the Labour MPs who are prepared to stand up against Gordon Brown to prevent him from taking this kamikaze decision on Royal Mail. What the EDM proposes would be the sensible course of action, but Gordon Brown is in charge and we all know that the sensible course of action does not always prove to be his chosen one. The fact that the Government's proposal reneges on a Labour manifesto pledge should set alarm bells ringing, but it appears that Gordon Brown is oblivious to public perception and opinion.

I do not have much time, I am afraid. The manifesto pledge stated: "Our ambition is to see a publicly owned Royal Mail fully restored to good health, providing customers with an excellent service and its employees with rewarding employment." I am not sure which bit of that statement allows the comeback kid, Lord Mandelson, to claim that his plans to sell a minority stake in Royal Mail are consistent with party policy. Lord Mandelson was one of the architects of new Labour, alongside Blair and Brown, and recent history has shown that, for Lord Mandelson, the substance of a debate comes a distant second to spin. Any form of privatisation of the Post Office network has already been widely criticised by unions and the public alike. The main concerns about the proposed action are that there would be major job losses, cuts to vital services and a lack of provision for the staff who remained in place. The future of Royal Mail as a public service should be of the utmost importance.

I do not have much time. The network change programme has already proved unpopular, as we have heard and as I discovered through receiving a large volume of correspondence on the matter from my constituents. I have therefore supported the campaign to prevent post office closures in the west of Scotland. In one Inverclyde post office alone, there were around 700 signatures on a petition against the facility's closure. I am sure that we all agree that the elderly, the disabled and people in rural areas are worst affected by such closures. Post offices are highly valued by local communities and in many cases are a key part of the fabric of the community they serve. The privatisation of Royal Mail could put undue pressure on other local businesses and services and would create service access difficulties and unnecessary extra expense for many residents. I welcome this debate in this Parliament and the fact that there were so many signatories to the EDM that was tabled in the Palace of Westminster. I urge Prime Minister Brown, who is known in some circles as Jonah Brown, to take a long hard look at what he proposes. Does he really want a back-bench rebellion on his hands that would mean that he would need and want the support of the Tories to force the proposal through? I sincerely hope that he does not. I urge him to think again and to maintain Royal Mail as a fully public entity that can provide services to all our communities in Scotland and those in the other three nations of the UK.

I am pleased to take part in this important debate. I acknowledge the hard work and determination of the Scottish Government in introducing the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill and of members who have taken part in the debate. Many aspects of the bill have been discussed, so I will not attempt to cover too much old ground. I will focus my contribution on how a recent visit to Berlin by a delegation from the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee relates to the bill. The purpose of the visit was to learn more about energy policy and usage in Berlin and in Germany as a whole. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee has been undertaking an energy inquiry for some months. It started formally last September, before I became a member of the committee. We are now at the inquiry's tail-end, and a report is due to be completed by the summer. As a new member of the committee, I have found the debate extremely informative. It has got me thinking even more about my own energy usage and my contribution to CO 2 emissions as well as those of the country as a whole. I was particularly interested to hear  the contribution of Peter Peacock, who is unfortunately not here at the moment. The trip to Berlin ties in well with the bill. I will highlight two meetings and their relevance to the bill, particularly to section 48, which is on the duty of ministers to promote energy efficiency. Our programme of events included a meeting with two members of the German Bundestag: Dr Axel Berg, the SPD spokesman on energy; and Herr Laurenz Meyer, the CDU/CSU spokesman on the economy. While discussing the effects of energy consumption and energy loss in domestic properties, both Bundestag members acknowledged that there are major problems with German buildings and that it is up to the state to provide solutions. We were informed that approximately 60 per cent of the current housing stock in Germany is rented, which will facilitate a domestic property improvement programme. In Scotland, however, 76 per cent of the housing stock is privately owned and 24 per cent is rented. It will therefore be a bit more challenging to have such a programme in Scotland. I said to Dr Berg that it was refreshing that there was an acknowledgment of the housing problem and that it was being examined. However, Germany appears to have acknowledged the problem some years ago. It was obvious to me that Scotland and the UK are some years behind Germany. I stated to Dr Berg that very little had been done in Scotland or, indeed, the UK to tackle this domestic problem. Dr Berg replied with a most startling response, "Sir, you must be a very poor country." As everyone in the chamber knows, however, Scotland and the UK are not very poor countries—far from it. However, there appears to have been little drive to promote energy efficiency in the past. Many buildings throughout Scotland that are energy inefficient can and must be improved. Providing resources to deal with that is obviously vital, as is promoting energy efficiency plans, for which section 48 provides. We had a meeting with the German energy agency and were informed that Germany plans to retrofit 50 per cent of buildings within the next 20 years. Given that 75 per cent of buildings in Germany were built before 1978, it is easy to understand that the retrofit will be a massive undertaking. Even if the 50 per cent retrofit is achieved, the target of a 2.5 per cent reduction in emissions will not be met, because it is currently calculated at 1.7 per cent. Even with retrofitting, there will therefore still be challenges for Germany, but at least it will be moving in the right direction.

I am not suggesting that at all. I am just highlighting a point that was raised at one of the meetings that we had in Germany. The Germans have a progressive idea for any new building to use a third of its energy from renewable sources. That has already been agreed and I commend the German Government for that action. No single solution will eradicate climate change or provide Scotland's contribution to tackling climate change, but the measures in the bill will surely play a valuable and important role. Yesterday, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth said: "Climate change is the greatest environmental threat facing humankind."— [ Official Report , 6 May 2009; c 17081.]  No one in the Parliament could disagree with that. Judging by the contributions in the debate so far, I get the feeling that members are all singing from the same hymn sheet, but we must improve Scotland's contribution by ensuring that the Parliament passes the bill at stage 1 this afternoon. I certainly do not think that the bill will be voted down, as that would send a message to the wider world that Scotland does not really care about the environment. As Robin Harper said a few moments ago—on this I could not agree with him more—the bill is a parliamentary bill. Together, the Scottish Parliament and everyone in Scotland have what it takes to lead the fight to combat climate change. I am sure that the bill will provide that opportunity for Scotland and the wider world.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government has taken in light of the Audit Scotland report, "Drug and alcohol services in Scotland". (S3F-1632)

Everyone in Parliament knows that alcohol abuse is a major problem in Scotland, and is aware of its £2.5 billion cost implications for the national health service. Does the First Minister agree with former Labour First Minister, Henry McLeish, who has said that the Scottish Government must press ahead with its proposals for minimum alcohol pricing?

To ask the Scottish Government what action it has taken to improve road safety. (S3O-6657)

As I highlighted in this morning's debate, when I undertook my survey in Inverkip, which achieved a response rate of 41 per cent, some 81 per cent of respondents said that they want action to be taken on the A78 junction at Inverkip. I welcome the fact that Transport Scotland will now undertake a survey, but I ask the minister to accept my invitation to come to Inverkip to see for himself the dangerous and potentially life-threatening junction. Will he agree to meet members of the Inverkip and Wemyss Bay community council to hear their concerns and to discuss the matter further?

Having read the motion and amendments a number of times, I believe that six minutes is not enough time in which to focus on the many points and issues that I want to raise. I will touch on a few, leaving Glasgow city centre to other members who I am sure will raise it. The potential for transport infrastructure in the west of Scotland is limitless. We have heard on a number of occasions about the issues and projects that could be taken forward. One suggestion that could be put into the mix is the greater use of the River Clyde. I am thinking of river taxis from Braehead to Glasgow city centre and a river boat from the tail of the bank to the city centre. Another suggestion is for more trains on the Wemyss Bay to Glasgow line. At the moment, one train runs per hour, despite a massive westward shift in population in the Inverclyde area. I have raised the issue with the minister. Also, the Gourock to Dunoon Caledonian MacBrayne ferry saga must be finalised, one way or another. The road infrastructure could be improved, with Transport Scotland adopting some roads in the East Dunbartonshire area where there are no trunk roads at the moment. If Transport Scotland adopted some roads in the area, it would aid investment and relieve pressure on the local authority. Also, consideration could be given to a bypass around Inverkip and Wemyss Bay to address the traffic chaos in the area. There is also the saga that is the Gourock interchange project, about which the minister knows a great deal. Those are only some of the issues that have been a problem for many years and which the present Scottish Government inherited on coming into office in 2007. If Government ministers solved all of the issues in four years, they would be miracle workers. That is even more the case following the Chancellor of the Exchequer's budget yesterday and the cuts that are coming Scotland's way in the near future. Some time ago, numerous constituents contacted me about the Inverkip situation. I conducted a survey in the Inverkip and Wemyss Bay villages on the danger of trying to cross the A78 at Inverkip. Delay in crossing the road is bad  enough, but at peak times—particularly in the morning and evening—the manoeuvre can be akin to taking a chance with one's life. I mailed out 2,150 survey forms, and the response rate was a massive 41 per cent. With 41 per cent of the population having taken the time to voice their concerns, the issue cannot be ignored. After a disappointing initial response, I persisted in contacting Transport Scotland. As of this week, Transport Scotland has agreed to undertake a three-month survey and to let me know its results at the end of the summer. Two junctions lead from the A78—one to Inverkip village and one to Kip marina. The amount of traffic that zooms up from North Ayrshire in the morning and from the villages to Greenock is one important issue, but we must also consider the safety element. The local authority has built a new secondary school, with approximately 900 pupils, only 2 miles up the road. Because of the amount of traffic that uses the road, it is dangerous for pupils to go on to it. I am delighted by the action that Transport Scotland plans to take, which is a step forward. I look forward to seeing the results of the survey. There are many reasons why investment in road infrastructure is vital. I have already mentioned safety. I highlight to the minister and to the chamber the tremendous shift in population to the western part of Inverclyde. Many more properties are being built in Inverkip and Wemyss Bay, and there now seems to be a shortage of people in the eastern part of the district, compared with the west. That is a really important issue. The minister and I have spoken about it before, and I am sure that we will speak about it again; no doubt it will be discussed later this morning. A further issue that exacerbates gridlock is the lack of investment by the proper authorities in flood prevention measures. As you know, Presiding Officer, when there are heavy rains in Inverclyde, floods can block off part of the district, especially at the Newark roundabout in Port Glasgow. As Inverclyde royal hospital no longer has consultant services, ambulances must take people to the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley or the Southern general. Sometimes every second counts, so it is important that the whole transport infrastructure and flood prevention measures are taken fully into account. I could go on, but I am running out of time and must close. I agree that there should be more investment in west of Scotland transport infrastructure, but I wish that members of the previous Administration had thought the same, instead of burying their Executive heads in the sand and realising only in May 2007 that there were shortfalls in our infrastructure.

To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it is providing to people looking for employment in Scotland in light of recent figures showing that an average of 10 people apply for each jobcentre vacancy. (S3O-6434)

The community of Inverclyde, where I live, has suffered vast job losses in the shipbuilding and heavy engineering sectors and, more recently, in the electronics sector. Now that the UK economy is in recession, Inverclyde and every other part of Scotland face even more job losses as a result of the UK Government's shambolic handling of the economy. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the confusing messages from the UK Government and the Bank of England might well be exacerbating the unemployment statistics in Inverclyde, which is 14 th in the list of UK parliamentary constituencies in Scotland, ranked by unemployment rate?

I fully appreciate the cost issues that the member has highlighted, but does he think that pleural plaques are a good thing?

I expect an element of justice to be reinstated for the people of Scotland shortly after 5 pm this evening. I expect the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) (Bill) to be passed by the Parliament, which will once again send a message to Scotland and elsewhere that the Scottish Parliament is prepared to act in the interests of the people of this country. I will take particular pleasure in casting my vote this evening because I have been involved in moving the campaign and the bill forward since before the bill was introduced to Parliament. Shortly after I was elected, Councillor Kenny MacLaren of Renfrewshire Council arranged for me to meet Phyllis Craig of Clydeside Action on Asbestos. The impending House of Lords decision and its ramifications for sufferers of pleural plaques was explained to me and I was asked to assist. With the help of Councillor MacLaren, we started to put the wheels in motion. I offered to introduce the draft bill as a member's bill, but we agreed to try first to convince the Scottish Government to introduce the bill, as that would guarantee it speedier progress through the  Parliament. Thankfully, the meetings between Clydeside Action on Asbestos, Frank Maguire of Thompsons Solicitors and the Scottish Government were successful. Gil Paterson, Bill Kidd and I invited Phyllis Craig and Frank Maguire to the Scottish National Party conference in 2007 to lobby all and sundry. I do not think that many SNP MSPs left the conference without meeting them and realising what pleural plaques were and what the implications of the House of Lords decision would be. When I was informed that the Scottish Government was to introduce the bill, I was delighted, but I realised that there was still a lot more to do. During the early stages of the bill, when I was a member of the Justice Committee, it was obvious that there was unanimous cross-party support for the bill. It was also obvious that there was a sense of injustice, and that the committee could do something about it. I am proud of the scrutiny that we gave the bill and of the report that we published. At this point, I pay tribute to the members of the Justice Committee for their work in scrutinising the bill. I was, of course, disappointed to hear Bill Aitken's comments. I respect the fact that he queried the financial aspects of the bill throughout the committee process, but I take this opportunity to urge the Conservatives to change their decision. I advise them not to paint themselves as they were in the 1980s, which is what they will do if they vote against the bill this evening. I was born in Barrow-in-Furness in England, but I grew up in Port Glasgow, as my parents decided to return to the town. My father was a coppersmith and worked in the shipyards, as did many other family members. Health and safety conditions in the yards were not as stringent as they are now, and some of the raw materials that were used then would not be used now—the main one, obviously, being asbestos. If I were given a pound for every story that I have heard about the white mice—not only in the past but since I have been involved in campaigning with Clydeside Action on Asbestos—I would be a wealthy man. The stories shocked me, but I was shocked even more by those about women contracting asbestos-related conditions as a result of shaking their husbands' overalls before washing them. That brought home to me just how potent and dangerous asbestos is, and how indiscriminate it can be. It can affect the whole population. I am pleased that the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament have listened to the arguments. I am sure that the vast majority of the people of Scotland will support the decision that we make on the bill. I know that they will support us in doing the right thing tonight, just as they  supported us when we did the right thing two weeks ago and voted for Jackie Baillie's Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill. During Bill Kidd's recent members' business debate on action mesothelioma day, I urged the insurance industry to work in tandem with organisations such as Clydeside Action on Asbestos and the Clydebank Asbestos Group, instead of fighting claims at every single turn. Today, I again ask the insurance industry to be proactive in moving this issue forward and not to challenge the will of the Parliament in the courts, as the media has reported might happen. If we pass the bill, there is no reason whatsoever for the insurance industry to mount a legal challenge to the will of the Parliament. Before I close, I welcome to the public gallery representatives of Clydeside Action on Asbestos, particularly Phyllis Craig, who is a rock for the charity; Frank Maguire of Thompsons Solicitors; representatives of Clydebank Asbestos Group; and Councillor Kenny MacLaren. Their hard work will be rewarded. More important, I want to welcome all those in the public gallery who suffer from pleural plaques and other asbestos-related conditions. Today is about allowing them the opportunity to obtain an apology for their condition—a condition that was contracted because they went to work and someone else neglected health and safety regulations. Today is about them being able to move on with their lives. Most important, today is about them obtaining justice—justice that they deserve. Part of Scotland's industrial legacy will be put right today. I urge the Parliament to vote with one voice and unanimously back this bill.

As a vice-convener of the cross-party group on visual impairment, I congratulate its convener, Robert Brown, on securing the debate. The motion and the debate are certainly timely. I, too, welcome members of the cross-party group to the public gallery. Throughout my time with the cross-party group, I have been fortunate enough to meet some extraordinary people who live with the pressures of being blind or visually impaired. I am proud of the many things that Scotland has given the world, including the engineering feats of Inverclyde's own James Watt in improving the steam engine. However, we must thank the French for giving us the pasteurisation process by Louis Pasteur, the stethoscope by René Laёnnec—forgive my pronunciation—and, of course, Braille, as we know it today. It is testament to Louis Braille that his communication system has lasted as the most effective tool for blind people. As Robert Brown said, the Braille method revolutionised communication for blind people. Without it, many would lead an extremely isolated existence. Blind from the age of 4, Louis Braille would have appreciated the difficulties of day-to-day living with no sight. As well as that, he experienced difficult social conditions and suffered severe illness for most of his life, which makes it all the more important to recognise his achievements. The freedom and independence that the Braille system can give people with sight problems is extremely important to them. The young musicians  who will be playing at the reception this evening, who use Braille to read their music, are a fine example of that. As a musician, I can only imagine how difficult it would be for someone who is blind or has a visual impairment to learn an instrument. That is difficult enough for people who have sight, but it must be so much more difficult for people who are blind or visually impaired. I recognise fully that someone who is blind or visually impaired and can play an instrument has a talent that is extremely welcome. It is difficult for many of us to imagine the everyday difficulties that blind and visually impaired people encounter. We are lucky enough to be able to access with ease the information that we require when we require it. That is not always possible for many people in Scotland today. The effective system that Louis Braille developed has not changed much over the years, but new technologies have kept Braille evolving with various software developments. The advent of the digital age has provided more flexibility for Braille users. It is my view—and that of many others—that education is a basic human right for everyone, regardless of whether they are sighted, blind or visually impaired. On that basis, it is incumbent on all Governments to ensure that everyone's rights are upheld. I know that RNIB Scotland and the Scottish Government have been working together to improve educational facilities—campaigns are on-going. There have been improvements in materials for blind and visually impaired people, but, as everyone in the chamber will be aware, there is still much to do. Progress is imperative for people of all ages with visual impairments. I look forward to noting the progress made by both RNIB Scotland and the Scottish Government on this issue and other such issues.

I congratulate my colleague Bill Kidd MSP on securing this timely debate and I, too, welcome to the public gallery the delegation from Clydeside Action on Asbestos. During the current session of Parliament, members on all sides of the chamber have been working closely with Clydeside Action on Asbestos. Bill Kidd, Gil Paterson and I have worked with the group on a range of issues over the past 22 months.  The Parliament has a history of bringing justice to people who have been affected by asbestos-related conditions. Tomorrow is action mesothelioma day, which is a reminder to everyone in the chamber—and, more important, to those outside the chamber—of the industrial legacy that still affects many people and their families throughout Scotland. Action mesothelioma day is, of course, not taking place solely in Scotland—events are taking place in other nations in the UK, and I wish them success tomorrow. We have heard what mesothelioma is, and I do not want to repeat what has been said, but it is important to reiterate that mesothelioma is a cancer that affects the lining of the lung, the lining of the abdominal cavity and the lining around the heart. Mesothelioma is not something that anyone would wish upon their worst enemy, never mind a work colleague. Thankfully, Parliament has a history of taking action to help the victims of mesothelioma, so we should give credit where it is due. Petition PE336 ultimately led to the Rights of Relatives to Damages (Mesothelioma) (Scotland) Act 2007, which the previous Scottish Executive introduced. That action shows that Parliament values victims of asbestos-related illnesses and is prepared to act accordingly. I would very much like other places to consider the issue fully, to act accordingly and to give credit where it is due. As we know, asbestos-related conditions are varied and mesothelioma is just one example of such a condition. With the support of members of all parties, the Scottish Government is taking action on the Clydeside Action on Asbestos campaign to provide justice for victims of pleural plaques. The Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill will be considered at stage 3 on 11 March, and I hope that the cross-party support for the bill continues. I am grateful for the Government's response to the Justice Committee's request for further information on the financial estimates relating to the bill and its expression of concern about the statement of funding issue. I will read the response with a keen eye over the next few days. It is clear that victims must get justice. On 7 November 2007, I led a members' business debate on the back of the shameful House of Lords ruling that overturned the previous position, whereby victims of pleural plaques had been entitled to justice. Like all MSPs, I was disappointed by that ruling but, thankfully in Scotland at least, we are on the cusp of overturning it. I am sure that if the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill is passed, the pressure on the Westminster Parliament to overturn the decision by the House of Lords, so that victims in other nations of the UK  can get justice, will increase. All sufferers deserve justice. An aspect of the continual campaign for justice that disappoints me is the insurance industry's apparent reluctance to work in tandem with groups such as Clydeside Action on Asbestos, which would allow victims to obtain speedy outcomes. I fully accept that the insurance industry cannot hand out money on a whim—no member would expect that to happen—but I am convinced that its practice of continually fighting cases and lodging appeals, thus delaying payments to victims, leaves a bad taste in the mouth. I respectfully suggest that the insurance industry should take a different approach and try to work with organisations such as Clydeside Action on Asbestos instead of fighting claims at every turn. People with asbestos-related conditions did not ask to have the illness. They went to work and did a hard day's honest graft. They do not deserve to suffer the ill health that has befallen them. Groups such Clydeside Action on Asbestos are invaluable in providing assistance, and action mesothelioma day is vital in keeping in the public eye the industrial legacy that has affected many people in our society. I again congratulate Bill Kidd on securing such a timely debate and on helping to keep asbestos-related illnesses in the public eye.

I congratulate the minister on her promotion. On 19 December last year, Inverclyde was severely affected by flooding and, as a consequence, a local councillor and I met representatives from Scottish Water and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency to try to find out who was responsible for the waterways in the area and to find solutions to resolve the matter. What discussions have taken place between the minister's officials and Inverclyde Council about flooding, and in particular about the implications of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill? Will she accept my invitation, as per my earlier correspondence, to come to Inverclyde and see for herself some of the areas that are regularly devastated when there is inclement weather?

It seems a long time since the Justice Committee published its report, but it was only last October. As I was perusing its pages in preparation for the debate, all the memories came flooding back. Once again, the Justice Committee has produced an important piece of work that will aid both Parliament and external bodies. Members do not have to agree with every word in the report, but it provides a firm foundation on which to build future policy decisions. As has been highlighted, the Justice Committee's inquiry into community policing emanated from its work on the roles and responsibilities of the police. During that earlier inquiry, it became apparent that community policing is a somewhat strange beast, given its  various titles and the various nuances of what it means, so the committee decided to look into the matter and try to clarify it. Visits were arranged to Dundee, the Borders and Motherwell, and the committee held evidence sessions, including a session via satellite with Professor Wesley Skogan from Chicago. I can only say that the committee examined the issue in great detail and came to its conclusions in an informed manner. As well going on the committee's visits, I spent some time going out with Strathclyde Police in Greenock and East Dunbartonshire and with community wardens in Inverclyde. I also met the community partnership team in East Dunbartonshire. Those additional visits allowed me to have more detailed discussions with the officers and wardens, and they certainly helped me during the inquiry. It became apparent early on that there is no one-size-fits-all definition of community policing. Communities and their needs differ, as does the geography of Scotland. What might be good for Greenock or Motherwell may well be inadequate for Peebles or Arran. That was highlighted to the committee by Chief Superintendent Val McHoull of the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents, who made it clear that she is not convinced that imposing a nationally defined model is the most effective way in which to move the community policing structure forward. As she pointed out, community police officers are "there to understand their community".—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 3 June 2008; c 854.] If they are to do that competently, it is essential that they have some flexibility within their area. Paddy Tomkins, Her Majesty's chief inspector of constabulary for Scotland, takes a similar view. Unconvinced by the neighbourhood policing model in England and Wales, he appreciates the diversity in Scotland and the merits of developing a less uniform model. I echo those sentiments in my thoughts about any future community policing model in Scotland. Regardless of whether we were discussing rural or urban areas, we heard about two issues loud and clear: abstraction rates and the tenure of community police officers. It became clear that abstractions are commonplace. In some instances, there is a feeling that community police officers are not as valued as other officers and that they are therefore the first to be called from their duties to perform other tasks. I suggest that community policing is actually one of the most important aspects of policing because it allows the police force to have a public face in communities and to build up links, trust and—dare I say it?—even friendships. Witnessing the rapport that community police officers have with members of  the public proved to me that the simple activity of talking to the public can play a vital role in community relations. Furthermore, the more trust that can be built between the police and communities, the more mutual assistance can be provided. There will of course be occasions when abstractions from front-line community policing cannot be helped. There may be a major disaster or even a terrorist attack. However, abstractions should be the exception rather than the rule. Paragraph 159 of the report notes Strathclyde Police's approach, with the red-circling of community police officers. That is an important development, but it will be some time before it is fully implemented and we can say whether it works. However, I believe that the will and the desire for red-circling exist, and I expect that this new approach will be beneficial in Strathclyde Police's area. I am sure that problems will arise and that it will not be all plain sailing, but in time the change of mindset will benefit our communities. The second issue of note that I will touch on is the tenure of community police officers. I was surprised that there appears to be no rhyme nor reason for the time that a police officer spends in the community. Furthermore, community policing appears to be the first step on the ladder in the police force. It became apparent that if community policing is to work, then a standard approach to tenure is needed. I appreciate that an officer's tenure is an operational matter and that the power to change the current approach lies outwith Parliament. That is quite right, but it would be remiss of members not to highlight in our inquiry areas of note or concern for other people to consider. The committee's recommendations that there should be training at national level and that there should be a minimum tenure of two years in community policing are based on all the evidence that we heard, and their aim is to offer a solution on a matter that we all regard as being an important part of policing in Scotland. I have no doubt that community policing benefits everyone. To judge from the visits that I have made in the West of Scotland region, the approach works. As is the case with other initiatives, stumbling blocks will be ironed out in due course, to create an enhanced service that brings about the safer Scotland that we all want.

First, I pay tribute to the Justice Committee's clerks and adviser for all their hard work and efforts during our stage 1 consideration of the bill. I concur with the convener's comments about the way in which the committee dealt with the sensitive issues that the bill throws up for everyone. I am sure that the committee and all members will continue to act accordingly as the bill proceeds in the weeks and months ahead. As others have said, the bill was originated by the previous Labour and Lib Dem Scottish Executive. I pay tribute to it for doing so. I am sure that colleagues know that I do not usually praise the previous Executive. However, I give praise where it is due: its instruction to the Scottish Law Commission to examine the law relating to rape and other sexual offences was certainly a worthwhile action. When the bill is passed, as I hope it will be, Scotland will possess a piece of legislation that provides greater protection for all of society. I congratulate the Scottish Government on continuing with the process that was set in motion by the previous Executive. I am sure that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice will be hoping that the end result of the bill will profit the nation. I will not be able to discuss all the issues that I think are important within the time that has been allotted to me, but I will touch on a few of them. First, I have to say that listening to and reading the evidence has taken me on a personal journey. Previously, I had a personal view on one issue in particular, but our stage 1 scrutiny of the bill altered my view. I believed that anyone under 16 who participates in sexual activity should be charged automatically and that legal proceedings should follow. Whether they became pregnant or not was irrelevant. As 16 was and will remain the legal age of consent, why should those under-16s who break the law be protected? I was aware that the children's hearings system deals with the vast majority of those cases and that the Lord Advocate can prosecute at her discretion, if appropriate. My opinion was that there were not enough prosecutions. Thankfully, my view has changed, not because I have become more liberal  or less pious, but because the evidence that was presented was extremely strong. Paragraph 273 of the Justice Committee's report supports the use of the children's hearings system for the vast majority of cases, with the Lord Advocate retaining her discretion in that regard. I think that that recommendation will benefit society. The last thing that I want to see is a number of people in our society becoming saddled with a criminal record when a more appropriate way of dealing with them would be beneficial. I also came to the conclusion that if a girl aged under 16 becomes pregnant, the last thing that she needs is to be marched into a courtroom, with all the pressures that that involves. She will need some other mechanism to assist her and the baby. Another aspect of the bill that I welcome—as did the committee—relates to gender neutrality. Paragraph 279 of the committee report was quite clear in its support for compliance with the ECHR, while noting the important evidence from the Lord Advocate that a different path from the one in the bill could be taken if that was justified. I am sure that committee members will debate further the Scottish Government's response to paragraphs 280 and 281 as the bill proceeds—Bill Butler touched on that earlier. Having read the Government's response, I am keen to hear the cabinet secretary address those paragraphs today. I was intrigued by the written response that he provided, but I stand by the recommendation "that the Scottish Government gives further consideration to the provisions of section 27 of the Bill." Widening the definition of rape is an important aspect of the bill. The committee recommended that there should be a separate offence of rape with an object. I welcome the cabinet secretary's response to the recommendation and his intention to have further discussion with the committee and to lodge amendments at stage 2. The important point for me is that an object could cause more damage to a person than a body part could. I accept that a sexual offence would still have been committed, but, given the even greater physical damage, as well as the psychological damage, that would be done, I find it difficult not to believe that the strongest possible label should be given to those who perpetrate such acts. I want to introduce a personal thought into the debate. Life imprisonment seems to be a sentence of approximately 15 years, whether for a rape or for some other act. I would like that tariff to be increased for those convicted of rape. Violating a person's body must be the most despicable thing that one person can do to another and, as such, it deserves to be punished by means of a long prison sentence.  Having sat through all the oral evidence sessions and read the paperwork on the bill, I am in no doubt that the bill should proceed through the Parliament. I am also in no doubt about the difficulties that all members in the chamber will have to deal with concerning some of the issues that the bill raises. I remind myself of a few key points when I think about the bill. First, I want justice to be done, and to be seen to be done, for victims of rape and other sexual offences. Secondly, I do not want to criminalise every young person who starts to experiment as they go through the growing-up process, but I do not want them to think that it is okay to indulge in underage sexual activities. Thirdly, I want young people to have sex education, via schools or health professionals. There has to be an understanding of the consequences of sexual activity: child parents, for example, sexually transmitted infections and law breaking. Fourthly, with rights come responsibilities. If adults cannot act responsibly, their right to liberty should be removed. Therefore, are the proposed sentences really high enough? Given that research from Children 1 st shows that around 30 per cent of Scots have sex before the age of 16, I have to query why society is failing in its responsibilities in that regard. I agree with the Catholic Parliamentary Office that "the sexualisation of young people in our society is a problem". I am sure that the bill will go some way towards achieving a better and safer Scotland. For that reason, I support it whole-heartedly.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the benefits  have been of its six-point economic recovery programme. (S3O-5736)

In the light of the narrow, petty party politics of yesterday afternoon's budget vote, does the cabinet secretary agree that the parties that voted against the budget have put in jeopardy further economic recovery in the communities that I represent in the west of Scotland, such as Inverclyde and East Dunbartonshire, to name just two? What extra funding will be lost to those two areas, hampering economic recovery?

The minister said that applicants to the mortgage to shared equity scheme should take appropriate advice. What advice services will be made available to people who hope to take advantage of the new scheme and how will they be able to access them?

The speeches that we have heard this afternoon from Labour and Tory members have been quite high on rhetoric and short on substance with regard to a serious issue that the SNP Government is determined to tackle. I did not expect Labour or Tory members to welcome the cabinet secretary's proposals whole-heartedly, but I was sure that they could and would accept some of them. I welcome "Protecting Scotland's Communities", which has some really positive aspects. The first is the proposal for a community payback sentence, which will shorten the time within which an offender must undertake payback from 12 months to six months. That is evidence of a speedier response. The second is the plan to legislate to make clear that sentences of less than six months should not be imposed unless no other option is suitable. That should enable work to be undertaken with offenders to tackle their issues and reoffending capabilities. The third is to end the existing arbitrary early release system that the Tories introduced, so that there is an effective end-to-end sentence management system. The fourth is the plan to abolish the sending of under-16s to prison and instead to provide them with more appropriate secure accommodation, which should be welcomed throughout the chamber. I could go on to list the many other positive aspects  of the document that will ensure that Scotland becomes a safer and more just country, but I will focus on the community payback sentence and on sentences of six months or less. Prison should be used to get dangerous people off the streets, to make our streets safer and to ensure that work can be carried out with offenders to turn their lives around. It should not be used as a free bed-and-board hotel to satisfy the Tories or the Labour Party, who appear to be having a competition to see which of them can be the more right wing. Bill Aitken has suggested that old hospitals or Royal Air Force bases could be used as prisons, while Richard Baker wants those who are on community payback projects to wear high-visibility jackets. In fact, Labour should just go the whole hog and seek the reintroduction of prison suits with arrows or of stocks in town centres. If Labour members want to humiliate rather than rehabilitate people, they should keep going as they are. Thankfully, if media reports are correct, Mr Baker does not have his own party's unanimous support for his proposals. I have to say that I fully agree with comments that Cathy Jamieson made in the past. In 2007, for example, she said: "Community sentences are proving to be an increasingly credible way of dealing with offending behaviour", while in 2004 she said: "I am clear that locking up offenders for short periods of time, and releasing them back into the community without action to address their behaviour, is not the answer." Moreover, last September, when she was the Labour justice spokesperson, Pauline McNeill said: "We support making payback to the community more central to the offender's punishment, addressing the underlying causes of offending behaviour, and expanding the range of community sentences."— [ Official Report , 11 September 2008; c 10770.]  Such comments clearly show that there has been an immense volte-face in the new Labour Party of Iain Gray and Richard Baker.

I simply point out that SNP members are not criticising the cabinet secretary in the media about their party's proposals. As for Bill Aitken's suggestion that former hospitals and RAF bases be used as prisons, I am afraid that, when other Tory MSPs say that it is not  a good idea and simply not possible, he should consider it a non-starter. Pursuing it would be a waste of time. Given that and the fact that the Tories built no new prisons and introduced the automatic early release system, it is clear that their soundbites have no substance. Considering the Labour and Tory positions on this matter, I have to say that Mr Baker seems to be a wee bit more right wing than Mr Aitken. That will come as something of a surprise—not least, I am sure, to Mr Aitken. Last summer, I visited a community service programme in the West of Scotland region. One of the guys on the squad told me that he had a funny shift pattern which meant that he might be off work for five days one week and only one or two days the next. However, under the programme, he was allowed to do only one day of community service a week. Under the Government's proposals, that guy would be able to do more community service on his five days off to get the sentence out of the way more quickly and to show that he is doing the work that he is supposed to be doing. The proposals will ensure that future offenders can carry out their community payback sentences in a shorter time, that the payback is relevant to the community and that the work is visible. Surely that is better than simply putting people in prison.

The guy in my story was in full-time employment; the problems arose because of his shift pattern. I point out to Dr Simpson that current working arrangements are totally different from what they were in the past. The SNP Government has proposed a means of tackling reoffending behaviour in order to make our communities safer. Changes to the offender management plan should be judged on their positive impact on our communities; in other words, we should not just lock everyone up and do nothing to tackle the individual's reoffending capability. Scotland is not an overly lawless country, but if some people are to be believed the police have lost control. I do not believe that for a moment, although, like the SNP Government, I accept that certain issues in Scotland's communities need to be addressed. The Government's proposals are sensible. The ADSW said in a briefing that it sent to all MSPs that it was "Supportive of the Scottish Government's approach to managing offenders". It raised legitimate issues for consideration, but I would rather trust the SNP Government to  manage offenders than the Tories and new Labour with their right-wing attitudes.

I congratulate Sandra White on securing this important debate, and all the MSPs who signed the motion. I am not surprised by the support for the Newsquest staff. For a democracy to flourish, it needs a few key components, one of which is a vibrant media. At present, Scotland has a vibrant media—albeit that there are signs of contraction—but the threat against the three Newsquest titles will surely send shock waves through all media organisations in Scotland. The Herald and the Evening Times are institutions in Scotland, and the Sunday Herald has proved in the past decade to be a quality addition to the newspaper stands. The more quality publications we have, the better, as far as I am concerned. There is another vital issue, which I suggest is probably the most important thing to be considered—the staff. Other members have already touched on that. The threat to the workers in the Newsquest organisation is appalling. They will be wondering what will happen to them in the coming weeks and months—they have already had a few weeks of uncertainty. Some will be lucky enough to get their jobs back, albeit on worse conditions, but what will be their fate in the medium term, never mind the long term? From what I have been led to believe, communication from management to the staff has been practically non-existent, which has created even more uncertainty and apprehension among the staff. I have been informed that those who are taken back will work for all three titles. As the publications have different sets of working hours, will that mean that the staff will work from 6 am to 12 midnight in order to cover shifts? David Whitton said that the shift will probably start at 10 am, but I have been informed that it will start at 6 am, which just emphasises the lack of information and communication from management to staff. Also, will the staff work six or seven days a week to ensure that the publications are covered? Those  questions might seem ridiculous, but I assure members that they are legitimate concerns that have been put to me by staff who do not have a clue about what the future holds for them at Newsquest. It could be said that those questions are not exclusive to Newsquest and the three titles—I accept that—but as this evening's debate is about the future of the titles and the staff, it is legitimate to highlight the questions. As things stand, it might seem to the naked eye that the management's actions are the actions of a drive to cut costs and increase profits. I do not know whether that is the case, and I am not suggesting that it is, but it could be suggested that such a strategy is under way. I hope that a profit maximisation strategy is not under way. The Newsquest products are quality products that target different markets and have the right to an equal place in the competitive media. In various sectors of the industry, competition can occasionally be positive, stimulating improvements and leading to better products. Scotland's written media is one such sector; the greater the range of available written publications, the better served Scotland will be. Indeed, the more that interest in on-line versions of newspapers increases, the wider the range of publications that will be available throughout the world. Newsquest has three different quality products that provide huge benefits to Scotland and ensure competition in the industry. The threat to the future of the titles and the staff is worrying and will concern everyone involved in the Scottish media. I urge Newsquest management to think again about its proposals, to communicate with its staff, to provide genuine assurances about the future of the publications and to invest in the publications. Increased investment will reap greater moral and financial rewards, while short-term cuts will simply devastate morale, the quality of the product, their readership, advertising and—ultimately—the publications themselves.

Today's debate is timely, especially after yesterday's announcement that BBC Scotland is set to lose 20 posts from news and current affairs, as well as another 54 positions, including producers, assistant producers, directors and researchers. That is in addition to the 96 positions that were cut earlier this year. If the BBC wanted to make job cuts, it should have done the decent thing recently and sacked two people as opposed to the fudge that it came up with. That would have saved the licence fee payer millions of pounds that  could have been reinvested to maintain jobs, talent and skills in the corporation. The debate is about broadcasting and competition in Scotland and the role of STV, which I will come back to in a moment. However it would be remiss of me not to mention yesterday's other shocking announcement by Newsquest that it is sacking its employees and asking them to apply for their positions, with up to 40 not being filled. That was a disastrous announcement for the media in Scotland. However, I wonder to what extent the announcement was another element of the hangover from when STV, under the Scottish Media Group, owned the Newsquest titles. Referring directly to the motion, having received the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's conclusions, and looking forward to the Ofcom report, I am pleased that broadcasting is being taken seriously in this chamber. In these tough economic times, competition is largely put aside while survival is uppermost in the minds of most businesses. With the recent events in Scottish broadcasting, survival might well be the appropriate word. It could be argued that there is internal competition between STV and ITV around public service broadcasting provision. However, I am concerned about the future of commercial public service broadcasting in Scotland because of the potential lack of competition for the BBC. I am pleased that the Scottish Government's submission to the Ofcom review states that the Scottish Government shares Ofcom's view that the BBC should not be the sole provider of public service content. The stage 1 findings of the Ofcom review, which show the importance that audiences place on the continued availability of high-quality, original content that meets public service purposes, came as no surprise. Stage 2 of the review attempts to take forward the choices that are available to give audiences the tailored local output that they ultimately desire. John Lamont discussed that. It is ironic that the Scottish Broadcasting Commission reported in October that a substantial increase in investment in Scotland by the UK public service broadcasters is required. Yesterday's announcement and Michael Grade's comments about STV being subsidised highlight that that view is not being paid attention to or that there is no commitment to ensure that what has been proposed will be carried out. Broadcasting is vital to Scotland's economic, cultural and democratic health, and, as I am sure members of all parties agree, more high-quality content should be produced here. Unfortunately, the recent report by the Producers Alliance for Cinema and Television—PACT—revealed that independent network television production in Scotland fell dramatically in 2007. A mere two  hours of independently produced drama were produced in Scotland for broadcast to the whole of the UK, which is worrying for the Scottish broadcasting industry. That enhances the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's case for a Scottish digital channel. It is time for London-centric broadcasting to come to an end and to allow Scotland to shine with the talent that is on offer here. An interesting piece of information emerged with the damp squib that was this week's Calman commission report: the agreement with the Scottish Broadcasting Commission that there should be a greater focus on broadcasting in Scotland. The Calman commission went further in stating that the Scottish Parliament and ministers should take a more active role in considering the broadcasting industry. As a nationalist, I welcome any support to bring more—indeed, ultimately all—powers to the Parliament. Normal self-respecting nations have such a right. In conclusion, I stress that the principle of competition between public service broadcasters creates a healthier industry for audiences as well as for broadcasters.

I thank the members who signed my motion and all the members in the chamber this evening. I welcome members of sail Clyde and representatives of the sailing community from the west and other parts of Scotland to the public gallery and the first ever debate on sailing, boating and the marine leisure industry in Scotland in the Scottish Parliament. I hope that this debate will, first, be a starting point for recognising the importance of the marine leisure industry and what it brings to Scotland's economy, and secondly, highlight the growth potential that can have a positive impact on the Scottish economy. It is apt that the debate is taking place on the same day as the annual general meetings of Sail Scotland and the British Marine Federation in Edinburgh. The parliamentary business managers deserve a wee bit of credit for perfect scheduling. First, I have to hold my hands up and state that I do not have a sailing background and do not own a boat. I went sailing twice years ago and went river canoeing some years ago as well. I did both at the Ardentinny outdoor education centre, and I thoroughly enjoyed the experience, but my hobby as a youngster was bagpiping, so that took priority. It could therefore be asked why I have taken an interest in the marine leisure industry. As a west of Scotland MSP who has spent most of his life in Inverclyde, I see the Clyde every day. I know  that it is still a working river as well as a river for leisure. Each year, when the sailing regatta takes place off the esplanade in Greenock, the river is a wonderful sight. Only recently, the river was once again a sea of colour and splendour, when the Queen Elizabeth II left its birthplace and spiritual home for the last time. It was a delight to see so many yachts, boats, canoes, dinghies and jet-skis on the river throughout the afternoon to have one last look at the pride of the Clyde. Not everyone who attended on that day would have come from Inverclyde, so the increase in tourism to Greenock would have been advantageous. With tourists come money, which helps local economies. The QE II event was not a typical event by any means, but such one-off events have a place as economic generators for local areas. As the leisure marine industry continues to expand throughout Scotland, such events will make huge contributions to local economies. As the motion states, Scotland's leisure marine industry has a turnover of £98.9 million a year. Furthermore, the economic benefit of recreational boating in Scotland is estimated to be in excess of £250 million. As we heard only a few months ago, when the Parliament considered the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill—which is now an act—golf brings in some £300 million to the Scottish economy. Quite rightly, golf is considered to be a major economic player for Scotland. The sailing, boating and leisure marine industry is not too far behind golf, but the industry's contribution to Scotland's economy has not been recognised. The industry's representatives will be the first to admit that they may not have stated their case in the past, but that will surely change in future. Prior to the summer recess, I was introduced to Mike Balmforth from the British Marine Federation. During the recess, he took me to visit the Kip marina in Inverkip, Largs yacht haven, Fairlie quay and Ardrossan marina. Only a few weeks later, I took part in the launch of the sail Clyde strategy document at Largs yacht haven. Only last week, I attended the official opening of the new, impressive Euroyachts showroom at Largs yacht haven. My Scottish National Party colleague Kenneth Gibson, who is the constituency MSP, did the honours in officially opening the showroom, so I will not say too much about that event in case he wants to speak about it in his speech. I have learned a great deal about boating, sailing and the leisure marine industry in recent months, but one key point that has stuck in my mind is that one does not need to be a millionaire to take part. Yes, yachts worth hundreds of thousands of pounds are available for sale, but the leisure marine industry caters for more than that category of person. Someone with a canoe,  people on a barging holiday or a person with a rowing-boat can also be involved. Scotland has 11,800km of coastline—13,115km if all the islands are included—as well as 220km of canal network originally built between 1768 and 1822, so there is plenty of space for anyone who wants to participate in the leisure marine industry. Another interesting fact that I remembered while preparing for today is that Ellen McArthur, who broke the world record for the fastest solo circumnavigation of the globe in 2005, came from land-locked Derbyshire. That proves that one does not need to live beside the water to get involved in water pursuits. As the motion highlights, the leisure marine industry employs 1,816 full-time equivalent staff and provides some 7,900 jobs indirectly. By any industry's standards, that is impressive. I am sure that many people outwith the Parliament are not aware of those important statistics. As well as providing economic benefit to Scotland, leisure marine activities benefit local communities. Members will have received information highlighting the activities of leisure marine organisations throughout the country. I found the information from the Moray Firth Partnership particularly interesting, because it highlights the investment that has been made to increase the number of berths. When completed, the development will provide 250 extra berths in five harbour areas. That will have a beneficial effect on local economies. For example, Inverness marina already has advance bookings from people from France, Norway, Holland, Denmark and Sweden. That proves that marina developments can increase tourism. The sail Clyde strategy that I mentioned earlier highlights that the Clyde currently has 3,200 marina berths and that the figure is expected to reach some 6,000. That increase will provide a massive boost to the leisure marine industry and will undoubtedly lead to more tourism opportunities. I am informed that the Clyde is the second most popular sailing destination in the United Kingdom, behind the Solent. Many people already fly up to Scotland from south of the border to do their weekend sailing from Scottish marinas. We should never forget that important market. The strategy also highlights that, at present, 30 per cent of the boats on the Clyde are not Scottish owned and that that proportion has increased by 50 per cent since 1996. Next year's homecoming 2009 is an ideal opportunity to establish longer-term roots within the marine leisure community. It has been suggested that the industry has not been taken seriously enough in the past, and I hope to improve that. I am keen to establish a new cross-party group on the leisure marine industry in  the Parliament, so if any member is interested, they should get in touch with me later. Three key issues need to be considered from the point of view of the industry. The first is the lack of skills and training, the second is the shortage of infrastructure, and the third is tourism, which I have already spoken about. I accept that infrastructure developments are taking place throughout Scotland and that they are being funded by marinas, but I am sure that there is scope for public money to be included. There would be benefits for local and national Government. That could be debated at cross-party-group level. Without all stakeholders making a concerted effort on skills and training, the leisure marine industry will face difficulties. As Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom are on the cusp of a recession, I suggest that now is the time to plan ahead and put in place a strategy that will facilitate the industry. I must also stress the positives. It has been acknowledged that, in the past year, progress has been made on the environmental impact of the leisure marine industry. The inclusion of the industry in consultations by the sustainable seas task force and the likelihood of its being consulted on the proposed Scottish marine bill should be commended. Industry representatives told me that they are delighted that they have been included in such discussions for the first time since devolution, and they commended the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment for bringing that about. Presiding Officer, I know that I have gone over my time; I am about to conclude. I have not begun to go into the detail of the importance of the industry to Scotland; I have really just skimmed the surface. Scotland already has golf, tartan, bagpipes and whisky as iconic and world-renowned brands. I would like the leisure marine industry to join that elite group. I accept that there is some way to go, but it is important to have that target. I hope that this evening's debate will be the first step towards it.

I welcome the plans to bring forward capital spending. However, does the finance secretary agree that it is disappointing that the UK Government chose to invest no new money in affordable housing and that the Scottish Government, while supporting the housing  industry as much as it can with the additional £100 million, would be better able to support economic recovery if it had proper borrowing powers?

The speeches so far have been, to say the least, interesting and robust. I did not expect anything less. With its scaremongering and attempts to strike fear into the hearts of the Scottish public, new Labour's motion is a typical example of its negativity. If the public listen to its nonsense, they will think that Scotland is some third-world country, constantly in-fighting, and that we are too small, too stupid and too insignificant. I know that Scotland is not too small, stupid or insignificant to matter and that it is moving forward with an SNP Government. Some of the SNP Government actions that deserve welcome include record health board funding, which will rise to £11.5 billion in this  spending round; the approval of a new southern general hospital, which will be built not through public-private partnerships or PFI but with £842 million of public investment; an extra £40 million for free personal care, a policy that was short-funded by the previous new Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive; and the policy of reinvesting 2 per cent efficiency savings in the NHS and not, as new Labour promised during the 2007 election campaign, transferring them to other budgets.

What I will say is that, compared with what happened under the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive's cuts agenda, the NHS is moving forward under the SNP Government. I could highlight many more positives for the NHS in Scotland under this Government—indeed, the cabinet secretary did so earlier—and long may the situation continue. If new Labour had been in power, its cuts agenda would have amounted to £771 million, which is 50 per cent higher than the sum that will be achieved by the SNP's efficiency savings. Although the SNP Government has been accused of being draconian in introducing 2 per cent efficiency savings, I point out that, in May 2007, Wendy Alexander criticised the SNP for lacking ambition in not insisting on the 3 per cent efficiency savings that she and new Labour wanted and that were in line with the United Kingdom Government's policy. I commend the SNP Government on certain actions over the past 18 months. First, I say well done for scrapping car parking charges at NHS hospitals. That tax on the sick was introduced on the previous new Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive's watch. I also say well done for keeping open Monklands and Ayr hospitals' A and E units, which had been threatened with closure by the new Labour—

Branding is everything. Finally, I say well done to the Government for instigating the independent scrutiny panels that  recommended that the community maternity units at Inverclyde Royal hospital and the Vale of Leven hospital be kept open. Consultant services that were cut on the watch of the previous new Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive have been secured under this SNP Government. While we remain part of the union, Scottish Administrations will continue to receive the block grant. Last year was no different—apart from the fact that the money came a couple of months late, which had a knock-on effect for public services. When we received the grant, inflation stood at 2.7 per cent; it is now a massive 5.1 per cent. That will have an effect on public bodies and the best thing that they can do is to manage their resources as effectively and efficiently as possible to get through a financial mess that has been aided and abetted by the UK Government. Given that the Scottish Government has limited financial powers and no power whatever to deal with inflation, any increase in spending in one department will mean taking resources from another budget. Until such time as Scotland gets the powers to deal with its economy and does not have to rely on the whims and mismanagement of London governments, we will always find ourselves in a restricted position. As I said, the motion is typical scaremongering nonsense from the Opposition and I urge the chamber to reject it this afternoon.

I am happy to take part in the debate both as a member of the Justice Committee and as the member whose motion on pleural plaques was considered in the members' business debate last year to which others have referred. Coincidentally, today's debate takes place in the same week one year on from that members' business debate, which was attended by 24 MSPs of all parties. I was grateful for their support and for the speeches that they made. The fact that the debate had to be extended because so many members wanted to contribute shows the importance of the issue to the Parliament. I am delighted that the Scottish Government introduced the bill after listening to the arguments that were put forward by campaign groups such as Clydeside Action on Asbestos, whose members, along with other campaigners, I welcome to the public gallery today. Their campaign for justice has been on the stocks for some time because they were aware of the impending outcome of the House of Lords ruling. The ruling was issued on 17 October last year, but targeted campaigning had taken place in preparation for that decision which, unfortunately, favoured the insurance companies over sufferers from pleural plaques. I have had meetings with Clydeside Action on Asbestos on several occasions. At one of those meetings, I agreed with colleagues Gil Paterson MSP, Bill Kidd MSP and Councillor Kenny McLaren to take the issue to last year's Scottish  National Party conference. At the conference, I proposed a resolution—it was seconded by Gil Paterson and passed by acclaim—to highlight to the Scottish Government that the SNP is full-square behind justice for pleural plaques sufferers. The bill will do something remarkable, in that it will not effect change but keep the status quo. It does not ask for a change in the law. For 20 years, pleural plaques sufferers were able to claim for damages, but the insurance companies fought that in the courts. Unfortunately, last year, the House of Lords agreed with the insurance companies and they won their case. That prevented others from claiming damages. Although the House of Lords decision is not binding in Scotland, it is persuasive enough that it will be adhered to, as has already been the case. I am delighted that Kenny MacAskill and Fergus Ewing have listened to the arguments and agree that justice should be upheld. For that, they will always have my gratitude. The stage 1 report is unequivocal in its support of the general principles of the bill; that is stated in paragraphs 153 and 155. Some issues still need to be addressed, but the committee was unanimous in its support for the principle that those who suffer from pleural plaques should have access to justice. The written and verbal evidence that the committee received was of great assistance. It also provided a confusing picture at times, particularly when it came to the financial aspects. I do not think that I am speaking out of turn to say that there was a heavy dose of scepticism when the committee was presented with financial evidence from the insurance industry about the projected costs of the bill. That was probably also the case with the information that we got from the United Kingdom Ministry of Justice. There were also questions about how accurate an estimate the financial memorandum to the bill is—if there can be such a thing as an accurate estimate. The committee has tasked the Scottish Government with providing further clarification on the financial memorandum, and that has already been discussed today. It is only right and proper that any legislation that passes through this or any other Parliament should have information about its costs that is as accurate as possible. Earlier, the minister said that the Government is looking into that in more detail and will provide more information in due course. I look forward to seeing that. I think that the statement of funding policy will continue to be debated between the Scottish Government and the UK Government, judging by the correspondence to date. Unfortunately, that has some way to run before the issue is fully resolved.  The committee also commented on the consultation process that the Scottish Government used; Bill Aitken mentioned that. Our recommendations about the consultation are in paragraphs 15, 16 and 17. There is no doubt that consultation on any bill is vital, and this bill is no different. However, some of the consultation responses are disappointing. I was disappointed that North Lanarkshire Council and Angus Council did not back the proposals. During the evidence session on 2 September, it was said that "plaques are a good thing and do not cause harm."—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 2 September 2008; c 1025.] The thud of committee members' jaws hitting the table was thunderous. The witness continued with a further explanation of that statement, but by that time the genie was out of the bottle. Pleural plaques are markers of exposure to asbestos and they are scarring on the pleura. Furthermore, they signify an increased risk for developing mesothelioma, as we have already heard today. That does not tell me that pleural plaques are "a good thing". Asbestos-related illnesses affect the whole of Scotland. They affect people who have worked in heavy industry such as shipbuilding on the Clyde and house building throughout the country. However, they also affect family members who have inhaled asbestos particles from overalls. I have met a lady who suffers from pleural plaques because of that. I welcome the bill and the Justice Committee's report on the bill. The Parliament has a chance to ensure that people in Scotland have a right to justice, and the Scottish Government should be commended for that. I hope that the UK Government gets on board and follows the lead to ensure justice down south as well. I support the bill and look forward to its becoming law at some point in the future. Finally, once again, I commend the campaigners, including Clydeside Action on Asbestos, for their tireless work in highlighting asbestos-related injustices, and I commend the Scottish Government for introducing the bill.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it is aware of the importance of piping to Scotland's economy. (S3O-4651)

Is the minister aware that next year is the 65 th anniversary of the College of Piping, which coincides with the year of homecoming? Is the Scottish Government aware of the significant influence that the college—which is the oldest piping educational establishment in Scotland—has had on piping in Scotland and abroad? Will the minister accept an offer to visit the College of Piping to learn more about its valuable work?

Does the member accept that there was a joint announcement last week by Inverclyde Council and the Scottish Government on building four new schools?

Sometimes I ask myself, "What is the point of the Lib Dems?" Having read the motion and listened to the speeches so far, I am none the wiser. It is obvious that people the length and breadth of Scotland are struggling to make ends meet due to the increasing cost of living, which is primarily due to the rising costs of food, energy and petrol. Only this week, a poll found that 72 per cent of families are finding it more difficult to pay bills compared with this time last year. That being the case, and given that prices have increased dramatically in the past year, it is reasonable to suggest that the Lib Dems should have backed the SNP's proposal for a fuel duty regulator during the most recent budget process at Westminster. At that time, unfortunately, they did not understand the logic of the proposal or the need to put money into people's pockets. It is good to acknowledge that even the Tories now realise that the fuel duty regulator is a worthwhile policy, despite their having voted against it at the time. The motion proposes that all parties should work towards a 2p tax cut using the Parliament's tax-varying powers. That is a laudable aim, I suggest, but have the Lib Dems thought through the implications of their policy? The debate about whether the cut would cost £400 million or £800 million will continue long after this morning, but it is legitimate to ask how many people would be forced into the dole queues by the £800 million cut. How would it be funded? It would certainly increase unemployment, but would it also lead to cuts in the central heating scheme or prevent the Scottish Government from investing £100 million in affordable housing? Would it be funded through the demutualisation of Scottish Water, which would probably result in increased charges for customers? Would it be funded through the scrapping of drug and alcohol programmes? The potential for the Lib Dem cuts to adversely affect the Scottish population is staggering. I am sure that people will not be duped by such utter nonsense. The UK leader of the Lib Dems also wants a 4p tax cut, so in Scotland we would have a 6p cut in  income tax. Our public services would be absolutely decimated. Iain Gray is trying to take the food out of children's mouths, but the Liberal Democrats seem intent on increasing poverty and deprivation and on starving the public sector. Within the limited powers of this Parliament, the SNP Government has already put money back into people's pockets, with a council tax freeze, the phasing out of prescription charges, the scrapping of bridge tolls and the introduction of a small business bonus scheme. Of course, further action is needed. A reduction in the cost of energy and fuel prices would certainly help. Energy prices have increased by 38 per cent in 2008 alone and the price of petrol has risen by 22 per cent over the past year, although I accept that the prices at the pump have decreased somewhat in the past couple of weeks. If the Lib Dems want to help hard-pressed families in Scotland, they need to put pressure on the UK Government to work for lower energy prices, lower petrol prices and lower food prices and to back measures such as the fuel duty regulator. Anything less is just playing the electorate for fools. As I said at the outset, I often ask myself, "What is the point of the Lib Dems?" Unfortunately, their irrelevance still knows no bounds.

Having spoken at stage 1, I am pleased that the bill will probably pass its final stage today, leaving a positive legacy for future generations in Scotland. Parliaments do not always leave positive legacies—I can think of quite a few examples—but the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill will certainly help to preserve a section of Scottish heritage and culture for the benefit of the nation. Parliament owes Jamie McGrigor its gratitude for pursuing the bill, both before and after the Scottish National Party came to power. I am delighted that the SNP Government has been happy to support him and his bill. As a proud Scot and a piper, I am keen to see a future secured for this part of our well-recognised national heritage. Tartan has a massive global significance, and it is synonymous with Scotland. That being the case, I was surprised that there was no national register of tartan in the first place. I am sure that many members were not previously aware that there was none. I find it surprising that previous Governments, pre and post devolution, did not rectify that. Passing the bill and establishing the public repository of tartan rectifies the previous position. The benefits of a single national tartans register are clear for all to see. It will bring economic benefits and enhance tourism. In the future, members of the public will be able to access it with ease. Tartan provides more than 7,000 jobs and about £350 million for Scotland's economy. It is a major Scottish industry with a global appeal and we  should be proud of it. During the stage 1 debate—as well as today—the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism highlighted the claims of the management consultant, Professor Michael Porter. As the minister said previously, "Professor Michael Porter ... noted that Scotland is one of only 15 or 16 countries on the planet that has a truly vivid national brand and a high standing that it owes, in great part, to tartan. Along with whisky and golf, tartan accounts for the fact that Scotland means something to 98 per cent of the world's population."— [ Official Report , 19 June 2008; c 10059.]  As a piper, I politely suggest to the minister and Professor Porter that the great Highland bagpipe has been omitted from that 98 per cent. The great Highland bagpipe is also a fantastic global and national brand. We have some wonderful global brands for a country of just 5 million people, but we have not fully exploited them across the world. Tartan, piping, whisky, golf and—dare I say—the delicacy that is haggis are five brands that highlight Scottishness. At another time, I will argue for sailing and the vast input into the Scottish economy that it brings. I would like sailing to be a global Scottish brand. It brings around £250 million into Scotland—£80 million from the Clyde alone. However, I will take that up another day. The introduction of the new role of the keeper of the Scottish register of tartans to oversee the register is a positive aspect of the bill. The keeper will provide a single focal point for tartan, which will enhance the marketing of tartan globally. That can only be beneficial to the industry. An official definition of tartan, together with a keeper who will consider new designs against a range of criteria, will help to deepen people's knowledge of tartan and encourage innovation in design. I am sure that the bill will prove to be beneficial not just to tartan and to Scotland but to the Scottish global brand. I am only too delighted to support the bill.

Will anything in the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill make it easier to achieve speedier flood resolutions in Inverclyde and other communities in the west of Scotland?

I speak as a member of the Justice Committee who sat through the committee's consideration of the bill, on which, in the main, it agreed. That is not to say that there were no areas of debate or contention; simply that, in the main, we welcomed it. I would have been surprised if the committee had not welcomed the bill, given the work that the former Scottish Executive had undertaken, which the new Scottish National Party Government continued. The bill seeks to provide the good governance of the Scottish Court Service by enabling it to deal with matters itself rather than by Government diktat. I fully agree with that approach, given that it appears to be similar to the one the Scottish Government took in discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities on its historic concordat. The bill enables the Parliament to continue to question and have a say on the SCS. Section 64 requires the SCS to provide information to the Scottish ministers, section 62 allows ministers to determine priorities for the service when dealing with the corporate plan and section 65 provides for ministers to issue guidance to the SCS. As we have heard, the Lord President has said that if he is invited to come to the committee he will attend, although he does not expect that to be routine as that is the role of the SCS chief executive. There is adequate provision to make the SCS accountable to the Parliament.  Throughout the passage of the bill, members have debated the role of the Lord President and the accountability of the SCS. Those concerns have been raised again today. They are legitimate, but I am confident that the bill contains sufficient safeguards to ensure accountability. Unlike the proposed abolition of the council tax bill or referendum bill, the bill that we are debating today is unlikely to receive many column inches in the media. I doubt that many people who do not work in the legal industry will be too bothered about our proceedings today, but the bill will provide a new and clear direction for the judiciary and courts in Scotland and various aspects of it will certainly benefit both the judiciary and Parliament. Section 9(3), which guarantees that the Judicial Appointments Board for Scotland will not "be subject to the direction or control of" Government, is welcome. Section 28, which introduces a judicial complaints reviewer, will provide a greater sense of transparency to the public when they are attempting to establish the accuracy of a complaint's handling. Chapter 5, which provides for the removal from office of judges, sheriffs and justices of the peace, is a welcome addition. The public perception of the legal establishment is that it is an untouchable group in society. I cannot comment on whether that perception is correct or incorrect, but I am sure that in time chapter 5 will provide a clearer picture, ensure transparency and make clear to the wider public that the legal establishment is working for the benefit of everyone in Scotland. I am sure that the bill will provide some clarity for the public and enshrine in statute the benefits of independence, albeit only for the judiciary and courts in Scotland.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in what has been an interesting debate. I start by disagreeing with the accusation that the SNP has a soft-touch approach to prisons and crime. With more than 8,000 prisoners—a 3 per cent increase over the past year—prisons at bursting point and a 22 per cent increase in numbers over the past decade, I struggle to see the logic in the soft-touch argument. I do not doubt that the media hysteria that surrounds the issue has gone some way to producing to that mindset. The Daily Record had a front-page headline one week of "SNP to free 4000 jailbirds" and a headline of "Outrage as 8000 Scots behind bars" another week. Those inconsistent reports appeared within three weeks of each other. A touch of consistency on this important issue would be beneficial, while the Government puts in place procedures for the future welfare of society as a whole. I am content that the Scottish Prisons Commission report recognises the need for action. I believe that prison is the right place for convicted rapists, murderers, drug dealers and other serious offenders. I also believe that less serious crime can be dealt with in alternative ways.

I am sorry—not at the moment. The issue of payback is highlighted in the report alongside the recommendation of "finding constructive ways to compensate or repair harms caused by crime." That approach is the appropriate way to engage offenders in rehabilitation work that will benefit them and the community.

I will come to that later. A visit to Barlinnie prison a few months ago made it obvious to me that there are problems with  trying to rehabilitate prisoners. The overcrowding problems have obvious implications for preparing prisoners for release—an overcrowded prison does not lend itself to working on rehabilitation programmes, nor does it help work on assisting prisoners who are about to be released. That should be obvious to everyone. A payback scheme will allow us to ensure that less serious offenders give something back to the community that they have damaged. It will ease overcrowding and facilitate more effective rehabilitation, with the longer-term aim of cutting reoffending rates. The type of payback and the cost implications will be matters for further discussion, but the fundamental aspect of the initiative is key to the future of our prison estate. Earlier this week, the cabinet secretary highlighted working on building sites as an option for payback. I would like less serious offenders to give something back, for instance by fixing and painting fences, cutting grass for elderly people or collecting litter and rubbish from the sides of railways and motorways. Those are all practical and, above all, useful ways of punishing offenders for their crimes, and they will remove the free-bed-and-board culture that afflicts the prison estate and costs it dearly financially. The Scottish Prison Service says that its costs are more than £40,000 per prisoner per year. I would prefer that the money was spent—not squandered—on payback schemes and on trying to rehabilitate serious offenders in prison. I am sure that many people listen to debates such as this and automatically call for public floggings, capital punishment and other extremes. I do not advocate such measures, and I agree with human rights. Everyone should have rights, even prisoners. There are two key points, however. First, with rights come responsibilities: if a person commits a serious crime, their right to roam the streets as a free person should be removed. Secondly, prisoners deserve a basic level of rights. I am more concerned, however, with the human rights of the innocent victims who have been wronged. My main concern is for the elderly lady who has been mugged or beaten up, and who is now too petrified to go out. She might also be scared to switch on her heating because of soaring energy bills, whereas prisoners live in warm cells and have three square meals a day. I am also more concerned about the human rights of a child who has been the victim of a sexual offence. The Scottish Prisons Commission's report states: "Scotland will not have a world-leading prison service ... until we reduce the unnecessary, costly, damaging and dangerous overuse of custody."  I am pleased to see that the SPC's recommendations include one for a sentencing council, which is also a commitment of the SNP. The issue is currently being examined. I must disagree, however, with the comments of John Scott, chair of the Edinburgh Bar Association, who said: "sentences less than 12 months don't do anything." I think that sentences of less than six months are a costly waste of time, but taking offenders out of the community for longer sentences provides respite to those who have been affected by them. I look forward to further developments on the sentencing council in due course. I have been keen to track the issue of mandatory sentencing for knife crime, of which everyone in the chamber is aware. When Damien Muir was murdered in Greenock in July last year, his family immediately took on the immense challenge not only of introducing mandatory sentencing but of safeguarding the future of our streets. As Damien's father John pointed out to the Public Petitions Committee this week, Scotland is one of the most successful countries for things such as engineering and medicine, so why do we have more knife crime per capita than anywhere else in Europe? I was pleased to note that Mr Muir has reported positive meetings with the cabinet secretary on the matter, and I look forward to the progression of the sentencing guidelines and the sentencing council consultation. I am sure that the rest of the afternoon's debate will be robust at times, but I am also sure that all members must recognise the important contribution that the Scottish Prisons Commission's report has made to bringing the justice and prisons debate to the public and to the Parliament.

I appreciate that obesity is an issue that people do not like to talk about, but this afternoon's debate has been extremely interesting. Many valid points have been raised, especially by Nigel Don, whose speech I enjoyed, and by Frank McAveety. I have no intention of reiterating all the points that have already been made, but I will touch on a couple. For many, obesity is a matter of embarrassment rather one that they do not care about. The obesity action plan that the Scottish Government launched in June is therefore a welcome step in tackling the problem in Scotland. The action plan is a long-term practical strategy, and the most appropriate way to move forward. With £56 million of funding over the next three years, the SNP Government is helping to create a healthier Scotland. By tackling obesity in Scotland, we are striving to alleviate some of the strain on  the NHS caused by chronic illnesses and the associated costs of treating the consequences of obesity. We have already heard that the estimated cost of obesity to the NHS in 2003 was £171 million, a sum that I am sure every member in the chamber agrees could be easily redistributed to other areas of the health service. It is a positive move, therefore, that the Government is devoting £19 million—nearly half the available resources—to the early years. We cannot ignore the importance of education in forming our opinions and mindset when it comes to a healthy lifestyle. In my adult years, I have been careful about what I eat. I still enjoy a fish supper or a burger from time to time, but I have never succumbed to the joy of a deep-fried Mars bar or a deep-fried pizza in batter—the thought is quite revolting. In the run-up to becoming a father, I became even more aware about the food that my wife and I ate. That awareness has continued since then, as we want to ensure that we and our daughter are as healthy as we possibly can be. The early years programme to improve the nutrition of women of childbearing age, pregnant women and children under five in disadvantaged areas will have longer-term benefits for people's health as well as the health of the NHS in Scotland. Improving nutrition and educating people about the benefits of healthier eating, particularly for pregnant women and children under five, will be successful in the longer term. By promoting healthy living from an early age, in relation to both alternative food choices and fitness options, we hope that the future of Scotland will be heading in the right direction. A further curse of obesity is diabetes. Last night, I attended the launch of the "Scottish Vision Strategy"—the document that I have here—at the meeting of the cross-party group on visual impairment. Shona Robison and James Kelly were also there. The strategy has been developed by a wide alliance of health and social care bodies, voluntary organisations, eye care professionals, Government representatives and service users. I encourage all members in the chamber to obtain a copy of the document from the Royal National Institute of Blind People, because it is interesting reading. The strategy is important because diabetes can lead to sight loss. It states: "our rate for type 1 or 2 diabetes is increasing by roughly 7% annually". That is an alarming rate. Thankfully, following its eye care review, the Scottish Government has given £2.6 million to health boards and partners to implement the key recommendations. That will, I hope, catch anyone with diabetes at an earlier  stage, help them keep their sight and turn around their general health. I mentioned the embarrassment of obesity. To be second in the world to the USA—to have a silver medal in obesity—is an embarrassment to Scotland, especially as we are a wealthy nation. The action plan is an opportunity to tackle the problem head on, and I am sure that there will be improvements in the future. Tackling obesity is a much wider issue, and has much greater benefits for people's wellbeing, than just getting someone to shed a few pounds, stones or kilos. The steps that the Government is taking are extremely welcome, and I fully endorse the obesity action plan.

Will the member take an intervention?

Last week, pupils from St Stephen's high school in Port Glasgow visited the Parliament. When I spoke to them about the proposal to increase the purchasing age to 21, they agreed that it is good. Does Ross Finnie agree?

When does the cabinet secretary expect to introduce legislation to ensure that lenders notify local authorities when they intend to repossess properties? What discussions have ministers had  with private landlords? What support will be offered to homeless people taking on private lets to enable them to settle in new accommodation?

As a McMillan, I am spoiled for choice for tartans—I have six to choose from. As a piper, a tartan kilt is a must, as it is for festival-goers, wedding-goers and sports fans alike, although I am sure that some of my friends and officers in the London Scottish Regiment, with whom I used to be a regular player, would disagree, as they wear the hodden grey. Alongside our tartan heritage we often find our clan history. Translated, the McMillan clan motto, perhaps fittingly for a politician, is, "I learn to succour the unfortunate." At times, however, it is impossible to aid those unfortunate souls in opposition parties. These days, most proud Scots will happily don tartan and, as the industry is generating more than £350 million for the Scottish economy every year, we cannot afford to ignore it. For a small country, Scotland is fortunate in having five major global brands: golf, whisky, bagpipes, haggis and tartan, predominantly for kilts. They bring huge sums of  money, and thus jobs, into the Scottish economy. That being the case, I welcome any methods of protecting the integrity of any of those brands for Scotland's benefit. The Scottish Register of Tartans Bill certainly appears to do that with tartan. Having a public body as the keeper of the register will ensure that not only Scots, but anybody with an interest in tartan, will be able to source information about it for many years to come. I welcome the actions of the Scottish Tartans Authority and the Scottish Tartans World Register, which support the bill. Furthermore, as Rob Gibson mentioned, the ECOTEC study into the economic impact of tartan found that a single register would give the industry enhanced marketing capability and profile so, in addition to protecting part of Scotland's heritage, the register should provide economic benefits. There is no denying the affinity that Scotland feels with tartan. As Iain Finlayson writes, tartan and tartanry "like many other Scottish fetish, has taken on wider, almost global significance." The bill does not say that Scotland equals tartan tat; rather, it safeguards part of our society that has become an internationally recognised symbol. There is nothing wrong with supporting an industry that provides more than 4,000 jobs directly and 7,000 indirectly.

That is a debate for other people, if they want to have it; I just want to ensure that Scottish tartan is registered in Scotland and that it can progress with the register. By defining tartan within the register and providing a point of reference for tartans, the bill seeks to preserve the plaid as we know it. Therefore, I am pleased that many in the industry support the bill, which asks the Court of the Lord Lyon and the National Archives of Scotland to play a vital role in maintaining the records. Tartan is an immense asset for Scotland. If the national register, which will be overseen by the keeper of the Scottish register of tartans, will protect such an important factor of Scottish life, it deserves to be welcomed. I notice that Jamie McGrigor has commented on the BBC that the previous Administration asked him to put his original member's bill on hold while it assessed tartan's economic value to Scotland. Thankfully, the current bill is now progressing  through the Parliament. I have a few points to raise about it, which I will do at a future date, but I congratulate Jamie McGrigor on introducing it to the Parliament and the Scottish National Party Government on recognising tartan's importance to Scotland as a nation by supporting the bill.

I thank Claire Baker for bringing the debate to the Parliament. The issue is important to many people and this is an important time to conduct the debate, given that the housing market is forcing people to rent, often for longer than anticipated. With that being the norm, there have been reports in the media that many landlords are seizing on the opportunity and increasing rental prices, with tenants' deposits increasing in line with that. As the motion correctly intimates, many people rely on receiving their deposits to secure or pay for future rented accommodation. Debt in Scotland is bad enough without that added burden. According to Citizens Advice Scotland, 1.7 million people had debt problems in 2006-07. The motion suggests that we should use the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 to introduce a tenancy deposit protection scheme similar to those in England and Wales. As the act was introduced by the previous Administration, I must ask what I think is a legitimate question about why that Administration did not introduce such a scheme at the time. During the stage 2 debate on the Housing (Scotland) Bill in October 2005, the then Deputy Minister for Communities, Johann Lamont, stated: "Any ... tenancy deposit scheme ... must be considered in the context of the number of other developments that are under way". She went on to say: "We will not introduce any scheme whose cost we consider disproportionate."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 5 October 2005; c 2501-2.] Tonight, however, Claire Baker is adamant that the current Administration should introduce such measures without consultation. Although I agree that tenants' rights and landlords' rights should be protected, I do not know whether the model that is used in England and Wales is the answer.

May I just make some progress first? Thank you. The scheme in England and Wales has been in operation for only one year, and no formal evaluation has yet been carried out. Furthermore,  not every landlord in England and Wales has signed up to the scheme. My information is that two thirds have signed up.

I am sure that, if what Ms Baker says were the case, the Government would look into it, but I am not sure that it is the case. I am sure that the minister will respond to Ms Baker's point when he winds up the debate. What safeguards are in place to ensure that the agencies that act as arbitrators do not have a conflict of interests? One scheme that is run by My Deposits Ltd—which previously traded under the name of Tenancy Deposit Solutions Ltd—is sponsored by the National Landlords Association. That leaves cases open to the possibility of decisions in favour of landlords. Would not it make more sense for more stringent landlord regulation to be introduced before forcing a new deposit scheme into practice? Students and recent graduates are named specifically in the motion as being most at risk of falling foul of the lack of protection for tenants. I acknowledge that student debt has reached £2 billion, but I also note that that is the legacy that Labour left behind, due to its record on student finance. Individual debt is declining under the SNP—from £11,416 under Labour in 2006, to £10,947 under the SNP in 2007. The state that the United Kingdom Government has got the economy into—as well as the credit crunch from the United States—also contributes to the high levels of debt in Scotland. Perhaps the Labour Party should concentrate on safeguarding the country's financial services before trying to pass on to the SNP Government problems that Labour could have dealt with. The SNP Government is committed to helping the people of Scotland.

The problems with hand hygiene and general hygiene at the Vale of Leven hospital that the cabinet secretary outlined in her statement are of serious concern. What action is being taken to address those important hygiene issues in hospitals, not only in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde but throughout Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Government what representations have been made about where to base the Ocean Youth Trust Scotland's fleet of three boats. (S3O-3710)

As the minister is aware, Inverclyde is undergoing a regeneration programme. By encouraging businesses and organisations such as the OYT, we will greatly aid that work. I ask him to ensure that the work that is under way with the Riverside Inverclyde URC is sped up and that Inverclyde benefits from the OYT relocating there.

I noted with interest the Labour Party's decision to bring this debate to the Parliament and I anticipated that Labour would take its usual attacking approach to Scottish National Party strategy. It is sad that I have been proven correct. The broken record from the Labour benches on class sizes and teaching strikes is beginning to be boring. However, time and again Labour members fail to mention their failure on class sizes. They are no strangers to U-turns: the previous Executive set a target of a maximum of 20 pupils in mathematics and English classes; before last year's election it changed the target to an average of 20 pupils; and it then abandoned the plan altogether. The EIS has campaigned for small class sizes since the Parliament opened, and was understandably furious at Labour's decision to ditch its plans. The EIS voted last week for a strike ballot on class size reduction, but it should be noted that under the previous Labour-Lib Dem Executive the EIS voted twice—in 2004 and in 2006—for industrial action over class sizes.

To add to Labour's disappointment, COSLA said that at no point had the EIS ever raised its concerns on education budgets with COSLA. It is time that Labour stopped harping on about an issue on which it failed to deliver. It should consider that COSLA also said: "in this debate we also need to be clear that nothing stays the same for ever." Under the SNP, local authority budgets will increase by 12.9 per cent, of which around half will be spent on education. The Renfrewshire Council education budget is £146.7 million this year, compared with £139 million last year. I allay any lingering fears on the part of Labour members by saying that £958,000 of the budget has been invested in reducing class sizes. We must appreciate the importance of understanding the local authority role in deciding education budgets. In that context, I mention the position of Labour members of Renfrewshire Council, who wanted to make an estimated £800,000 of cuts or efficiency savings—or whatever terminology members want to use—from the reduction in school rolls. The actual cut or efficiency saving was £430,000—almost half what was hoped for. How does a Labour proposal for such a huge cut or efficiency saving take into consideration the wellbeing of young people in Renfrewshire? It does not do so, and neither do  the majority of Labour suggestions. COSLA said: "Put simply, we should be concentrating on the difference we make to children's health, well-being and attainment rather than individual lines of spend and every input they resource." The Greenock Telegraph this week carried a story about Wendy Alexander, who was complaining—nothing new there—about the apparent lack of new schools in Inverclyde. Perhaps she should have done some research about the pitiful two new schools that were built in Inverclyde under Labour between 1999 and 2003. In the article, she is quoted as saying that when people leave school they should be allowed to go on to college. I agree, but she should also have said that she and her colleagues voted to maintain the graduate endowment, which placed an extra burden of debt on students. I am pleased that COSLA does not think that the Labour motion is worth signing. I agree, and I ask members to reject the time-wasting motion. Let us get on with the job of delivering a better, well-educated Scotland, with local authorities delivering for Scotland's schoolchildren.

During the debate in November, I highlighted the use of funds to defend big-time crooks. Today, the cabinet secretary highlighted the fact that the focus is not business models but the development of a robust system of regulation. Can he guarantee that the big-time crooks will not be the beneficiaries of any new regulations or other changes that are introduced?

I welcome the debate and congratulate Jackson Carlaw on securing it. I am sure that there is a consensus that education about the Holocaust should ensure that future generations in Scotland understand the tragedy that took place and understand how cruel and callous the human race can be. I will not go into all the details of Jackson Carlaw's motion, and I am afraid that I will not go into Ken Macintosh's amendment, which I thought was rather unfortunate, but I particularly agree with the final part of the motion, which begins: "and considers that sufficient resources". Like other MSPs, I have been to Auschwitz. I was there in 2000 as part of an InterRail trip to eastern Europe. I will come back to that in a moment. Auschwitz is approximately an hour from Kraków, which is a major city and the cultural capital of Poland. There were three camps at Auschwitz. In June 1940, the Auschwitz concentration camp was established, when the Nazis took it over; in October 1941, Birkenau was established; and in 1942, the Monowitz concentration camp, which was a munitions factory, was established. Thankfully, in 1947, the new Polish Government decided to create the Auschwitz-Birkenau State Museum. Everyone who has been to Auschwitz will recognise that that was an important decision and an important landmark in teaching people about the history of that location. Auschwitz receives about 500,000 visitors every year and it is free to enter, which is vital, because it ensures that more people have the opportunity to see for themselves the atrocities that happened. As I mentioned a moment ago, I have been to Auschwitz and also the Birkenau camp. The strangest thing for me was walking through the gates under the sign "Arbeit macht frei". The first accent that I heard was a German accent. It did not freak me out, but I was a wee bit taken aback, then within half a second I was delighted it was a  German accent. Some German kids were there to learn about the atrocities that happened. We have already heard this evening about the atrocities, and I will not repeat what has been said, but I am sure that members who have visited Auschwitz-Birkenau will agree with what I am about to say. The first thing that people notice when they walk about the two camps is the silence, and the second thing that they notice is the terrible atmosphere. Cathy Jamieson mentioned people who swagger as they go in and are in tears when they are there—I fully agree with that observation. The worst part of the visit for me was the gas chamber—going into it and seeing how people died in such a cruel and callous way. I do not think that anyone could forgive the Nazis for what they did there. I encourage people to go to Auschwitz, Dachau or any of the other camps that still exist. It is important that not only this generation but future generations learn about what happened in the past and about how cruel and callous the human race can be when people have total control over others. Everyone in Europe should go there. I welcome the money that the United Kingdom provided earlier this year. I also welcome the fact that the Scottish Government is working with the Holocaust Educational Trust to make progress.

I, too, would like to thank the Minister for Community Safety for his statement last week launching the Government's strategy, "The Road to Recovery". I thank him not only as a citizen who is concerned about the increasing drugs problem in Scotland, but as a parent. On behalf of all who have seen  loved ones succumb to the traumatic lifestyle associated with drugs, I also thank the Government for promoting its strategy. As the minister has pointed out, 421 people in Scotland lost their lives to drugs in 2006. That number is not only worrying but a sad reflection of the society in which we live. Add to that the estimated 52,000 people with drug problems, and the 46,000 children who, not through choice, are affected by parental drug use, and we have a seriously distressing situation. In 1995, everyone was shocked at the images of 18-year-old Leah Betts in hospital, attached to a life-support machine and fighting for her life, after taking ecstasy. In 2002, her parents—Paul, an ex-police officer, and Janet, a nurse—and her younger brother undertook a tour of schools in Scotland, telling the story of the time following Leah's death. However, there are not enough members of the Betts family to go round every pupil in Scotland to warn them of the dangers of drugs. That is why a comprehensive educational programme is vital to saving lives. It should not be up to the families of drugs victims to educate our young people on the issue. Sadly, the cost of drugs is measured not only in lives but in the size of the burden on Scotland's finances. An estimated £2.6 billion a year is the cost of Scotland's drug problem. That equates to £238 a week to feed a heroin addiction. The strategy focuses on assisting drug users in their aim of living a drug-free life. As has been said throughout today's debate, we should not underestimate the immense task that those people face. Therefore, it is imperative that we support the Government's move to provide resources and support to people faced with that situation. Before the election last year, I visited the haven project in Kilmacolm; and earlier this year, I visited the moving on project in Greenock. The projects are totally different, but their ultimate aim is to ensure that people get off drugs, thus making their lives a lot better, and making the life of the community a bit better as well. I am delighted that we have the support of the Tories on the issue of rehabilitation; I am also delighted that Margaret Smith has said that the Lib Dems will back the Government's motion. Some members have already spoken about methadone. Methadone does not lead to recovery for the majority of users; 90 per cent of addicts are still taking methadone after five years. However, methadone still has an important role in helping to stabilise people, as the moving on project in Greenock has shown. If we look at the figures, we see that only 3 per cent of methadone users are completely clean  after three years, compared with 30 per cent of those treated in rehab, so the benefits of focusing on rehabilitation are obvious. The road to recovery for drug users is difficult and must be taken in small steps. I am pleased that the SNP Government strategy is starting off on that journey for a healthier Scotland—and for a Scotland that is prepared to take a new approach to tackling the drugs menace that our communities face.

The debate has been interesting. My SNP colleagues have spoken of the many achievements of the SNP Government over the past year, although we have also heard the moaning Minnie collective of the Opposition with scant positives and plenty of moaning. As a member of the Justice Committee, I am pleased to see the investment of £120 million a year to provide three new prisons. Murdo Fraser conveniently forgot about that when he spoke, but that is not much of a surprise, bearing in mind that the Tories did not build any prisons when they were last in power.

I have just started, so I need to continue. The issue has been debated numerous times in the chamber, but I do not think that anyone should argue with the measures that are being taken by Kenny MacAskill to deal with the terrible overcrowding problems in Scotland's prisons. Continuing on the justice theme, I have spoken to various police officers in recent months and the overwhelming consensus is that they are delighted with the actions that have been taken to recruit 1,000 more police officers. There should be no doubt that those officers will be utilised in an effective capacity, whether they are on the beat in Greenock or Govan, Lerwick or Linlithgow or are on some other duty. I am sure that the chief constables will use the extra resources effectively. The SNP Government may be lambasted by Labour members for many things, but it would be a cold heart that would deny the benefits of the increase in free personal care payments. The increase to £149, and to £67 for nursing care, will benefit more than 9,000 older people in care homes. I have no doubt that our elderly population would be even better served if the attendance allowance were to be reinstated, so I am pleased that East Dunbartonshire Council recently voted unanimously to encourage the UK Government to reinstate payments for Scotland. That is somewhat surprising, given that the council is a Labour-Tory coalition, but perhaps the councillors' Labour colleagues in Parliament could take note: do not be afraid to contradict Gordon Brown's thoughts on the matter. That does not seem to bother the Labour leader in Scotland. I like to think that we are all committed in our own way to creating a fairer, healthier, greener and smarter Scotland. The way in which the First Minister set out on 14 May what the SNP  Government is doing to further that cause should therefore be welcomed. Measuring the success of creating such a Scotland by introducing the Scotland performs framework is an idea that has the potential to be rolled out further. The idea of accountability appears to frighten some, but the SNP Government is content to show the people of Scotland exactly what it is doing for them. The announcement of the Scottish university for sporting excellence, to be based at the University of Stirling, and of the annual £2 million saltire innovation fund are only two examples of how the SNP is providing the basis for a healthier and smarter Scotland. Alongside those initiatives, there will be a full and meaningful legislative programme. One piece of legislation that I will be particularly delighted to see being introduced in the coming year is the asbestos claims bill. I have campaigned on the pleural plaques issue since being elected last year. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice's bill, which will reverse the House of Lords judgment on pleural plaques, will be a massive boost to those who suffer from the condition and wish to pursue an action for damages. I have met quite a few people who suffer from pleural plaques and I have had dealings with the campaign groups. I assure members that those people are delighted that the bill will be brought forward in this Parliament. The Scottish Prisons Commission's report is due. Henry McLeish has been reported a lot recently, speaking if not in outright support of the SNP, definitely in support of our many achievements, even though he is not yet convinced of the benefits of independence. I trust that the commission, which he leads, will give the Government a sound indication of the best way in which to deliver an effective prison system. I hope that the problems that have been caused by massive overcrowding and high rates of reoffending as a result of the lack of action by previous Administrations, including the Tories, will be addressed in the commission's findings. The past year in the Parliament has undoubtedly been a fascinating one for the people of Scotland to watch. The electorate seem happy with the fact that a minority Government is ruling in Scotland, which means that decisions must be won on their own merits. That situation is new in the politics of Scotland and the UK. It is a fresh approach, with which SNP members of the Scottish Parliament are content. After all, we trust the Scottish population.

The SNP Government will not take any lessons from Labour in view of the housing crisis that we have been left with. Being part of the new politics in Scotland has been interesting, and it has been interesting to see a Government being considered to be successful in delivering for the people of Scotland. I look forward to next year, in which the SNP will continue to move Scotland forward.

Déjà vu, Presiding Officer. As we are all aware, the issue of skills covers a wide range of areas, from early learning to adult learning and everything in between. The combination of the SNP Government's skills strategy and the work of Skills Development Scotland is a positive force that will move forward Scotland's ambition in the area of skills. Scotland has a proud tradition of skill-based workers, and investment in such areas is the highest in the UK, which results in a well-qualified population. However, being qualified is often not enough. The Labour approach is heavily influenced by the Leitch review of skills, with an emphasis on  increasing the number of qualifications that are available, rather than considering demand from the labour market. Research by Futureskills Scotland shows that, while Scotland has successfully developed a highly skilled workforce, demand for such workers has not always kept pace with the increased supply. The Scottish Government's strategy balances the current disparity between employers and skilled workers. By considering the needs of employers as well as placing individuals at the centre of skills development, a coherent skills base will be developed.

I will come on to that later. That cohesive structure serves partly to close the gap between academic and vocational learning. Vocational learning is a valuable alternative to the academic route that most people consider when aiming to enhance their skills, and I am pleased that the Scottish Government recognises the importance of vocational learning in its approach to skills. I am sure that all members acknowledge the dearth of plumbers, electricians and other skilled tradespeople in our communities. John Park's proposed member's bill focuses on apprenticeships and gives us a rather interesting insight into the state of Labour's affairs. Does he really think that doing the best for Scotland means duplicating UK Government policies? Clearly not, because one could be forgiven for thinking that he was ever so slightly envious of the SNP strategy when he spoke to The Scotsman last September.

I am not actually criticising the member's bill per se. When the bill is introduced and there has been a full consultation process, I am sure that it will be given the due consideration that it requires. John Park is quite right that the first step that has been taken has been welcomed by, among others, Iain McMillan of the Confederation of British Industry Scotland and Liz Cameron from the Scottish Chambers of Commerce. When he spoke to The Scotsman about the matter last year, John Park said:  "Skills is a policy area where there is much agreement, and even political opponents can see merit in the Cabinet secretary for education and lifelong learning's document as a first step." Many of us take skills for granted, but the SNP's strategy for developing skills is a positive transformation of a sector that is so vital for moving Scotland forward, and it should be welcomed if we are to do the best by Scotland's workforce. Scotland has the chance of a generation to lay positive foundations for the future. The Commonwealth games are coming, and Scotland will be developing other major infrastructure projects. A positive skills strategy is vital to meet those and other business needs and to plug the gap that has led to a shortage in skilled tradespeople. I therefore back the amendment in the name of the cabinet secretary and reject the Labour motion.

Thank you, Presiding Officer—

I concur with earlier comments about the work of the Justice Committee clerks and their assistants during the evidence sessions on the bill.  I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this stage 1 debate. While the bill covers many aspects of the current and prospective justice systems, I want to start with an issue that has been on all our minds over the past week: independence—however not the national question, but the independence of the judiciary, which has the potential to be contentious. The recent World's End pub murder trial has been cited as evidence for having more extensive judicial independence. Indeed, the Law Society of Scotland and the Society of Solicitor Advocates have gone on record to state that they are in favour of more extensive judicial independence. It is widely acknowledged, too, that in order for our judiciary to gain a higher state of independence, an appropriate management structure must be put in place. Part 1 of the bill deals with judicial independence. Its provisions will create for the first time in Scotland a statutory statement of judicial independence. While it is widely thought in court circles that there is—or should be—judicial independence, stating it in statutory form is surely more favourable than having an informal arrangement. In keeping with the fair and democratic practices to which we have become accustomed, courts should have as much judicial independence as possible. I am pleased, therefore, that the Lord President, Lord Hamilton, has stated that he strongly supports part 1. The Justice Committee asked the Government in our stage 1 report to reassess whether the judicial independence section of the bill is too narrowly drawn. In his response, the cabinet secretary agreed to consider that and lodge an amendment at stage 2, which I am sure will be welcomed. The bill addresses the responsibilities of various affiliated parties, including ministers, the Lord President and the Lord Advocate. The current situation places the Lord Advocate in a position of responsibility, alongside ministers, for the organisation of the supreme courts. However, it is not unreasonable for the Lord President to gain statutory responsibility for administrative activities in the current court structure, which the bill will implement—indeed, the Lord President and his colleagues currently undertake many of those activities. I concur with the view that those responsibilities should come under a statutory agreement, in order to create clear and official boundaries for all concerned in the running of the court services. The Justice Committee raised concerns about committing more judicial time to administrative activities, therefore I welcome the cabinet secretary's decision to request an independent review by Douglas Osler of the measures that deal  with administrative activities. I look forward to reading the outcome of the review and to our making an informed decision on the issue at stage 2. A further area of interest is the Justice Committee's recommendation that judicial training should be mandatory. There was debate about that, to which Paul Martin alluded. I am sure that the issue will be raised again in the debate. The Justice Committee's report is clear that the Lord President should have responsibility for making and maintaining training arrangements for judicial office-holders. The committee also recommended that such training should be mandatory, to improve confidence in the judiciary. The cabinet secretary's response to the committee's report says that all training should be up to the Lord President. I am sure that we will discuss that during stages 2 and 3. My final point is about statistical data in the Scottish Court Service. I recently had an enlightening meeting with representatives of Children 1 st , at which we discussed the lack of statistical data collected by the Scottish Court Service about children. I will lodge questions later today about that, so I do not expect an immediate reply. In this technological age, statistics are vital to inform future decisions. I am therefore sure that such evidence would enable the Scottish Court Service to plan with greater confidence. I am pleased to support the bill.

I thank Alison McInnes for bringing this important members' business debate to the Parliament, and I congratulate her on securing what is her first members' business debate. I have been involved with RNIB Scotland since becoming an MSP. In my capacity as deputy convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on visual impairment, I have spoken with the organisation at length. I was also in contact with RNIB Scotland quite a few times in my previous capacity, before being elected to Parliament. The right to read campaign has rightly gained support from all quarters, and I was privileged to chair, on behalf of RNIB Scotland, a successful fringe meeting on the campaign at the recent Scottish National Party spring conference. George McLaughlin was one of the guest speakers at that meeting, and I must agree with what Alison McInnes said. George is a very impressive and intelligent young man. I was delighted that the Minister for Schools and Skills was able to attend that fringe meeting and answer people's questions about RNIB Scotland's campaign. I was also delighted that she agreed to meet RNIB Scotland to discuss the campaign and other relevant issues further. As we have heard, the campaign seeks to create a national educational transcription service to enable blind and partially sighted children to have access to the learning aids that they require. Children can find school days tough enough without being at a distinct disadvantage due to a lack of adequate materials. That is especially true for someone with a disability. Research by RNIB Scotland shows that almost 1,400 pupils across Scotland require specialist learning materials. Research also shows some discrepancies among local authorities, which are responsible for the provision of such materials. As can be expected, some areas of the country are better equipped than others. RNIB Scotland has stated that the current system lacks a cohesive national strategy and that many of the materials used in schools around Scotland could be introduced in others. Although local authorities should still be encouraged to take responsibility for provision and distribution in their area, a centralised system would still be appropriate. I therefore support any initiative to introduce a centralised system for use throughout the country, to enable blind and partially sighted children to have access to electronic copies of the textbooks that they require. One of the key issues that RNIB Scotland has highlighted to me is that, although reformatted  textbooks are occasionally available, the time delay in getting them is detrimental to the people who are in need of such assistance. As suggested by RNIB Scotland, if access to textbooks was delayed for sighted children, the issue would be highlighted more prominently. RNIB Scotland also states that publishers have already shown interest in supporting such an initiative. That news should be welcomed. Indeed, at last summer's Edinburgh book festival, Robert Brown and I attended the launch of a multi-format text book. The foundations of this positive move are definitely in place: specialists and publishers are on board and there is widespread public support. I have no doubt that we can provide a national education transcription service and that, with the correct input from organisations such as RNIB Scotland and experienced individuals, we are not too far away from implementing it across Scotland. More than 75 per cent of blind and partially sighted adults in Scotland are unemployed, often because of a lack of skills and training. That can obviously be traced back to the lack of learning materials. We must uphold the fact that education is a right not a privilege, no matter whether a person is fully sighted or otherwise. This debate has been worth while and important, and I am sure that there will continue to be cross-party support on the issue.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made on a consolidated firearms bill. (S3O-3232)

I am pleased that the summit appears to have been constructive and that the issue of how to rid our streets of illegal guns and of the reported 500,000 air weapons that are in circulation is being considered with a sense of urgency. The cabinet secretary is aware that weapons are not necessarily an isolated problem but can be tied up with the drugs trade, as the drugs raids that Strathclyde Police carried out last Friday in Inverclyde demonstrated. He has said that he will communicate with the Home Secretary. Will he stress to her that new legislation is necessary, regardless of whether Scotland acts as a pilot area? She must understand and realise that there is a problem that needs to be tackled. Will the cabinet secretary provide further information on the activities that will take place this summer?

The First Minister will be aware that the Clyde marine pilots are involved in industrial action with Clydeport over a variety of issues, including safety concerns and a new contract that the pilots think is less than satisfactory. He may also be aware that Clydeport recently advertised in Poland for pilots, stating that "previous experience of piloting would be advantageous". In light of that, will the First Minister open a channel of discussion between Clydeport and the Clyde marine pilots? Until now, Clydeport has refused to answer numerous calls and letters, including a registered letter, from the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service, which is trying to facilitate talks.

I have no doubt that every member has at some time campaigned or spoken on housing. Scotland faces a housing shortage in the public sector. East Dunbartonshire faces a social housing crisis, which is due in no small part to the voting down by Conservative councillors there of a target for a minimum percentage of social housing for rent. When the opportunity arose in January to provide for a substantial percentage of social housing for rent, the Tories, along with Labour and the Liberals, did not take it. The SNP group even offered to lower its 15 per cent target to 10 per cent, which the ruling Labour-Tory administration preferred, but that figure was still rejected. East Dunbartonshire Council has a waiting list with which the current council housing stock cannot cope. When the right to buy was introduced, the area had more than 10,000 council houses. That figure was reduced to just over 3,600 by 2006-07, whereas the number of people on the waiting list is about 4,500. The council also has a backlog of homelessness applications. As a result of all that, local people cannot stay in the area. Where will they go? Perhaps they will move to another local authority area and add to its overstretched waiting list. Our local authorities face such problems, but effective social housing can help to alleviate them.

I will talk about the Inverclyde situation later. The actions—or lack of them—of the previous Scottish Executive have left Scotland facing a housing shortage. The SNP Government has been clear in its aim—which has received overwhelming support—to build 35,000 new homes in the next decade.  Right to buy has been a bone of contention, but I make no bones about saying that the Tory position, which dates back 30 years, shows clearly that the Tories are behind the times. The proposal not to remove but to restrict the right to buy for new social housing was supported by 94 per cent of respondents to the Scottish Government's recent consultation. If that measure is not taken, research shows that 90,000 socially rented homes will be sold in the next 10 years. As I have shown, we do not have enough social housing to allow that to happen. Moreover, it is no secret that the Labour Party, along with its Tory pals, took to encouraging tenants to vote for housing stock transfer. In Inverclyde, tenants voted overwhelmingly to transfer to a large housing association—that was up to them; it was their choice. However, since then, some constituents have asked me why they were forced down that road. Some have even mentioned the word "bribery", because if they had rejected the offer the housing debt would not have been written off. Those tenants were given no option, because if they had exercised their democratic right to vote against transfer, they would, in effect, have been punished. A year into the SNP Government, we have had a commitment to create a fairer Scotland and to clear up Labour's mess again. The investment of more than £1.6 billion over three years in housing and regeneration from the tight budget settlement is just one example of action. I hope that, in summing up, the Tories—and perhaps even the Labour Party—will explain why the United Kingdom Treasury will write off housing debt only if housing stock transfer takes place. Surely if the Treasury can provide £50 billion to the UK financial sector because of the credit crunch and can pour a similar amount into Northern Rock, paying £2 billion to wipe out the housing debt is a mere drop in the ocean. I urge members to back the Government amendment.

I welcome the statement and am pleased that this Government is doing the right thing, just as it is doing the right thing in relation to pleural plaques, as the Cabinet Secretary for Justice indicated earlier this session. Can the cabinet secretary provide some guidance to people who are currently involved in legal action concerning hepatitis C, in particular with regard to how they should proceed from this point?

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities regarding the recent Audit Scotland report, "Improving the school estate", and in particular the annual charges from private finance initiative contracts. (S3O-2877)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that that excellent report highlights that by 2012, annual charges for PFI projects are likely to reach more than £500 million, with just over £200 million being funded by the Scottish Government. The report did not mention who will fund inflationary increases. Will the cabinet secretary agree to look into the matter? Does he agree that the PFI funding mechanism is not the best use of limited public funds?

I associate myself with Nigel Don's comments about the help and assistance that new members of the Justice Committee have had under Bill Aitken's convenership. I thank Bill Aitken. More important, I thank the committee staff, who have been extremely helpful, particularly to new members of the committee. As a member of the Justice Committee, I am grateful for this opportunity to talk about the recommendations in our report. The witnesses from whom we heard and the submissions that we received made for some not-so-light reading. That was unfortunate, but it demonstrated the strength of feeling about policing in Scotland. As we compiled the report we had a responsibility to consider all the views that we heard. I hope that the debate does the issue justice—pardon the pun. During this parliamentary session and in this debate, much has been made of police numbers. However, we are debating a report about the effective use of police resources. We should not get hung up on the numbers; we should consider what is done with the resources that police authorities have. Every Government department can always use more resources, irrespective of the parliamentary session that we are in. However, the budget is finite and departments must act with the resources that they are given. The committee report welcomed the Government's commitment to provide sufficient funds to recruit 500 additional officers and I welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Justice's confirmation that the Government's budget will provide for the much-talked-about 1,000 additional officers. There is no doubt that we face a tough challenge, as a result of inherited problems with police numbers. High retirement figures and the low level of planned recruitment mean that we must work harder to keep Scotland safe. It is clear that the Government relishes the challenge and is not only managing to meet the manifesto pledge on the recruitment of 1,000 more officers, but is going beyond that. The additional officers will be crucial to the future of policing in Scotland and will be essential to the smooth operation of forces throughout the country. The cabinet secretary told us that 150 police recruits passed through Tulliallan before the end of the previous financial year, under the Scottish National Party Government. The SPF, in its response to the committee report, said that the term "community policing" began to be used in Scotland in the 1970s. Community policing is an issue of great interest not only to the committee and the Parliament, but to wider Scotland. I am delighted that the  committee will look into community policing in the next stage of its inquiry. From its response, I am aware that the SPF thinks that it will be "almost impossible" to provide a definition of community policing. Given that many people are unsure about the meaning of the term "community policing", they are therefore unsure about the workings of the system. The committee picked up on that point, as is evident in our report. The recommendation that a clear definition of community policing should be created as a matter of priority should be welcomed. Understandably, having one approach to community policing throughout Scotland may not be ideal, but that can be overcome. Input from every force will be necessary and, if we are to get the best out of the system, co-operation from all will be required. That said, I return to my earlier point on the SPF's response that it may be "almost impossible" to provide a definition of community policing. I am therefore heartened by the cabinet secretary's response to the recommendation. Work has begun on attempting to define community policing. A sub-group of the additional capacity programme board is looking into the issue, and I look forward to reading its report. As the cabinet secretary pointed out, we must ensure that recommendations on measuring the policing of communities are reflected in the Scottish policing performance framework. I trust that he will ensure that that will happen. In order for that to happen, a comprehensive review of police roles and responsibilities must be undertaken. The committee report suggests that an independent review of the roles and responsibilities of the police should be undertaken, and due consideration should be given to that finding. I was astounded to hear that no review had been made of the role and responsibilities of the police for more than 40 years. As a new member of the Scottish Parliament, I could not get over that. I thought that such reviews were undertaken fairly regularly—after all, times change and people and situations move on. It therefore interests me that the cabinet secretary, in his response to the report, said that the Government is considering the recommendation. I will watch with interest to see the steps that are taken on the recommendation. The role of community wardens is an interesting issue, to say the least, partly because of the lack of clarity about the work that they undertake. For example, what powers do community wardens have and how highly are they trained? The committee backed the community warden scheme. Wherever they are deployed, community wardens appear to make a positive difference. That is to be welcomed.  The issues surrounding policing are never to be taken lightly. I look forward to hearing more from the cabinet secretary on the Government's future plans, based on the committee's report.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak again on a matter, which will perhaps this evening—if all members arrive in time for decision time, as I assume that they will—be put to bed for the foreseeable future. I am happy to reiterate my position. During the parliamentary debate on HDC a couple of weeks ago, I said that there was no logic to not extending the scheme and that proposing a sunset clause was tantamount to faffing around. I accept that on occasions sunset clauses have a legitimate place, but given that the cabinet secretary has offered a widespread review—not a repeal—of HDC when Addiewell prison opens, a sunset clause is not relevant in this instance. I could have considered a sunset clause if there had been no other offer on the table. The cabinet secretary has outlined the strict guidelines around the extension of HDC and has given details of measures to allow prisoners to make a safe transition back to society, which include statutory exclusions, preventing certain categories of offenders, such as sex offenders, from being released on HDC, and a robust risk assessment process, which is undertaken by the SPS and takes into account a prisoner's previous history of violence, for example.  The primary aim of HDC was to ease the reintegration of prisoners into the community, while restricting their movements, which creates a better environment for all concerned. As the cabinet secretary pointed out during the previous debate on HDC, prisoner numbers in Scotland have reached record levels. Prisons are operating over capacity by about 1,000 places. What kind of environment is that for prisoners and prison staff? It has been established that the situation is due in no small part to years of neglect by the Tories and a lack of investment by the previous Administration. The Labour Party is on record as saying in the Justice Committee that it is not against HDC per se. I would not expect Labour to oppose HDC, given that it was part of the previous Administration, which introduced the scheme. I am sure that Labour and Lib Dem members of the previous Executive viewed HDC as an important part of justice policy. I am also sure that Labour members are aware that when HDC was introduced by the United Kingdom Parliament in 1999 the system was intended for prisoners who were serving sentences of between three months and four years. HDC was then brought in for up to two months at the end of a sentence. Since then, HDC has been extended twice: first in 2002, when presumptive HDC was introduced for prisoners who were serving sentences of between three and 12 months; and secondly in July 2003, when the maximum curfew was increased to 135 days. I would not suggest that Labour members are opposing the SNP Government's plans for the sake of it, but they know that Labour ministers in London have extended HDC—and that that has happened without mention of sunset clauses. In a recent interview with Jack Straw it was said that the prisons estate in England and Wales is only 70 places short of capacity and emergency measures might have to be taken. Who knows what the future will bring on HDC in England and Wales? In Scotland we have an opportunity to help prison officers and to help prisoners to reintegrate into the community. It is in everyone's interests that prisoners not only do their time but have a chance to be rehabilitated. I am sure that all members—even the Tories—agree on that. There is no doubt that HDC should be extended. I hope that members have the sense to press the right voting button tonight and reject the motion.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it has taken, or plans to take, to urge the United Kingdom Government to hold a referendum on the European Union Lisbon treaty. (S3O-2592)

Although I do not want to highlight the internal war going on among the Lib Dems or the broken manifesto pledge of the Labour Party, does the minister agree that we should seek to discover the will of the people on the EU treaty, and that the decision in Westminster this week to back the treaty highlights once again that that place treats the people of Scotland and the rest of the UK with contempt on this crucial issue?

As a member of the Parliament's Justice Committee and a representative of the West of Scotland region, where Greenock prison lies, I welcome the debate. I was disappointed that last week the Justice Committee decided not to back the proposed extension of home detention curfew. There was no logic in that decision. At least Bill Aitken was consistent, as the Tories were against HDC in the first place. For some time, warnings have been issued by people involved in the justice system, including the governor of Barlinnie prison, that Scottish prisons are badly overcrowded. That situation stems from  the previous Administration's years of neglect of the Scottish Prison Service. The fact that the prison population has broken through the 8,000 barrier has set alarm bells ringing, and it is imperative that something is done. We cannot expect the SPS to do an adequate job under such circumstances, never mind expect prisoners to respond to the support that is offered to them if it is not adequate. The SPS has expressed the fear that if the present circumstances continue, in a few short months Scotland's prisons will be unable to cope. What then? What will happen when there is an increase in violence following a major football match or matches? Where will we put offenders? Will Labour members offer to detain them in their homes overnight? A night in the company of Labour MSPs sharpening their knives might deter many people from reoffending.

The proposal to extend the period for which an offender can be tagged from four and a half months to six months is not to be feared. If those extra six weeks—we are not talking about six months or six years—help prisoners to reintegrate into society so that they do not reoffend, surely providing for such an extension is worth while.

The Government is taking longer-term action on prison overcrowding. Over the next three years, £360 million of capital investment will be ploughed into improving and modernising the prison system, with new prisons being provided in Addiewell, Bishopbriggs and the north-east. However, a short-term solution must also be found. Action needs to be taken now, before the situation gets even worse. It is hard to understand the difficulties that prisoners must face when they try to reintegrate into their communities, but it is a damn sight harder for prison staff, who are working in conditions to which they should not be subjected, and for our communities, which are harmed when former prisoners reoffend. By allowing prisoners to spend an extended period on HDC, we will help to ease them back into society, which will in turn help society in the longer term. Not only will that ease the pressure on the prison system, it will potentially benefit prisoners by allowing them to readjust and reintegrate. As I have said, action needs to be taken now. If we faff around inserting a sunset clause, as the Labour Party wants to do, we will further delay decisions, which will only cause more problems. The Government has already stated its intention to review the entire HDC policy in early 2009, when Addiewell prison opens.  Last week, Labour again sidled up to its Tory bedfellows to form a right-wing alliance. Arguing against the extension of HDC will not endear Labour to the public. Last week was the first time that the use of a sunset clause had been mentioned. I would have thought that Labour would be a touch more understanding of the problems that it left the SNP Government with. The cabinet secretary's motion needs to be passed so that we can provide some breathing space for our prison service. The men and women who work hard to maintain standards in our prisons should not have to cope with the added strain of overcrowding. The current situation is not acceptable by any standards, and the extension of HDC is a logical way of starting to rectify the situation.

I welcome the debate and the introduction of independent scrutiny panels. I fully agree that every circumstance must be examined on a case-by-case basis and that the independent scrutiny panels should examine proposals before they are put out to full public consultation. Every member will have their own experiences of health board consultations. As a West of Scotland MSP who stays in Inverclyde, I can assure the Parliament of the Inverclyde public's lack of confidence in the former Argyll and Clyde NHS Board. There is now an attitude of healthy scepticism towards Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board. It is obvious that the Parliament wants a strong, successful NHS. One way of ensuring that we take the public along with us is to ensure that the mechanisms are in place that will allow us to restore confidence in health policy decisions. I am sure that the introduction of independent scrutiny panels will aid the achievement of that aspiration.  The only constant in the delivery of public and private services is change—no change in the NHS is not an option—but if changes are proposed, it is vital that all the facts and figures and every conceivable piece of information are made available. Consultations that do not enjoy public confidence are not worth the time and resources they take up. I was delighted that the cabinet secretary established an independent scrutiny panel to consider maternity services in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area. I took part in the consultation by attending a public meeting and providing a written submission. I also met panel members when they came to the Parliament. When the panel reported, it suggested that the board maintain community midwife units at Inverclyde royal hospital and the Vale of Leven hospital. It suggested that the CMUs be maintained for three years, to provide a community education programme. I welcomed that suggestion, as did other people, but the board rejected it and still intends to remove vital services from the IRH and the Vale of Leven hospital. Two important points arise from that experience: the strength and status of independent scrutiny panels; and the continuing lack of public confidence in health boards. Ross Finnie talked about that in detail. I agree with Ian McKee that the provision of evidence in consultations is vital. The public might not always agree with the outcome, but it will help if people can be taken along in the process. Independent scrutiny panels will provide a useful mechanism for holding health boards and the Government of the day to account. I hope that public confidence in health boards will improve as a result. If the public have no confidence in boards or other public service providers, we have major problems. It is imperative that the Government of the day get things right. I know from my experience in Inverclyde that public confidence is at a low ebb. Independent scrutiny panels must fully consider comparative models in other health board areas. When the independent scrutiny panel considered NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde's proposals for maternity services, I put forward information about NHS Tayside and the CMUs in Montrose and Arbroath. The information had not been brought to the panel's attention until then, so it was important that it was provided. I agree with the presumption against centralisation. Services should remain as local as possible, provided that they are safe and viable. I am sure that the establishment of independent scrutiny panels will go some way towards ensuring that that happens.

Will Robert Brown give way?

I will add my thoughts and sentiments to those that  have been expressed thus far. There is no doubt that the Commonwealth games will benefit Scotland as a whole. I am sure that a positive effect will be felt in the West of Scotland region. I welcome the games to Scotland, and I am certain that the Scottish people will be model hosts. However, there are obvious concerns in staging a world-class event. The bill contributes towards the Scottish Government's aim of making the games safe and enjoyable for all. In turn, the games will create a long-lasting legacy for Glasgow and Scotland. In debating the bill, we have the opportunity to ensure that Scotland gets the most out of hosting the games. However, some fears have been expressed that the loss of lottery funding to the London Olympics may adversely affect the legacy of the Commonwealth games. The escalating cost of the London Olympics means that Scotland could lose out on £150 million of lottery funding over the next four years. During the recess, a week or so ago, I was down south visiting some of my family. I spoke to a man who stays on the outskirts of London and works in the City of London. His take on the London Olympics was that they will benefit only the people of the east end of London, not people in London more generally, and certainly not people north of the Watford gap. I return to the Commonwealth games. The Parliament has achieved cross-party support for the Scottish Government making a claim for more lottery funding for the games' legacy. The Government's generous agreement to provide 80 per cent of the net costs, with Glasgow City Council meeting the remainder, should be welcomed. That said, the agreement should not detract from the raw deal that we are getting in comparison with the funding for the London Olympics. The fact that the London Olympics are unlikely to have much impact north of Watford—never mind in Scotland—proves that the SNP Government got it right in launching a public consultation on the Commonwealth games. The consultation will engage all those who will be involved in the games, from the ground up. Their views will be important in getting the games right, so that a legacy is created not only for Glasgow but for the whole of Scotland. With the views of those people duly taken into consideration, the bill should be allowed to proceed in line with the appropriate actions. The bill should also act as a guide for the Commonwealth games organisers and the public, so that they can enjoy the games and take pride in their country's hosting them. I welcome the guidelines on ticket touting. The issue is not new, but it does catch people out unwittingly. I was fortunate to get a ticket for the  Scotland v Norway game in France in the 1998 world cup. What got my goat on the train journey to Bordeaux was the touts who were wandering up and down the train trying to sell tickets to genuine fans. My take on touts is that they are parasites on genuine fans, whether of the sporting or musical variety. When someone is trying to obtain tickets for a large event, it is all too easy to become immersed in the sense of occasion. The bill addresses the need for the sale of tickets to be regulated. Cracking down on ticket touts was a key factor in the success of Glasgow's bid to host the games. Indeed, the host city's contract sets out that "the unauthorised sale of tickets should not be allowed". That view should gain wide support in the chamber. From the speeches that I have heard, that seems to be the case. I hope that the great number of people who will go to the games will not be adversely affected by ticket touting. As I said, ticket touting is not new; it appears during every major sporting or musical event. There is the potential for us to use the consultation findings to consider future ticket touting regulations. The extensive infrastructure work that is to be undertaken for the games in Glasgow is to be commended. That infrastructure will not only create short-term sustainability for the city, it will be part of the games' legacy. During another vacation, in the summer of 2005, I went to Australia for three and a half weeks. I was based in Melbourne. The sporting legacy that that city gained from hosting the Olympics a few decades ago and from the Commonwealth games, which the city was about to host in 2006, was fantastic. The facilities that I saw were world class. Any country that hosts a major sporting event should consider that model. As well as the sporting facilities, the legacy of the Glasgow games will have other aspects. I hope that the athletes village in the city and other contributions to the regeneration of the Clyde area will work towards the common legacy goal. Although efforts will be concentrated in Glasgow, the west of Scotland should benefit from the increase in trade and tourism that the Commonwealth games will attract. The Clyde will be the focus for many people. On lovely summer days—when we get them—trips on the Waverley down to Arran are first class. I hope that, through implementing the bill, Glasgow and Scotland host an extremely successful Commonwealth games for the home and visiting athletes and spectators. Let us hope that we provide an atmosphere that befits a winning nation and encourages current Scottish athletes and those of the future.

What co-operation does the Scottish Government have with foreign Governments, either directly or via the United Kingdom Government, when people on the sex offenders register in Scotland plan to emigrate, particularly to nations whose regulations may not be as strong as ours or to member states or potential member states of the European Union?

We have heard much this morning about how life would be wonderful under a Labour Administration in Scotland and how only the Labour Party would ensure that a school building programme continued to aid pupils in Scottish schools. However, two Labour MSPs think that a new  school has been built every week since 1999, which would add up to 416 schools; one thinks that 200 have been built since 2003; and another thinks that 300 have been built since 1999. In fact, only 110 schools were built in the past four years; 173 were built over the past eight years.

I am not going to take that. As my colleague Christina McKelvie said, over the past eight years 177 schools were closed. Under the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive, there was a net deficit of four schools. Much has been made about the "brick for brick" commitment. I have every faith that the SNP Government will work towards fulfilling our manifesto commitment brick for brick, thus providing a school estate strategy to benefit Scottish pupils. We have Labour, and its poodles the Lib Dems, to thank for eight years of PPP and the Tories to thank for introducing the policy.

I am sorry, but I do not have enough time. Elizabeth Smith said that she was so proud that the Tories had introduced PPP. However, perhaps attitudes to PPP are changing in the Opposition parties. After Kenny MacAskill announced that the new prison for Bishopbriggs was no longer going to be funded via PPP, Wendy Alexander welcomed the decision. Over the past eight years, some said that PPP was the only game in town and that we could not do anything about it. That struck me as the same as the tired old rhetoric that we are too small, we are not capable enough and we are too thick to develop things for ourselves. It is the same old nonsense that has kept Scotland in the union and set us back years and years. I am thankful that the Scottish electorate voted out the tired old parties last year and gave the SNP the chance to provide a fresh impetus for Scotland. Furthermore, the electorate gave the SNP the opportunity to show that there are viable alternatives to PPP. The Scottish futures trust is out for consultation. I hope that the Opposition parties will take part in the consultation and that they will welcome the idea. New schools are usually welcomed, provided that it is perceived that the correct and proper procedures have been followed to allow the public to have their say. I am afraid that the experience of the Lib Dems running Inverclyde Council over  the past four years shows the way not to consult the public. Their arrogance and dismissal of the Inverclyde public was supreme, and they paid the ultimate price last May by having their number of councillors reduced from 13 to 4 and losing control of the administration.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. Unfortunately, the current minority Labour administration in Inverclyde Council appears to be following in the same vein. I say to Ms Jamieson and Mr Macdonald that they should just ask the parents who send their children to Clune Park primary school in Port Glasgow, which is threatened with closure. The unholy alliance of the current Labour-Tory coalition in East Dunbartonshire Council has signed off proposals for its £501 million PPP programme. New schools are fine and well, but making future generations of pupils in effect pay for the privilege of going to school is appalling. It smacks of privatisation of children's education. I do not think that the SNP Government need take any lessons from Labour and the Lib Dems, given their record over the past eight years. That is why I urge members to reject Labour's ill-informed motion.

Scotland has some serious health issues, as I am sure all members agree. It is therefore incumbent on the Government of the day to work to improve the state of the nation's health. It will come as no surprise that I back the SNP Government's plans to improve the health of Scotland's citizens. I do not see how anyone could disagree with the following: a 19 per cent increase in investment in 2010-11, if the budget is passed; £90 million a year for the next three years to ensure that, by the end of 2011, nobody will wait longer than 18 weeks from referral by a general practitioner to treatment for routine conditions; £500 million a year to fund major new developments, such as the new children's hospital and the new Southern general hospital in Glasgow—

I will not at the moment—maybe I will later on.  I do not see how anyone could disagree with making improvements at existing hospitals throughout Scotland, including Aberdeen royal infirmary, Borders general hospital, Raigmore hospital in Inverness and the Dumfries and Galloway infirmary; and working with partners to meet the mental health needs of serving and former armed forces personnel. That is not to mention the reduction in prescription charges leading to their abolition; the presumption against centralisation of hospital services; the creation of independent scrutiny panels; the retention of accident and emergency services at Ayr and Monklands hospitals; the increased funding for free personal care; a three-year investment of £54 million to fight the hospital superbugs; and the other announcements that the cabinet secretary made this morning.

I am sorry, but I must make progress. There are many more issues that I am sure will be discussed this morning. However, the items that I have highlighted alone prove that the SNP Government is committed to the health improvement of the nation and to the NHS in Scotland.

I am sure that they will be told to you in due course. I will focus on the local health care bill, which will include provisions to implement the SNP manifesto commitment to ensure that health boards have a directly elected element. As someone who stays in Inverclyde, I know that the threat of services being removed from the Inverclyde royal hospital is never far away, nor is it far away in the case of the Vale of Leven hospital. The centralisation agenda for NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde—and before that, NHS Argyll and Clyde—has been of extreme proportions. For example, the IRH and the Vale of Leven hospital have lost the consultant-led services in the maternity units, and we now have community midwife units. The number of births at those units has not been as high as was hoped for—but if the CMUs are not marketed to the public, how will the public know about them? The introduction of the independent scrutiny panel proved to be successful, as it listened to all the arguments and produced a report recommending that the CMUs be kept open and that there should be a community education  programme to inform the public about what a CMU is. At a public meeting in Greenock, I introduced comparison figures to the scrutiny panel comparing the CMUs at the IRH and the Vale of Leven hospital with those in Arbroath and Montrose in Tayside—[ Interruption. ]

I do not have one with me. Despite the vast differences in population, the number of births in Arbroath and Montrose was still vastly higher, and I wondered whether the health board had ever considered why. The health board's response to the scrutiny panel was to thank it but to say that it was still planning to consult on closing the CMUs and centralising them in Paisley. Whether the Royal Alexandria hospital could cope with the increased centralisation agenda is another issue entirely. It would not surprise me if the health board threatened cuts at the RAH if its centralisation agenda does not take place. A further aspect of the debate concerns parking charges at hospitals, with which I, for one, do not agree—I have said so in the chamber and in the media. I welcome the announcement that the cabinet secretary made before Christmas that if charges are to be introduced, there should be a cap of £3 a day. That is a welcome step, and it shows an understanding about the importance of the issue. The key part of Nicola Sturgeon's statement on parking charges was that health boards must prove that such charges are required. Following the cabinet secretary's announcement, I wrote to the health board to ask it specifically about traffic studies at the IRH, Vale of Leven hospital and the RAH in Paisley. One of my SNP colleagues, Councillor Kenny MacLaren from Paisley, had also written to the health board specifically about the RAH. The response is wonderful—it says: "No specific traffic study has been carried out at the RAH ... There is also an issue with staff numbers and availability of parking spaces with the ratio being three staff members to each parking space". That may well be the case, but there must surely be shift patterns, and not everyone works at the same time. In addition, not everyone owns or drives a car. Heaven forbid, but some people might even take public transport. The response provided me with an answer on one location, but I will not be surprised if the responses on the IRH and the Vale of Leven hospital are similar. When will the board get the message that parking charges are not needed at the IRH, the Vale of Leven hospital or the RAH? Furthermore, the consultation took place before those three hospitals were part of NHS Greater  Glasgow and Clyde, so how can the imposition of charges be justified? I have given members a flavour of why a local health care bill that provides for the direct election of a percentage of health board members offers a way forward that will improve health care in communities. I do not for a minute suggest that the direct election of health board members will create no problems in future—very few issues are without problems. However, if people who care about the health service and want normal services to be delivered locally have a say, health services and the health of the nation will improve. We cannot let the arrogance of health boards continue.

We have a duty to the electorate to ensure that the health of the nation is much improved in four years' time. The Parliament has an opportunity to ensure that Scotland takes itself out of intensive care. The many proposals of the SNP Government will go a long way towards improving Scotland's health.

To ask the Scottish Executive with what procedures local authorities must comply when planning to close schools. (S3O-1788)

As the cabinet secretary will be aware, over the past four years, the then Liberal Democrat-run Inverclyde Council decided that it wanted to reduce the number of secondary schools in its area from eight to five, which left only one denominational school to cover Greenock, Gourock, Inverkip and Weymss Bay. The new minority Labour administration wishes to rationalise further and close a school in Port Glasgow, which will affect less well-off areas in the town. Will the cabinet secretary provide an assurance that, under the Scottish National Party Government, strict and thorough scrutiny of any proposals will take place when school closures are considered?

My point is on an issue that was also raised by Keith Brown. I fully accept that, towards the end of a campaign, matches can be of great importance—that has been the case in the past two campaigns. However, sometimes campaigns are finished before they get to that stage. Surely it would be better to guarantee that every match is shown live—or at least that a highlights package is shown—as opposed to waiting until the end of campaign before saying, "Well, that's really important so that match must be shown."

Will the member give way?

First, I congratulate Keith Brown on securing the first members' business debate of 2008, and I thank him for his kind words earlier. There now appears to be a political consensus—except for Hugh O'Donnell—in favour of more powers for the Parliament, so the debate is timely in the current political climate. I was only too happy to sign the motion, bearing in mind that it continues from where I left off when I became an elected member. I lodged a petition with the Public Petitions Committee during the previous session, and I had the privilege of attending my first meeting of any committee when I gave evidence to it. The petition was PE1026, and I know that it was discussed again at the Public Petitions Committee meeting on 23 October 2007. On that matter, the committee convener Frank McAveety highlighted a couple of points that I would like to respond to, although unfortunately he is not present to hear it. First, yes—where am I now? Secondly, I am indeed a true believer. Over the years I have been to see some terrible football matches involving Scotland. I am sure that Frank McAveety will agree that it is good to see the national team do so well and the players play once again for the jersey—which I know Mr McAveety does when he plays for the parliamentary football team. I was delighted that my petition was passed to the Scottish Broadcasting Commission, and I am sure that it will take cognisance of the motion that we debate today. I find it ridiculous that there is no guarantee that every Scotland match will be broadcast live, or even that there will be a highlights package for it. When I gave evidence to the Public Petitions Committee on 17 January 2007, I said that many people in Scotland do not have Sky TV, do not—for various reasons—want to go to a pub or cannot go to a pub because of a disability. Indeed, it might be argued, particularly in view of the last point, that the relevant bodies—the DCMS, the SFA and the BBC—are involved in some kind of social exclusion. That might sound like an attack on the UK Government, but it is not. I am simply highlighting the fact that the DCMS does not fully  appreciate the cultural and sporting significance of football to Scotland. Moreover, I am not suggesting for one minute that there is one rule for the English national team and another for Scotland. This is an area where the BBC must demonstrate its sense of responsibility. If it is prepared to spend hundreds of millions of pounds from its £3-plus billion budget to cover the progress of the English national team, that is fine, but it should also consider the Scottish national team's importance to the Scottish public. I also accept that, as the major footballing power in Scotland, the SFA needs to get the best deal possible to ensure that money is invested in the grass roots of the game—as well as used to get us a new manager. I am sure that the association fights hard to secure the best deal, but the question is whether it could try harder. I lodged my petition because in the recent Euro 2008 qualifying campaign, Scotland's match against Lithuania was shown neither live nor in a highlights package. On the other hand, Northern Ireland's match was shown live on BBC Northern Ireland, Wales's match was shown live on BBC Wales and England's match was shown live on BBC1. As a licence fee payer, I was somewhat annoyed by the situation and felt that the BBC, as the public sector broadcaster, had a duty to supply relevant programmes to relevant parts of the current UK. It will come as no surprise, therefore, that I fully agree with Keith Brown's motion and I look forward to the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's consideration of this issue and, I am sure, many others. I also agree that powers over broadcasting should be given to the Scottish Parliament to ensure that the Scottish Government of the day can act not only to safeguard the industry in Scotland but to create opportunities in it. By doing so, it would follow the German, French, Spanish and Swedish models of ensuring that national team matches are shown on national television.

I welcome the debate. I also welcome the Scottish Government's creation of the serious organised crime task force. As each member who has spoken thus far has said, organised crime has a daily impact on Scottish communities and individuals. It has a detrimental effect on Scottish life and our business community. The co-ordination of specialist expertise, skills and knowledge in the task force will help to reduce the amount of organised crime on our streets and send out a message that tackling serious organised crime is a priority for the Government. I am confident that the task force will complement the work of the Serious Organised Crime Agency and address specific Scottish considerations and problems that are distinct to our communities. Scotland has a unique legal system and policing culture and needs a dedicated  task force to work alongside the SOCA. The Scottish Government is taking steps to ensure the safety of its individuals and communities. In that respect, the task force should be welcomed. As the cabinet secretary, Pauline McNeill and Sandra White have said, one of the primary industries that criminal gangs exploit is the private hire taxi trade. Organised crime can prosper only if it has a respectable business as a front for criminal behaviour. Taxi companies are ideal fronts for criminal activity, as they can be presented as legitimate businesses. Concerns exist that the regulations that govern the licensing of private hire vehicles are too lenient and allow criminals to infiltrate the business as a cover for criminal activity and money laundering. We should make a distinction between private hire taxi firms and the black hackney cabs. The black cab or public hire taxi trade is regulated tightly by the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982, but the private hire trade is not subject to those stringent regulations. We therefore need to tighten the regulations on the private hire trade. Under the current regulatory regime, an individual can obtain a licence to run a private hire vehicle with relative ease. Applications can be made to the local authority on behalf of an individual or company, with a small application fee of about £200. The local authority then forwards the application to the police, who perform a background check for criminal activity. Provided that the police check does not reveal any such activity, the local authority will then grant the licence, following a safety check of the vehicle, which costs only £100. In short, for a relatively small amount of money, a criminal business can prosper easily. On passing the aforementioned safety check, the licence will be granted and thereafter the vehicle will be subject only to an ordinary MOT test, with no maximum age limit. Compare that to the regulation of the black cab industry, in which two thorough safety checks of vehicles are often required per year. The stricter regulations in the public hire industry make it significantly more difficult for criminals to infiltrate the industry, so the private hire industry must follow suit. It is widely known that there is no limit on the number of private hire licences that councils can give out. The local authorities' inability to limit the number of private hire licences makes it difficult to control entry to the profession and thus easier for organised crime to operate on Scotland's streets. The situation damages the good name of legitimate and hard-working taxi firms and drivers throughout the county, who are in the majority. With the black cab industry, the 1982 act gives local authorities the power to limit the number of public hire taxi licences that are available annually. The number is based on an in-depth survey of  demand in the area and ensures that enough taxis are available to provide good customer service while allowing fair competition among local businesses. Importantly, the system makes it significantly more difficult for criminals to enter the trade. The current lax regulatory regime for the private hire trade has made that part of the industry an open target for criminal gangs. It should be stressed that the fault does not lie with local authorities or the police, as they do not have the power to fight that lax regime. Legislation to allow local authorities to limit the number of private hire licences would offer protection to the taxi industry from criminal gangs and would control entry into the profession. Organised crime affects the lives of many hard-working and honest Scottish individuals and their families, so we need to crack down on it. It is apparent that more stringent regulations would be the first step in tackling the problems that taxi companies face. Too many criminal gangs use apparently legitimate businesses such as taxi companies as fronts for illegal activity. Steps should be taken to put them out of business and remove them from Scotland's streets. I support fully the role of the newly established serious organised crime task force in bringing together all the major agencies and in spearheading a renewed drive and commitment to tackle such crime in Scotland. I ask those agencies to make the regulatory regime of the private hire trade a priority area on which action must be taken. I back the motion in the name of the cabinet secretary.

The irony behind the motion is galling. The Lib Dems, who have an awful record of supporting sport while in power, are criticising the new SNP Government for trying to clean up their legacy. The Lib Dems have the cheek to note in their motion "the importance of grass-roots sport and the opportunities that currently exist to increase sporting participation", but when they were running Inverclyde Council over the past four years, they decided to build a secondary school, using public-private partnership funding, on the site of football pitches. Regrettably, the Inverclyde population is receiving a double whammy—the vast cost implications of PPP and the loss of football pitches to the local community. Unfortunately, the Lib Dems are not alone in that respect. Four years ago, Renfrewshire Council, which was then Labour run, commissioned a report on the Apex centre in Paisley and was told that the centre needed £400,000-worth of urgent repairs. The council refused to invest in the centre, which is now so dilapidated that repairing it would cost £1 million. It is therefore now recommended that the centre should be closed. That is a prime example of Labour investment in community and sporting facilities. The most important obstacle to participation levels in sport in Scotland is a lack of quality facilities. It is well understood that our climate is not akin to that of Australia, which means that it may be difficult for us to encourage some outdoor activities. That emphasises the need for top-notch facilities. The new generation of artificial grass offers an ideal remedy to the problems of traditional pitches, which are expensive and time-consuming to maintain. Such pitches have restricted use, and  tend to be less playable in the winter, particularly in the west of Scotland. Statistically, natural grass pitches can be used for 150 to 200 hours a year. Third-generation pitches, by comparison, cost roughly the same to construct, are significantly cheaper to maintain, and can be used for 2,000 to 2,500 hours a year. The advances in artificial grass technology—which gives more usage, especially in bad weather—provide the opportunity for a dramatic increase in sport participation, particularly in our nation's top two sports of football and rugby.

As the minister said, a review is taking place at the moment. My colleague Michael Matheson mentioned the 10 new regional sports facilities that were announced by the previous Administration in 2004. Three years later, not one of those facilities has opened its doors and only one has made it past the first stage of development. Under the Labour-Lib Dem Executive, the Tories, and London Labour, the number of public sports pitches fell dramatically—130 pitches have been lost since 1996. The previous Administration left Scotland in a poor position for sporting facilities. The SNP has been left with that mess, but in our short time in power we have already begun taking steps to sort things out. In the past week, the Minister for Communities and Sport has announced a £1.1 million investment in sports facilities throughout Scotland. That will include funding for projects in Aberdeen, Paisley, Peebles, Torridon, Scone, Loch Tummel, Stirling, Stornoway and Hawick. The Government has also announced its intention to create a sports facilities fund, whereby community sports clubs can bid for money to improve facilities, provided that those facilities can be used by the whole community. Unlike the previous Administration, the Government understands the importance of providing Scotland's people with quality facilities. It is therefore vital that money is distributed to support those facilities. That is why I am glad that the SNP Government has started to take the necessary steps. I urge members to reject the Lib Dem motion and to back the Government amendment.

Summary justice reform is a matter of great significance to the running of an efficient judicial system, as we have heard, so it is important that the Parliament makes progress on it. As all members will testify, the issue is rather technical. I am sure that, as a consequence, this debate will be somewhat tamer than this morning's debate on the Scottish constitutional issue. There are various issues in summary justice reform that will be discussed, some of which have been highlighted already. I will focus my attention on the proceedings of summary justice. According to the McInnes report, which was published in 2003, the percentage of cases that were disposed within 10 weeks of the date of the offence was a mere 6 per cent. Inversely, 98 per cent of cases were completed within 100 weeks. Some 500 work days were used to dispose of those cases. Simply put, a system that fails to dispose of more than half of all cases within six months of the date of the offence cannot truly be considered to be summary justice. Summary trials are generally shorter and much less likely to take place over more than a day. That means that the proportion of summary trials in which an accused will have the opportunity to abscond part way through the trial will be smaller than is the case in relation to solemn trials. That is why, when we are considering the provision of summary justice, a main focus of concern should be the more efficient and effective delivery of that justice. Improving the speed at which summary justice operates is likely to deliver significant benefits to the victims and witnesses in at least two ways: earlier access to justice; and a reduction in wasted court appearances. Summary justice not only benefits the victims and witnesses; it benefits the court system. Swifter judicial action is also likely to contribute to reducing reoffending and deterring criminals who might have benefited from the drawn-out judicial process. Certainly, there is little doubt that delays  in the system have allowed some offenders to believe that there is little to no effective sanction against their behaviour. On the other hand, with an increased efficiency in summary justice, disposals can be more appropriately tailored to fit the offending behaviour in a shorter timescale after the offence has been committed. It has been suggested that a statutory time limit should be instituted for summary cases. Such an idea has many positive aspects. Setting a time limit of some months from when a person is charged with an offence within which the case must be brought to trial or dropped could be very effective at improving the speed of summary justice. Sub-targets could be presented within the overall target that relate to individual facets of the system, such as the time that is taken by the police to report cases to the procurator fiscal; the time that is taken by the procurator fiscal to get cases ready for court; and the ability of the court to accept such cases when they are ready. That would institute an idea of competition that would ideally propel each affected body to effectively and efficiently accomplish its course of action. Although time limits could of course be extended for unique cases that demanded an extension, the negative aspects of the idea of time limits are quite obvious. The principal beneficiaries of a statutory time limit would be neither the victim nor the witnesses. It would be the accused person who managed to delay their case by taking advantage of systemic delays to have the case dropped. There would be widespread, and very justified, public concern if large numbers of cases fell because a time barrier had been passed. There are several simple solutions to the delays in summary justice. Primarily, there should be greater and more effective communication between all levels of the judicial process. As the number of judges is limited, certain administrative proceedings could be more efficient if a judge's presence were not necessary. If a clerk were allowed to fix a date for trial in response to a written plea of not guilty, that would immediately lighten the load for the judges. To speed up the sentencing procedures for a convicted offender, the relevance of previous convictions could be taken into account to properly penalise the person in question. To bring about further efficiency, a trial could be permitted to proceed in the absence of the accused, provided that the court was satisfied that the accused had been properly cited to appear and considered it to be in the interests of justice to proceed. Given that roughly 8 per cent of accused fail to appear on the day of their summary trial, which means that more than 4,000 hearings result in a warrant for the arrest of the accused, allowing  the court to proceed in absence would dramatically hasten summary trials. It is intended to provide the courts with more extensive powers when a witness fails to appear for a court hearing, such as the power to release the witness on bail when they have been apprehended following a failure to appear. That provision, which was inserted into solemn procedure legislation in the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 by the 2007 act, would also assist in speeding up summary trials. The overload of appeals in the High Court is increasingly a factor in preventing efficient summary justice. The High Court is under a severe burden from dealing with appeals. Given that all the appeals are dealt with at the High Court, the process becomes slower. The McInnes committee recommended that there could be a separate court to deal solely with summary justice appeals. That was not in the 2007 act and so has not been established—it might be something to be considered at some point in the future. To adequately provide justice, the summary justice system should be fair to victims, witnesses and accused; effective in deterring, punishing and helping to rehabilitate offenders by taking action against an offender as quickly as possible, which maintains a link between the crime and consequence in the offender's mind; and, of course, efficient in the use of time and resources by ensuring that the flow of information between those involved in the system is streamlined. Considering the elements that have been put forward today and following those three principles will drastically facilitate a better summary justice system.

I am sure that the First Minister would like to  congratulate Strathclyde Police and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency on the drugs bust that took place in Greenock last weekend, which removed £500,000-worth of cocaine from our streets. Will he ensure that the Scottish police service and the SCDEA receive every support and the necessary resources in the fight against the scourge of drugs that blights Scotland?

I am sure that many members in the chamber are as delighted as I am at being dragooned into being here this morning. Scotland has a unique situation regarding law and the legal profession, and for that reason the large-scale liberalisation of the English legal services market is not really appropriate for Scotland. The focus on large cities and dense urban areas in England does not really apply to Scotland's geography and small-town communities, as has been highlighted by the cabinet secretary this morning. For example, England has a mass of legal services in Temple Bar in the west of London. That accumulation works well for the 7 million people in the London area, but what about the other 45 million people in the rest of that country? Having said that, restraining legal firms would be counterproductive when we consider expansive legal services and their positive impact on the economy. Our challenge is to encourage the large firms in Scotland while ensuring that individuals who require legal services are not ignored. That is why I am happy that the Scottish Government will continue to work with the industry to develop a distinctly Scottish regulatory approach that recognises specific Scottish needs, while balancing the need for small communities to have access to justice and while enabling large firms to compete at the international level, much as the Royal Bank of Scotland Group is currently doing. Allowing the free market to have complete control of the legal services market would be devastating  to many organisations and individuals in our communities. Access to justice means ensuring that those who live in Scotland can expect fair and equal access to independent legal advice, regardless of their ability to pay and their location. As the debate about centralising larger firms persists, we must always keep in mind what access to justice means. Several organisations currently provide legal advice or services to individuals who seek assistance. Although citizens advice bureaux, welfare rights advisers and community law centres provide services and assistance, many Scots still miss out. The reasons why people do not use those organisations and services vary, but people's lack of exposure to them certainly persists. People may often be unaware of the services that are available to them until it is too late. Ignorance of the organisations and services can, unfortunately, be at the root of many very sad stories. Just the other day, I dealt with a constituent who was about to be evicted from their home. Many problems surround the eviction, some of which appear to relate to the housing association. Although various reasons lie behind the impending eviction, one burning question remains: what would have been the situation had my constituent received accurate information and assistance much earlier in the process? Without even considering all the specifics, it is obvious that the situation would probably not be the same as it currently is. It is therefore extremely important that the current free legal services unit of the Faculty of Advocates—which provides free advice and representation through Citizens Advice Scotland—is widely known about, but that is not the case. Information simply was not available for my constituent. I have never been about to be evicted from a property that I stayed in. I am sure that everyone in the chamber agrees that no one should have to endure that situation. If assistance is available, people should have the opportunity to receive proper legal advice, so that evictions can be prevented. Let us assume that the constituent was a council tenant and had obtained early legal assistance from a community law centre, which had received funding from the local authority. The local authority would then be paying for the defence of the tenant who was threatened with eviction, while at the same time trying to evict that tenant. If such a case were to reach the courts, how would the local authority sort out the paradox? [ Interruption. ]

Of course, funding problems are not solely related to community law centres. The Scottish Legal Aid Board's legal funds have been significantly drained thanks to criminal cases. I welcome the fact that normal citizens can obtain legal aid, but I am sure that everyone in the chamber feels as I do when they pick up a newspaper and read about big-time crooks obtaining legal aid. That money funds their defence, instead of funding the normal citizens whom we represent. There is a big argument to be had about that, and we will have to look into it during the coming four years. On another aspect of legal aid, we must recognise that legal aid funding has increased by 7 per cent. To conclude, I reiterate the importance of legal advice and of service organisations in supplying information to individuals. However, we need to focus on raising awareness of such organisations. Helpful organisations are effectively stripped of their power to assist the public when individuals do not know that information and support exists. On that note, as I highlighted a moment ago when I mentioned a paradox, local authority funding for such organisations should be examined. When a local authority helps to fund both the prosecution and the defence, more than an eyebrow is raised. I hope that we will be able to resolve those issues and provide the Scottish public with the services and access to justice that they require. I welcome the motion, and I welcome the amendment in the name of Pauline McNeill.

This is my first speech in the Parliament that I have not written down, so it might be a wee bit more interesting than usual. However, I guarantee that my speech tomorrow morning in the debate on competition, regulation and business structures will be written down. I congratulate Paul Martin on securing the debate. The motion gets to the point, as we can tell from the list of people who have signed it. It is capable of applying to hospitals throughout the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area. As all the members who are present know, four motions and one amendment have been lodged on car parking charges and the review. All the motions express various levels of concern and highlight the charges that will be paid. I welcome the review of car parking charges and I hope that it will change the health board's position. In my submission to the review, I raised various issues. Some of them have been touched on, but I will go over them. Not every hospital car park is overflowing. Anyone who has been to a hospital for treatment or for a visit at whatever time of day will have seen that. If a hospital is close to a housing estate or housing scheme, the people who stay there may suffer if people park in the streets outside their homes. Deprivation is another issue. Not everyone can afford to pay to use a hospital car park. At times, public transport to hospitals is lacking. Not every hospital is beside a train station. Buses go to hospitals, but not everyone wants to take a bus. Not every hospital is in an easily accessed location—we have only to consider the example of the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley. For someone from Inverclyde, that hospital is difficult to access. The parking charges are not proportionate. In my submission, I considered the figures.  Somebody who earns less than £10,000 pays the same proportion of their wages as someone who earns £80,000—0.006 per cent. In the middle band of charges, someone who earns £12,000 pays 0.025 per cent of their wages, but someone who earns £29,000, which is still in the middle band, pays 0.0165 per cent of their wages. I do not agree with charging at all, but the banding structure is also wrong. Another aspect, as Patricia Ferguson highlighted, is safety and unsocial hours. Hospital workers do not have a 9-to-5 job; they work in a 24-hour industry. We must consider the safety aspect of things. Gil Paterson mentioned that, when he goes to the football match, a wee boy will ask, "Mister, can I watch your car?" I confess that I never thought of that when I put together my submission. That was new to me, but I would be prepared to consider it a bit more. We must remember that the charges were agreed in March 2007. I had hoped that the health board would reconsider its policy after the May elections, but I welcome the fact that there is a review. I hope that a positive outcome will result from the review. The review must consider how the charges would affect everyone if they were to continue and were not altered in any way, shape or form.

I bring the debate to the Parliament with mixed emotions. For my first members' business debate, I had hoped to speak about an issue of less importance and to be a touch more light-hearted. Unfortunately, that is not the case, but I am pleased that so many members from different parties are present. I particularly welcome the people from Clydeside Action on Asbestos and Frank Maguire from Thompsons Solicitors who are in the public gallery to watch the debate. Today has been a busy day for everyone who is involved in the asbestos-related campaigns, and I hope that a positive outcome for sufferers of pleural plaques can be found soon. I lodged my motion for two reasons. The first is to condemn the recent decision by the House of Lords to overturn the compensation that has been available to people with pleural plaques. The other is to show support to those with asbestos-related diseases, such as pleural plaques, as well as to organisations such as Clydeside Action on Asbestos, which campaigns on their behalf. Pleural plaques are a scarring of the lung tissue. They are an indicator that exposure to asbestos has occurred in the past. A person who suffers from pleural plaques will probably require regular check-ups and chest scans throughout their lives. Although the problem might not always affect someone's lung function, it is recognised as damage that has been done to their body. The main concern of those with pleural plaques is that it highlights the fact that they have inhaled asbestos fibres and that they might go on to  develop a more debilitating or even fatal asbestos-related disease, such as asbestosis or the cancer mesothelioma. The House of Lords decision said that the condition of pleural plaques does not lead to other asbestos-related illnesses. However, I am sure that the House of Lords has been wrong before. Those with pleural plaques obviously suffer a great deal of stress and anxiety, which is often heightened by their knowledge of former workmates and family members who have died from various asbestos-related illnesses. Each year in the United Kingdom, more than 3,000 people die because of an asbestos-related disease, and the number is predicted to rise to 10,000 by 2020. For the past 30 years or so, people with pleural plaques have been able to claim compensation from the employers who exposed them to asbestos. In many cases where the employers are no longer in business, it is those companies' insurance firms that are taken to court for compensation claims. However, that process tends to be neither simple nor straightforward. It can take many months or even years before a settlement is made. It is not only those who have worked in shipyards who have been affected by asbestos illnesses. People who have worked in construction or many other sectors of the economy were also exposed to asbestos, often recklessly, by their employers. They knew of the dangers of asbestos, but either did not inform their workers of the danger or did not provide adequate protection for them. Furthermore, it is not just the individuals who have worked with asbestos who have contracted asbestos-related diseases such as pleural plaques. Often, their families have come into contact with asbestos fibres, and they, too, have developed such conditions. Clydeside Action on Asbestos has numerous cases of wives and children of workers, who would shake the asbestos dust from their husbands' or fathers' overalls prior to washing them. They later developed asbestos-related diseases themselves. Until recently, those with pleural plaques had the right to sue their former employers for compensation. That right was not given automatically, however. Each case had to be heard in court and the employers' liability in exposing their workers to asbestos had to be proven before any compensation was granted. That would take time, especially considering that the symptoms of asbestos-related diseases can take many years to develop—often 30, 40 or more years. The decision by the law lords on 17 October now stops that. There was a question whether the ruling would apply in Scotland, but the ruling by Lord Uist on 23 October followed the law lords  ruling to the letter. That decision contradicts natural justice. It allows negligent employers to get away with poisoning their workers. It also contradicts a statement by a leading judge in a previous appeal case, who stated that pleural plaques are evidence of an injury to someone, and that such damage—even though it is internal—should not be treated any differently in law from external damage to the body, for which compensation is normally applicable. Pleural plaques are recognised by medical experts as a sign of irreversible damage to the lining of the lung, caused by a history of exposure to asbestos, which carries with it an increased risk of malignant disease, such as the deadly cancer mesothelioma. Some studies suggest that someone with pleural plaques is 100 times more likely than the general population to develop a fatal asbestos illness. That includes mesothelioma, a cancer primarily of the lining of the lung, which often results in death within 14 months of diagnosis. Not allowing someone to bring an earlier case for compensation for pleural plaques means that many people with asbestos-related diseases, including mesothelioma, will never see the end of their compensation case. By contrast, allowing them to bring an earlier case on pleural plaques would provide the background if someone was unfortunate enough to develop a further asbestos-related disease, and that would speed up the court process. That is a major reason for allowing those with pleural plaques to retain their right to seek compensation from their former employers. I offer my support to Clydeside Action on Asbestos and the Clydebank Asbestos Group for their role in campaigning not only for people with pleural plaques but for all those with asbestos-related illnesses. They cover the whole of Scotland and have clients in the traditional shipbuilding communities of Greenock, Port Glasgow, Dumbarton and Clydebank, as well as Glasgow. Asbestos-related illnesses do not affect people only in the west of Scotland; they affect people in the whole of Scotland, although there is a particular concentration in the west, the east coast and the Highlands. Furthermore, asbestos-related illnesses are not exclusive to the shipbuilding industry; they also affect people in the building trade. I commend the work of those who campaign for justice for sufferers of asbestos-related illnesses. I have met people from Clydeside Action on Asbestos on a number of occasions. I urge anyone who has been diagnosed with an asbestos-related disease to contact the group for advice and assistance. My motion notes that a draft bill has been presented to the Cabinet Secretary for Justice  seeking a Scottish solution to the matter. I know that Clydeside Action on Asbestos and Frank Maguire met the cabinet secretary today and I hope that a way forward can be found as soon as possible to help those with pleural plaques. Some people might think that this is a health matter, and in some ways it is. Others might regard it as a legal issue, and there are legal aspects to it. However, it is fundamentally a moral issue of allowing recompense to those who have been wronged. I therefore urge the cabinet secretary to ensure that the issue is given the importance that it deserves, which I believe has been the case until now, and to lodge a bill in the near future. In my discussions with Clydeside Action on Asbestos, I said that I would lodge a member's bill if necessary. However, I am sure that a Government bill would make speedier progress through the Parliament. There is consensus on this matter throughout the chamber. I look forward to justice being reinstated for victims of pleural plaques.

Last night, I told two friends that I would be speaking in this debate. They gave me rather different advice on alternative dispute resolution. One friend's advice, which might work in some but not all instances, was, "Get the person to sit down with a mediator. They should take three sheets of paper: one for a list of things they want; one for a list of things they don't want; and one for items from both lists on which there's a possibility of finding middle ground." The second friend's advice was a wee bit simpler. He said, "Why not just take a big piece of wood with a nail in it and hammer people?" When I questioned whether that was a metaphor for the approach that the Westminster Government used when introducing its housing stock transfer policy, that part of the conversation soon ended and we moved on to something else. I certainly do not advocate the stick-and-nail approach and I am not sure that the three-sheets-of-paper approach would have great success, either. However, methods exist that can be used, particularly with neighbour and community issues. As has been discussed, mediation is one method that can be used as an alternative method of  dispute resolution. It can be used for a variety of problems that affect people, such as arguments with neighbours, antisocial behaviour and arguments in the family home. I will focus on disputes with neighbours. Every member will have cases that involve antisocial behaviour or complaints about one person's actions that have a negative effect on their neighbours' lives. The ideal solution would be a simple knock on the door and a friendly chat about the issue, which would, one hopes, sort out the problem. Unfortunately, times have changed and confrontation may well be the result of that type of action. No one wants confrontation, particularly with a neighbour, so other methods must be examined. Furthermore, the courts and legal action must be the last resort in resolution, as that process can be protracted, time consuming and costly. Community and neighbour mediation is a way of resolving disputes between those who have issues. It operates with trained mediators who help both parties come to an agreement about the problem at hand and, thankfully, it has a high success rate of about 90 per cent. An independent mediator is present to facilitate the process of the two parties reaching an outcome. If a binding agreement is formed, the courts can, if necessary, ensure that a certain course of action is followed. However, people tend to comply with such agreements and thus do not need the courts at all. If members looked at the advice on websites such as Shelter Scotland's, they could be forgiven for thinking that much of the information is common sense, such as the suggestions that people should introduce themselves to their neighbours when they move into a new house or ensure that they look after any pets properly, keep an eye on children and do not play music at excessive levels. The vast majority of the population live their lives using that commonsense approach. However, it takes only one person or family to make others' lives unpleasant, which is when mediation can play a part. Research that the previous Executive undertook highlighted a few points. The largest category of disputes concerns complaints about noise from music systems, televisions and laminate flooring. The second major cause for complaint is the behaviour of children, including noise, arguing, littering, fighting and vandalism. The main referral route for most participants is via the local housing officer, who is often aware of the difficulties between neighbours. The research also showed that 61 per cent of cases that use the mediation service record a positive outcome, in that either the problem is resolved or the situation improves in some way and that, in 28 per cent of cases, agreement is reached on all the issues. People's view of the process is generally positive, although several participants stated that it was more  traumatic than expected. Although the research showed that the outcome is unsatisfactory in 39 per cent of cases, it showed that mediation is a useful and successful method of resolving disputes. From a financial perspective, mediation is extremely cheap compared with going through the courts. The same Executive research found that the average cost of handling a case was £121, which rose to £204 when face-to-face mediation was involved. The average cost of the legal cases that were examined was £3,546. The average cost of introducing antisocial behaviour orders was approximately £2,250 and for repossession actions it was £9,000. The research shows that mediation has a valuable role in sorting out disputes and that it is effective in keeping people away from the expensive and time-consuming legal system, as other members, including Bill Butler, have mentioned. That can only be good for those who are involved in disputes and for the legal system, which is already clogged up. I was totally unaware that we have just had Scottish mediation week, which ran from 15 to 19 October. I am sure that, with greater publicity of that week and of debates such as this, politicians with no legal background and the public will have greater awareness of mediation and other forms of alternative dispute resolution, such as conciliation, ombudsmen, arbitration and adjudication, to name just some.

I welcome the proposals to end the right to buy for new social housing that has been built by local authorities and housing associations. The housing supply crisis should not be exacerbated, bearing in mind the legacy of the previous Labour and Liberal Executive. The right-to-buy policy has helped—

The right-to-buy policy has helped families in Scotland but it has also caused problems. Two hundred thousand people are on council house waiting lists—

Will the cabinet secretary ensure that the SNP manifesto commitment to reviewing the right-to-buy policy is fulfilled at the earliest possible opportunity? How long will that take?

This important debate will ultimately, I am sure, lead to an improved complaints service being offered to everyone in Scotland.  The report contains some sensible recommendations. First, it recommends that the number of tsars should be cut—we currently have more than 40—and that we should have one complaints body instead. A second excellent recommendation is that the complaints handling system should be standardised, which would lead to consistency across all sectors and make the system easier for the population to use. That recommendation would lead to greater efficiencies and less duplication and could have an agreed and transparent timeframe. A similar point was considered by the Justice Committee yesterday, when we took evidence from the Scottish Police Services Authority. Those two recommendations would greatly assist the public in their quest for improved public services and a reliable and robust complaints system, and would improve belief in our public services. The quid pro quo, however, is that even greater powers would be given to the SPSO. I am sure that many members, both past and present, have taken up cases on behalf of constituents—there is a great deal of uncertainty among the public about the SPSO and its effectiveness. Many people might wonder whether it is worth bothering to complain, bearing in mind the percentage of complaints that are upheld: 1.16 per cent in 2003-04; 0.58 per cent in 2004-05; 3.13 per cent in 2005-06; and 8 per cent in 2006-07. I for one do not believe that those figures represent a true account of legitimate complaints throughout Scotland; neither do I believe that 100 per cent of complaints are valid. However, the poor figures to date beg the question whether it would be wise to give the SPSO even more powers and responsibility. Any external scrutiny must be guided by the five key principles of independence, public focus, proportionality, transparency and accountability. Without them, the scrutiny will not be worth the paper it is written on. The Crerar review has one main recommendation that sets alarm bells ringing for me: "the specific role of investigating front-line service failure should be devolved to service providers and scrutiny bodies". Let us use Inverclyde Council as an example. Only two years ago, Audit Scotland produced two reports that slated the running of that council and noted its poor leadership, lack of direction and poor service delivery. The report was a wake-up call to the Parliament and to Westminster, which had allowed the mismanagement of the authority to go on for many years without calling it to heel. The poor souls who lived in Inverclyde—I am one of them—knew that the council was a mess and a  shambles, but nobody would listen. Thankfully, Audit Scotland forced action. I am delighted to say that the new corporate management team is turning the council around, and it deserves every credit for doing so. I might not always agree with its decisions, but at least I recognise that the team is working tremendously hard and that shoots of optimism are returning. Let us imagine that Inverclyde—or any other authority—was in a mess and we gave it the power to investigate itself. If it did not know the direction in which it should be going and it was falling apart, the last thing that we should do would be to give it more powers. That would be failing on all five key principles. The actions taken to revive Inverclyde's fortunes appear to have been the correct ones, and they did not include giving those who failed more powers. I am sure that one of the reasons why the Inverclyde situation came to a head was the school reorganisation proposals that members of the previous council put on the table. They created a mess of tremendous proportions that led to allegations of social re-engineering and keeping apart less well-off and wealthier families. I am convinced that that was the final straw for many people. Many and varied complaints were sent to Inverclyde Council and the SPSO, yet the SPSO refused to meet the complainants or to respond to aspects of the final report, which backed up Inverclyde Council. I have spoken to members from different parts of the country and discovered that there is a significant lack of public confidence in the SPSO, so giving the SPSO more powers is not the correct way forward. Before there is any increase in the powers of the SPSO, fundamental questions that I would like to be answered include: whether the SPSO should accept undated documents; whether it should meet complainants; why so many people are deeply unhappy with the way in which the SPSO has investigated complaints; and whether the SPSO should consider best value when considering complaints about public services. I welcome the Crerar review, which is a useful starting point for further consultation and for improving the complaints procedure in Scotland. However, I caution against giving the SPSO more powers. I also caution against giving service providers a self-regulatory role. Good service providers would deal with the role with great efficiency, but less successful ones could, in theory, use it to hide their failings. One has only to consider the annual number of audit reports about Scottish public bodies that emanated from Westminster pre-devolution to see how easy it was for such bodies to hide failings. Audit Scotland has ensured that public bodies in  Scotland are more accountable to the public purse, which is to be welcomed. It is imperative not only that we consider the problems that might lie ahead if we gave the SPSO greater powers, but that we ask who would keep watch on it. If the SPSO is to be empowered in this way, we must have assurances that the organisation will be changed and improved and that we will not have the same problems that so many people have experienced. Indeed, Andy Kerr and Derek Brownlee have already alluded to that. Today's motion leaves the debate open. The chamber will revisit the issue, and I am sure that many members will welcome the debates that we have on it. We must grasp this chance to improve complaints procedures in Scotland, because by improving them we will also improve the perception of public bodies, as the population will have greater confidence that they are being listened to.

I was hoping that the Liberal Democrats' motion would be a bit more constructive and consensual—but, alas, no. Yet again, we have negativity from the party of contradiction. If the Lib Dems do not want shorter waiting times, I am sure that they will have even fewer MSPs in four years' time. Everyone in the chamber, apart from the Lib Dems, wants shorter waiting lists and, indeed, no waiting times at all. Taking no action has never been an option, because it will lead to an NHS that will continue to be burdened with waiting times that are totally unacceptable in this day and age. This morning, Margaret Curran referred to the extra funding given to the NHS from 1999 to 2007. Although everyone welcomes that additional money, the public wonders whether it has been wisely spent and whether the NHS is any better as a result.

Not at the moment. I am surprised that the Lib Dems have lodged a motion that opposes improvement in the NHS. Thankfully, though, the motion also highlights their  position on patient rights. I believe that patients should have rights; obviously, the Lib Dems do not. Their scaremongering about a lawyer at every bedside is utter nonsense and simply shows their contempt for the Scottish people. No one in this Parliament with any sense believes that Scotland will end up with an American-style litigation system. Those who do, have no confidence in the Scottish people or the Scottish NHS and therefore have no place in this chamber. The motion also shows the Lib Dems' desire to grasp the privatisation of the NHS. I cannot believe that a party that was in Government until only recently is able to defend or even promote the NHS's continued privatisation.

Not at the moment.

The chamber will have to forgive me. I consider the NHS to be sacred and to be for every member of our society. The NHS in Scotland is not for sale and should not be privatised. It should be of the people, for the people and by the people.

I am sorry; I need to make some progress. We should consider the Lib Dems' poles-apart position on this matter. In Edinburgh, they want more privatisation whereas, in London, they do not want it at all. Only last September, after the Labour Party conference passed a motion against their Government's policy of even more privatisation, the Lib Dem MP Steve Webb said: "The recent announcement that there is to be no limit on the involvement of the private sector in the NHS will alarm the vast majority who do not want to see the health service privatised." The London Lib Dems are against privatisation, but their Scottish branch wishes to embrace it.

I am sorry; I need to make some progress.

I am sure that every party in the chamber, except the Scottish branch of the Lib Dems, is able to highlight many examples of Lib Dem hypocrisy. They have this reputation for being nice, fluffy and cuddly, but, as today's motion proves, they are cynical and hypocritical and, apart from allowing the people of Scotland to have a referendum on independence, will say and do anything to get into power. Unfortunately they were successful for eight years. However, this  year, thankfully, the Scottish population saw through their deceit and voted accordingly. This year's SNP manifesto pledged to reduce waiting times and introduce a patients' rights bill. We believe that by the end of 2011 no patient should wait longer than 18 weeks from GP referral to treatment; indeed, as the Labour Party's manifesto contains a similar policy, I would have thought that it would support the SNP in this matter. As we all know, hidden waiting lists were the unspoken truth of the previous Administration. I will not labour that point, but I think that patients should have real rights and shorter waiting times. The SNP Government will introduce the same kind of patients' rights legislation that, as various members have already pointed out, has been a success in Norway. The Norwegian system gives patients rights to information, rights to individual plans, rights to medical records and special rights for children. Who in the chamber does not want such rights for themselves, their families or their constituents? The Scottish branch of the Lib Dems wants privatisation, but the London branch does not. The Lib Dems do not believe in giving patients rights, because they think that that will lead to a "litigation culture". Moreover, they have no confidence in the Scottish people. What is the point of them? As they obviously have no confidence in Scotland, why should Scotland have any confidence in them? Nicola Sturgeon recognised that, despite its many failings, the previous Administration made some progress in reducing waiting times. The SNP Government has been big enough to highlight that, and it simply wants to make continuous improvements to help Scotland's patients and the NHS as a whole. In that light, I urge every member to back the Government's amendment.

Do the cabinet secretary and Scottish ministers accept the problem of underfunding in local authority planning services? If so, what will he and ministers do about it?

Is the Lord Advocate confident that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service has the capacity to deal with major cases, bearing in mind that, as she pointed out earlier, it has to operate under severe time constraints?

Members will have various experiences of the drugs problems in Scotland and in their local communities. I certainly hope that the new SNP Government can build a consensual approach to tackling the issue. The problem of drugs abuse is shocking. On 24 July, the Daily Record had a report in which it quoted Professor Neil McKeganey and stated that 50,000 people in Scotland are on heroin, 22,000 are on methadone and we have only 300 places for residential treatment. Christine Grahame mentioned some of those figures earlier and the minister highlighted other statistics. The problem is vast. It is obvious that every stakeholder should get involved in the fight against drugs misuse. To follow the consensual approach, I point out that I am not averse to some policies in the other parties' manifestos for the recent election. The Labour Party suggested providing a wider range of drug treatments that are tailored to the individual, making it easier to seize assets using the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 and reinvesting drug  dealers' money in the communities that are hardest hit by drugs. Labour also said that it would not shy away from taking children away from drug-misusing parents for their safety and well-being and that it wanted to take into account the wider family in rehabilitation programmes. Some of those proposals are laudable. I am also keen on the Conservative policy of putting £100 million into tackling drugs. Obviously, I stood on an SNP platform, with SNP policies such as developing a national drugs commission; increasing by 20 per cent the funding for drug treatment and rehabilitation programmes; increasing access to abstinence programmes; dedicating £10 million to drugs education in schools; and increasing support services for the families of drug addicts and the families of those who misuse alcohol. I hope that some of those policies are included in our national strategy. I am happy to have a broader, non-partisan approach to continuing the struggle and, judging from what has been said so far in the debate, I think that that is true of other members. In the run-up to the election, I visited the Haven rehabilitation centre in Kilmacolm, which opened my eyes. I was humbled by the success stories that I was told. Of the people who go to the Haven, 65 per cent come out rehabilitated and drug free. That success rate means that the blight on our communities from drug abuse is reduced and people go back into society to play an active and positive part in our communities. I was told one story that I am sure has been replicated throughout the country. The Haven has a graduation ceremony for those who go back into the community. When one individual who is now clean and back in the community attended the ceremony, his family, including his child, were there, which was the first time that he had seen his child in about eight years. When drug addicts become clean and get their lives and families back together, that is a major achievement for them and for our society and communities.

I am sorry, but not at the moment. I live in Greenock in Inverclyde, an area that has well-documented drugs problems. Duncan McNeil and I are fully aware of the devastating effect that drugs have had in Inverclyde. I may not always agree with Duncan's comments on drugs, but I know that he wants Inverclyde to be a better place and that he wants a successful outcome in combating the problems and challenges of drug abuse. Combating drug abuse will help Scottish society immeasurably. It will help those drug addicts who want to be clean and want to get their lives back in order and it will help our communities  to live in a stronger Scotland, where criminal activity perpetrated by drug addicts is reduced and where our citizens can live in a safer society.

Will the member give way?

I congratulate Murdo Fraser on lodging an interesting motion that is positive and negative at the same time. Up to the reference to the 2008 Beijing Olympics, the motion is positive and I cannot fault it. I also realise that holding the Commonwealth games in Glasgow would be good for Glasgow and Scotland. It is unfortunate that the same tired old attitude that has held Scotland back for generations comes to the fore in the remainder of the motion. I respect the fact that every party in the Parliament has its own agenda. The Conservatives are not afraid to show their unionist credentials in their official title. It is fortunate that I see Scotland as having more confidence in itself and as able to represent itself as a normal independent nation that participates in world events. Even though I am yet another Scottish nationalist who is England born, I consider myself to be Scottish and I cannot for the life of me see why stifling Scots' ambition is a core belief of the unionist parties. Anyway, I return to the motion, which is just an appetiser to sweeten Scotland to back the 2012 London Olympics. Its purpose is to get Scots to back losing millions of pounds of lottery money that would have been spent on projects in every constituency and region. Probably more sinister, its purpose is also to get rid of the world-famous, peaceful and party-loving tartan army by jeopardising the Scottish national football team's future. Members should make no mistake: if a football team GB is at the London Olympics, the Scottish Football Association can pack its bags and enjoy retirement. [ Interruption. ]

I realise that Scottish football is too bureaucratic, but abolishing the SFA is not the way forward. I do not know whether the Tories want to rid us of the SFA or whether they just do not realise the by-product of their wishes, but that is where we will head if a football team GB takes to the park. The London Olympics are spiralling out of control. In March, Tessa Jowell announced the financial estimates for the Olympics of £5.3 billion to cover building venues and infrastructure, £1.7 billion to cover the wider regeneration of the Lea valley area, £2.7 billion for the additional contingency fund, £600 million for security and policing, £800 million for VAT and £400 million for elite sport and Paralympic funding. The total is a massive £9.345 billion. Added to those costs is the cost of staging the Olympic games, which is estimated at £2 billion. Thankfully, that is to be met by the private sector.  It is distasteful in the extreme that lottery funding is to be used to subsidise a project that clearly will never break even, never mind make a profit. Given the funnelling of lottery money from Scotland to an event in London that will have few tangible benefits for Scotland, I must ask why we Scots must help to subsidise the event. When voluntary groups and charities come knocking on the door of and lobby every MSP for more resources because their lottery funding has been slashed, what will members say? I was delighted that England hosted Euro 96 successfully, although the competition was frustrating yet again for Scotland. I sincerely wish the London Olympics every success, and I will cheer on individuals to win, as I have done for many years, not because of their nationality but because of their talent and personality. I will obviously make an exception for Scottish team members, who will be resplendent with the saltire on their competing attire. However, the London Olympics cannot be supported at all costs. I mentioned the SFA and the tartan army. As a foot-soldier myself, I will never support a football team GB. I am Scottish and I want Scotland to compete on the world stage. Even if a team GB were for under-23s only, it would not stop the Union of European Football Associations and FIFA arguing for one British team at every future tournament. Who could blame them? The precedent would have seen set. Members should make no mistake: a football team GB would be the first step to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland losing their football independence and being subsumed by the English Football Association. It would also be the first step to Scottish football becoming a backwater, as the money would dry up and even fewer kids would have the chance of making the grade at the highest level. In 1908, when the Olympics were first held in London, Scotland competed in its own right. Why cannot that happen again in 2012? I urge the Parliament to back Stewart Maxwell's amendment.

I, too, welcome Nicola Sturgeon and Shona Robison to their jobs as Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and Minister for Public Health. I am sure that they will do a tremendous job. I also welcome the debate and Nicola Sturgeon's announcements on the review of the free personal care policy and the increase in payments for personal and nursing care in care homes.

Okay. I am sorry. The health of the nation, including that of our senior citizens, is of paramount importance. I am sure that Nicola Sturgeon's announcements will have a longer-term positive effect on delivering the key policy of free personal care, which was backed by every party that is represented in the chamber. I am delighted that the SNP Government is again delivering on its manifesto pledges—as we all know, quite a few manifesto pledges have been dealt with in recent weeks. I am sure that all members want the free personal care policy to be a success and that they have been concerned by reports in the media in recent years about poor-quality care and a lack of funding. I am also sure that they will want to address the varying interpretations of "care" by local authorities that have been reported. I sincerely hope that any review of free personal care establishes recommendations that are workable and can be implemented. Free personal care is about more than just providing a level of health care to people. For those who live in the community, it is about allowing senior citizens to have independence and freedom. It is about preserving dignity and providing assistance in equal measure. For those who live in care homes, it is about ensuring that the care that they receive meets their needs and enables them to live a comfortable and happy life. I, for one, believe that our senior citizens deserve the dignity and respect that the introduction of free personal care was meant to safeguard. It is important to ask why there has been a continual struggle by senior citizens to have their rights highlighted and brought into the public eye. They do not feel that they have been listened to or taken seriously. Many activities have taken place that have helped our senior citizens, and those should be welcomed. However, providing pre-election gimmicks only exacerbates a delicate situation. The introduction of free personal care was lauded  as a positive step towards reducing pensioner poverty, which is a reality in Scotland. Free personal care was never going to eradicate that problem, but it was seen as a major step in helping our senior citizens. We must ask ourselves what has gone wrong with the policy and how it can be fixed. Every member will have received a policy briefing from Help the Aged, in which major concerns are highlighted. The use of waiting lists by local authorities is an issue that struck me. If local authorities have used waiting lists as has been reported, it is imperative that that is investigated. It must be examined whether not enough funding was given to local authorities; whether it was underestimated how many people would require free personal care; or whether money for free personal care was directed to other services by local authorities. A further point that needs clarity is the charges for the preparation of food. I spoke to a couple of experienced SNP councillors about today's debate and asked them about the experiences that had been highlighted to them. Their main point concerned the preparation of food, which Keith Brown and David McLetchie have spoken about, and they stressed the need for clarification of the rules. Up to half of Scotland's local authorities have charged for that service, although some local authorities refunded the money that they had charged after they were challenged. That highlights to me the fact that there is a major problem with, and a lack of clarity about, the current rules. I do not believe that local authorities have been duplicitous. I do not believe that any local authority wants to be classed as operating against the spirit of the legislation. I am sure that every local authority would welcome a clarification of the rules and further legislation if that is required. A further issue that should be highlighted is the withdrawal of the attendance allowance. After the introduction of free personal care, £30 million to £40 million was withheld by Westminster. It is important that that issue is redressed. Devolution was established to allow the Scottish people and the Scottish Parliament to introduce domestic policies for Scottish issues. The introduction of free personal care was such a policy. I think it unfair, therefore, that people who receive free personal care have been punished because the Parliament introduced a policy with such a fine objective. I am sure that the current Westminster Government will be a bit prickly when the Scottish Government raises the matter with it. I welcome the announcement of the review, which will be chaired by Lord Sutherland. I also welcome the increased payments for personal and nursing care in care homes from April 2008. We  cannot allow the policy to continue under a cloud and expect the problems to go away. The decision by the SNP Government to review the policy will, I am sure, be welcomed by every member and every party.

I speak today as the first member of my family to have entered the murky world of politics. Thankfully, they are still talking to me. The support that I have received from my family and friends has been steadfast, and for that I will be eternally grateful. My only sadness is that my father is no longer with us to see me making my maiden speech. The debate on whether Scotland should be independent will continue even after independence has been achieved. I welcome an honest and open debate about Scottish independence. However, today's debate is about Scotland being wealthier and fairer. I want to highlight issues that could make Scotland a wealthier and fairer nation for everyone. Scotland's devolved status clearly limits the improvements that we can make. However, people should not doubt that the new Scottish Government will continue to improve the lives of the people of Scotland. Today's debate should be welcomed by everyone in this Parliament. I stay in Inverclyde, and I am sure that the 1,700 small businesses in the area would welcome the introduction of the small business bonus scheme, under which 1,300 small businesses in the area would pay no rates at all and the other 400 would pay less than they currently do. That would be a massive boost to those companies and the local economy. If those savings were reinvested by those companies, as some of them undoubtedly would be, how many more jobs and opportunities could be created? Being wealthier and fairer covers many aspects of life, not just small business. A fairer method of paying for local services, with the scrapping of the unfair council tax and its replacement by a local income tax, will also improve the lives of many people. I am sure that that will be debated long after today's debate is over. Education is a third and extremely important aspect of being wealthier and fairer. Wealth does not necessarily mean only financial benefits. A wealthy nation is a well-educated nation. The new Scottish Government must ensure that all children have access to a world-class education system. An education system that offers boundless opportunities for every child entering the school gates will repay Scotland a thousandfold. I am delighted to say that, in Scotland, I am not alone in that belief.  Given that that is the case, I must highlight an issue that is of great importance to the community in which I live. The previous Liberal Democrat-run local authority proposed plans to invest in the fabric of Inverclyde schools. I am sure that I am correct when I say that most people were happy that those plans were produced, as Inverclyde schools had been bereft of funding for many years because of the decisions of the previous administration. However, the plans have proved to be explosive, not only because of the public-private partnership/private finance initiative funding element, but because of the reduction in the number of schools from eight to five. The proposals also mean that the new schools will have fewer facilities than the schools they replace and that the largest school will be built on the smallest site. Further, costs have risen from £80 million to £200 million. As if that is not bad enough, I must also point out that the inability of the new schools to cope with their school rolls will result in secondary school pupils being educated in huts. I am sure that members agree that the points that I have just highlighted—and they are only the tip of the iceberg—are disappointing and require further scrutiny before the plans are accepted as being the way forward. It is, therefore, astounding that the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Scottish Executive agreed to the proposals in April 2006. Public opinion is still massively against the proposals, and it is incumbent on the new council to engineer new proposals. It is also incumbent on MSPs representing Inverclyde to highlight the failings of the proposals to the new Scottish Government ministers. Scotland needs a wealthier and fairer way forward for everyone. The damning statistics from Inverclyde prove why that is vital for future generations: 39 per cent of the Inverclyde population is economically inactive; 17 per cent of the working-age population claims income support; 22 per cent of people have a long-term illness, health problem or disability; and 21 per cent of children live in a household in which no one is in employment. Further, in 2001, 38 per cent of adults had no qualifications. Scotland has a long way to go to improve the lives of everyone who lives here. Areas such as Inverclyde can only benefit from a new approach and new policies. I am sure that the new Scottish Government will act accordingly and will step up to the mark to make Scotland wealthier and fairer.