I am pleased to take part in the debate, as it is important that we highlight the issue in Parliament. As we know, human beings have always had a propensity for indulging in substances that can change our state of mind to introduce euphoria, hallucination or relaxation. Young people in particular can be tempted by their curiosity to try out new experiences and are often less risk averse than many of the rest of us. Some drugs agency workers have told me that, with substances that are not illegal, there is the added incentive that use or possession of them will not attract a criminal record. Therefore, some people think that the reduction in the use of illegal drugs might be due in part to the increased use of new psychoactive substances. It is unfortunate that experimentation has become much more dangerous in recent years, due to advances in two areas: chemistry/biochemistry and information technology. When I was a young undergraduate chemistry student, chemists knew that they could mix certain reactants together under particular conditions to produce a pharmaceutical substance, but the exact mechanism through which the reaction took place and how it affected the brain and body and the consequent physiological and psychological effects were not well understood. Over the past 40 years there has been huge development in knowledge about the mechanisms of chemical reactions, which means that compounds can be tailor made. There is also knowledge about how parts of compounds bind to receptors in the brain, and their effects. That means that whole families of compounds that have particular physiological and psychological effects can be fairly easily produced. As the minister said, advances in information technology mean that when the substances have been produced they can be sold online to individuals anywhere in the world. Given the use of bitcoins and other alternative forms of payment, it is extremely difficult to control sales. The exponential development of knowledge therefore makes the control of so-called legal highs very difficult. I very much agree with the minister that the term “legal high” is not in any way helpful and makes substances sound innocuous. People think that something that is legal must be safe. The preferred terminology—new psychoactive substances, or NPS—is far more accurate. New psychoactive substances have been developed to mimic the effects of illegal drugs. They are marketed in ways that bypass legislation, with no product warnings to consumers about possible side effects as there would be for prescribed medication, and no guarantee of product purity. As the minister said, new psychoactive substances were implicated in the deaths of 47 people in Scotland in 2012 and are thought to have contributed directly in 32 of those cases. The UK Government has responsibility for banning and classification of illegal drugs and considers drugs on a case-by-case basis. It recently banned the hallucinogenic NBOMe and Benzofury, which are ecstasy-type substances. More than 200 substances have been banned since 2012. However, whenever a substance is banned, a similar substance can be designed and produced to take its place In December, the Home Office announced that it will undertake a review that could lead to changes in UK legislation. An option that is under investigation is the automatic ban on drugs that are substantially similar in chemical structure to illegal drugs. However, the solution might not be as simple as it sounds, given that some substances that are medically useful might be similar in chemical structure to some illegal drugs. Too strict a definition might constrain research into potentially useful new legal medical drugs. Countries that have adopted such a measure have made exclusions for food, medical and other products. Of course, it is unfortunate that provision for exclusions can create loopholes. Products are often marketed as something other than new psychoactive substances, such as plant food or bath salts. I understand that the UK Government is looking at legislation in Poland and the Republic of Ireland that attempts to control the internet sale of such products, with regard to their safety and their use as a drug—although how the substance is used ultimately depends on the purchaser rather than the seller. Whatever legislative proposals come out of the UK review—and none of the suggestions that I mentioned will be easy to implement—education and increasing public awareness will be crucial. A simplistic just-say-no message will not succeed. It has not succeeded in the past and it probably will not succeed with new psychoactive substances. The purpose of our amendment, which I hope that the Government will accept, is to reinforce the message that anyone who is tempted to indulge in new psychoactive substances needs to be aware of the dangers that are posed by some substances and indeed other substances that might be present, having been produced at the same time. The term “legal high” is misleading and dangerous. These are not cosy, legitimate products, which make people feel good; they are pharmaceutical compounds that have been deliberately manufactured to bind to receptors in the brain and simulate the effects of illegal drugs. They are as dangerous as those drugs, both psychologically and physically. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime produced an informative report, “The challenge of new psychoactive substances”, which goes into a lot of detail, including chemical structural detail. Despite that detail, the report notes that many of the substances contain unfamiliar molecules and that research on most new psychoactive substances is very limited.

That is absolutely correct. There will always be other substances in these products. They might not be active but we do not know that, and because we have no control over them, we have absolutely no idea of what else is in there as well as the active substance. Synthetic cannabinoids, for example, are functionally similar to the controlled cannabis derivatives, and their side effects can include cardiovascular problems and psychological disorders; some might lead to seizures and irregular heartbeat, and some might be carcinogenic. Cathinone is a derivative of the khat plant, and it is sometimes called meow meow. I used to wonder why, but I know now. It has a similar effect to amphetamines, but little is known about the mechanism of its action, and its side effects can include agitation ranging from mild to extreme psychosis. It is often marketed as bath salts or plant food. Ketamine, which has been around since the 1980s, is used as a tranquiliser for horses. If anyone has ever seen a half-tonne horse go down after having taken ketamine, they can imagine what it does to a human being. It can also affect long-term memory. There are a number of variations on mescaline, which is powerfully hallucinogenic, and some of them can have very long-lasting effects. They can cause agitation, seizures, and liver and renal failure. Piperazines were developed initially as antidepressants but were later found to have similar properties to amphetamines. They were taken off the market because they were liable to abuse, but they are still being sold as pep or party pills and they have similar effects to amphetamine and methamphetamine. There are also plant-based substances. People might think that something that is herbal or a plant is okay, but as we know a number of plant-based compounds can contain a cocktail of toxic alkaloids that can have extremely serious psychological and physical effects. We are debating the issue in the shadow of a terrible event that took place at the weekend when a young woman tragically died after taking a particular type of product. That product—if it is the one that it is thought to be—might have contained para-methoxyamphetamine, which is five times as powerful as ecstasy; as we know, many people have been hospitalised through taking that. The message that went out before was about the danger of illicit drugs, and the message that needs to go out now is that the so-called legal drugs are just as physically and psychologically dangerous as the illicit drugs that they have been designed to emulate. The user does not know what else they might contain and what dangers are presented by those compounds. I was very pleased to hear from the minister about the steps that the Scottish Government is taking to spread the message that these are not benign, legal substances. They are hard core and physically and psychologically dangerous, and that message has to go out. Young people who might be tempted to take these substances need to understand the dangers that they might encounter in doing so. I move amendment S4M-08950.1, to insert at end: “and promoting public understanding of the dangers of NPS”.

I share the disappointment expressed by others that Scotland’s share of pillar 1 direct support has decreased and that the convergence uplift has not been passed on to Scotland, as it was our low level of payment per hectare that enabled the UK as a whole to qualify through averaging less than the 90 per cent threshold. As has been said already, there was unanimity last October across the parties that Scotland should receive the entirety of that funding, and it is regrettable that the UK Government failed to listen even to its own party colleagues in Scotland on the issue, even if it was not prepared to listen to the Scottish Government or indeed to the Scottish Labour Party. Although the payment per hectare in Scotland in 2019 will be less than half the UK average, it is important, as Claire Baker has said, to remember that, although those payments are low, the average payment per farmer is £25,751 per annum. That is five times the EU average and some £8,000 higher than the average in England.

If the member listens to how I develop this argument, he may be more in agreement with me than he thinks he is at the moment. The disparity arises because we have some very large landowners in Scotland. Indeed, I know that the environment minister has commented recently on the need for further land reform. The spread of funding shows a huge increase between the ninth and 10th deciles of about £200,000, with the 10th decile—that is, the top 10 per cent—being awarded more than twice the amount that the second-top decile receives. Andy Wightman has estimated that the top 10 per cent of farmers received almost 49 per cent of the total subsidy in 2011. More than two thirds of the subsidy has gone to the top 20 per cent of farmers. There is clearly a considerable imbalance, with large landowners receiving large amounts of subsidy. I know that many farmers support a cap on payments. The NFUS is strongly opposed to it, but a cap would provide a mechanism to release funding for rural development. I am interested in the cabinet secretary’s views on that matter because, as colleagues have already said, environmental organisations feel that the cabinet secretary has been a little timid in his proposed transfer of 9.5 per cent to pillar 2, given that a maximum of 15 per cent is permitted. Pillar 2 can support measures to combat and mitigate climate change, to address loss of biodiversity—which is a problem in Scotland, as it is across Europe—to improve water and soil quality, and to invest in community development. Although I think that I can understand the Government’s argument that the low payment per hectare to Scotland by the UK Government made it more difficult for the Scottish Government to match the commitment to pillar 2 that was shown, for example, by the Welsh Government, capping the funds that are received by Scotland’s largest landowners could have released funds for other measures.

Sorry. We are tight for time and I have already taken an intervention. I would also welcome the cabinet secretary’s view on another issue that I raised at the last CAP reform debate—I do not think that he answered me at the time. At its convention on 28 June last year, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities took the view that at least one third of the EU funding in the 2014 to 2019 period, including our SRDP and maritime programmes in Scotland, should be allocated to local authorities for distribution—I stress that it would be for distribution, not for the local authorities to keep for themselves. COSLA made that request in anticipation of the possibility that direct payments would decrease—quite rightly as it happens. Clearly, it would have the greatest impact on rural areas. If the SRDP were sufficiently flexible, local councils and others—through a community planning mechanism—would be able to mitigate the effects of pillar 1 reductions by supporting local economic and social programmes tailored to the needs, priorities and opportunities of specific areas. I am a passionate supporter of devolution—as many in the chamber will know—but, for me, devolution is not simply about the appropriate powers being passed from Westminster to Edinburgh; it is also about passing powers from Edinburgh to more local levels when that enables decisions to be made that are more sensitive to local needs and priorities. Scotland’s rural and coastal communities are diverse. Even within a region such as Dumfries and Galloway, the challenges and opportunities vary between areas. Langholm’s issues are different from those of upper Nithsdale or Eskdalemuir or the Mull of Galloway. The rules around the allocation of funding from national organisations cannot always be flexible enough to reflect those differences, whereas allowing local authorities and others to use a community planning approach to a basket of EU funds that might include structural, rural and maritime funding streams has the potential to ensure that those funds are used to complement each other and to achieve maximum value for money. Community-led development, skills and needs training, business support and measures to tackle deprivation could be co-ordinated to complement each other and to deliver maximum effect where that is required. As I said earlier, I raised COSLA’s proposal in the CAP reform debate on 3 October last year—I do not know whether there have been any meetings between local and national Government since then to further explore the possibilities. I reiterate that I am not suggesting that local authorities should hang on to those funds—rather that they should be enabled to distribute a portion of the EU funding streams, which could operate alongside their own community grant schemes and reinforce those schemes. However, I note that the current consultation SRDP has a number of elements along those lines. We know, for example, that LEADER has always been intended to be bottom up and partnership based, and I note that it is suggested in the consultation document that rural and coastal areas will be invited to submit a local development strategy and that partnerships—including larger towns with a local rural hinterland—are also being encouraged to do so. Finally, as other members have done, I reject the notion that Scotland would automatically receive a better deal as an independent nation. The CAP receipts to Scotland would have to be renegotiated, and agreed by all 28 member states if Scotland becomes independent. It is true that Scotland has lost out on pillar 1 support, but a yes vote this year will not change that one little bit.

The cabinet secretary will be well aware of the anger over the announcement in Dumfries, where 34 civilians will lose their jobs or be relocated to Glasgow. Does the cabinet secretary not agree that that is compulsory redundancy in all but name? Does he not also agree with many people in the area that the closure should not take place without full consultation? Does he agree that Police Scotland and the Scottish Police Authority ought to defer their decision until they have undertaken a full consultation with the public, members of the police force and members of civilian staff?

Only one part of the legislative consent memorandum is contentious and that is the proposals on forced marriage. In starting, I think that it is important to make the distinction between arranged and forced marriage. I am sure that every member of Parliament is appalled by forced marriage, and wishes the law in Scotland to be effective in preventing forced marriages from taking place, and in bringing justice to women and men who have been subjected to it in the past. Members of the Justice Committee took evidence from a range of witnesses, all of whom shared the desire that legislation should act both as a deterrent and as an avenue for justice to victims. However, they did not all share the same views on the LCM. Members have been contacted by Scottish Women’s Aid, Hemat Gryffe Women’s Aid and Shakti Women’s Aid, which have outlined their concerns over the LCM’s content. As we have heard, as recently as 2011, the Scottish Government attempted to address the problem through the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Act 2011. That introduced civil forced marriage protection orders which, if breached, can result in a criminal proceeding and prosecution carries a maximum sentence of two years. The Istanbul convention, which the UK Government signed in 2012, requires that forced marriage be a criminal offence. The situation is different from that in England and Wales, where breach is not criminalised. The three organisations that I mentioned have argued that the difference in Scotland meant that our legislation was compliant with the Istanbul convention and the LCM was not necessary here. Obviously, given the nature of the organisations involved, that was not because they wished in any way to excuse forced marriage but because they were concerned that the threat of criminal prosecution on report would deter victims from coming forward. It is often the families of victims who have forced marriage on the victims, and victims may be very reluctant to report family members who then become exposed to criminal procedure. Amina—the Muslim Women’s Resource Centre raised concerns in written evidence to the committee that victims might be less likely to seek an annulment if that could result in their families facing criminal charges. Scottish organisations also felt that they had not had the opportunity to contribute to consultation on the issue other than to the committee, unlike sister organisations in England and Wales that had taken part in the UK consultation. It is interesting that the majority of those organisations agreed with the proposals in the LCM. As the key argument was initially about whether Scotland was compliant with the Istanbul Convention, a legal opinion was sought by the committee. I assume that committees are not bound by the ministerial convention on legal advice, so I disclose that the opinion received was that Scottish legislation is not compliant. The Law Society of Scotland, despite many reservations about the LCM, also agrees that the Scottish Government is obliged to take steps to ensure compliance. Therefore, we require a change in our legislation, too. That leaves us with two options. One is to sign up to the LCM; the other is to pass our own legislation. The committee has asked the minister to consider whether it would be practicable for the Government to introduce its own legislation. As we have heard, if we do the latter, that will take longer, so would it be a problem if we are not compliant within the rest of the UK’s timescale? I think—I do not quite remember where I got this information from—that the idea is that ratification will take place in 2015. It is a dilemma. We have concerns about how the proposals might work in practice. All witnesses to the committee stressed the need for cultural change and education, citing, for example, the route by which domestic abuse became recognised for the abhorrent crime that it is. Will the legislation act as a deterrent, or will it make victims less keen to come forward in case relatives face criminal charges? We have been told that the civil process will continue to run in tandem with the criminal process but that it does not have to be the victim who reports the criminal offence. However, what would happen if the victim wants to go down the civil forced marriage protection order route but someone else reports the forced marriage as a criminal offence? I would be interested to hear more about what the Lord Advocate has in mind to ensure that the wishes of the victim take precedence. However, I am reassured to hear that the Lord Advocate is looking into the matter. The other major change is that the maximum sentence for the criminal offence will be seven years instead of the current two years. That change is being introduced in Scotland without consultation. The alternative would be for us to introduce our own legislation. I initially thought that that could be done using the emergency procedure, and I was quite attracted to that option. However, on thinking about that further, I am not convinced that the end result be very different from what is proposed in the LCM. Moreover, our experience of emergency legislation is that we often do not quite get it right in the long term and subsequent legislation is required to rectify the deficiencies. Furthermore, would the emergency route enable the consultation to take place that witnesses felt had not taken place with the LCM? The likelihood is that we would either adopt very similar proposals to those contained in the LCM or take the risk of passing different legislation through the emergency route only to repent and amend at a later date. The other problem is that, if our legislation appears to be more lax than that in the rest of the UK, what message would that send about Scotland’s attitude to forced marriage? How would that affect the cultural change in Scotland that we all agree is required? Therefore, it is with some considerable reservations that Labour will support the motion on the LCM.

A number of important points have been brought out in this very brief debate. Sandra White made the point about the need to treat forced marriage as we do other abusive practices within the family. The LCM is obviously intended to bring the deterrent of a significant maximum sentence. I agree very much with the concerns that have been expressed that there was virtually no consultation on the increase of the sentence from two to seven years. The committee was advised about the slow process of domestic abuse being recognised as a serious offence and the role that legislation and prosecution can play in effecting cultural change. Of course, the current legislation will send out a message about the unacceptability of forced marriage. As was mentioned in the debate, evidence from Police Scotland indicated that there have been seven forced marriage protection orders, and I note that most of those cases came to light through child protection procedures. However, support organisations will have received considerably more inquiries about help that did not result in formal FMPOs. It is therefore difficult to assess the impact of the current legislation, which has been in force only for a couple of years. The minister advised the committee that evidence from other countries shows that, where forced marriage is a criminal offence, it results in increased reporting, but we do not know what will happen in Scotland. John Pentland stressed the need to comply with the international obligations and the need for consistency. I recognise Margaret Mitchell’s point that many aspects of Scots law are different from the law in England and Wales. However, theoretically at least, where members of an extended family live in different parts of the UK, a legislative framework that was perceived to be less stringent in respect of forced marriage could result in family members in Scotland becoming the instigators of forced marriage because the penalties were less. Christine Grahame mentioned the problems with the LCM process. I think that we were all frustrated by that, and indeed by the number of amendments that kept coming up. Returning to a point that she made, I note that the problem is the way in which the civil and criminal systems work in tandem. That will have to be resolved in the UK as well as in Scotland if we are required by the Istanbul convention to make forced marriage a criminal offence, so we need to concentrate on how the problem can be resolved in practice. If a legislative route is required, the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill is nearing completion of stage 1 in the Parliament and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has signalled that he will lodge amendments to end automatic early release for some crimes, for example. I would think that, if required, there is an opportunity to amend the bill further to ensure that we take account of victims’ rights to have their desires prioritised when it comes to whether cases go through the civil or the criminal process. I was interested in Malcolm Chisholm’s points on ratification. Interestingly, none of them was raised in evidence to the committee. The issues came up today, in this debate. I am not absolutely clear whether the legislation is required to be in place prior to ratification or whether it would be appropriate to consider it after ratification, so I, too, will be interested to learn the minister’s view on that issue. This has not been a particularly happy experience. I do not think that any member of any party has been particularly happy about the way in which the LCM has proceeded but, to use a phrase that I do not particularly like, we are where we are. We are possibly now at a stage at which the only way forward is to agree to the LCM but to take the necessary advice on what safeguards must be put in place thereafter to ensure that victims’ wishes are always respected.

Mr Fergusson is being modest about his singing and guitar-playing abilities, as any of us who have heard him can testify. I, too, congratulate Joan McAlpine on securing the debate. There have been motions in the past noting and congratulating the Big Burns Supper and it is good to have a debate on this occasion. Unfortunately, the start of this year’s festival coincides with tomorrow’s Cowdenbeath by-election and, therefore, the attendance at the debate is probably smaller than it might otherwise have been. I am pleased to celebrate a winter festival that, although it is relatively new, is rapidly becoming a fixture in the Dumfries and Galloway calendar. It is, of course, part of a series of cultural and heritage events across the region all year, which include the common ridings and the ridings of the marches in the summer. Dumfries and Galloway has a rich and diverse environmental, historical and cultural offering for visitors and for those of us who have the great fortune to live there. As Joan McAlpine said, Robert Burns was one of those fortunate enough to live in Dumfries, spending the last years of his life there and writing some of his most famous compositions. Where more appropriate to have a winter festival built around a Burns supper? The event was created, as we have heard, by Doonhamer Graham Main, who has a huge passion for both the arts and his native town. It is equally enthusiastically supported by his board members, chaired by Maureen Farrell, and by his staff. I, too, welcome to the chamber Councillor and Mrs Wood, who have been involved with the event over the years. The festival includes a mixture of comedy, music, theatre and variations on the Burns supper. I also noticed the burlesque Burns supper. The bard might have wanted to be there, but I was not quite sure that it was appropriate for me to attend it. I should also mention in passing that I attended a performance of “Blood Orange”, a play written by Mr Main and a number of young people in the form of a Greek tragedy. It is a hard-hitting but absolutely excellent piece of theatre and I can well recommend it. An important component of the event is community participation, with well-known performers from other parts of Scotland, such as Fred MacAulay and Big Country, and it is also a showcase for local talent and for up-and-coming young performers. As we have heard, there is also a large community event. This year, it is a carnival procession, so I will be keeping my fingers crossed. We had a lot of snow last year; I hope that the weather is not too unkind this year. I notice that this year’s programme boasts a festival fringe, with several recent Scottish films such as “The Angels’ Share” and “Sunshine on Leith” being shown at the Robert Burns Centre Film Theatre to coincide with the festival events. Brian Taylor is even holding a big debate on Friday; I do not know whether that is part of the festival or just a coincidence. The Spiegeltent made its appearance for the first time last year and was very much enjoyed. I enjoyed it myself and was extremely pleased to see it being erected again at the Loreburn car park on Monday. The Big Burns Supper has attracted support from a number of organisations, particularly from Creative Scotland, which has been supportive, and from Dumfries and Galloway council. It benefits Dumfries and the surrounding area through increased footfall at venues. It brings visitors into town and the festival website contains links to several local hotels. I hope that visiting performers and visiting audience members will come back to not only future Big Burns Suppers but Dumfries and Galloway at other times of the year, for other festivals and to enjoy the range of activities that we have on offer, including wildlife, leisure, mountain biking, walking and sailing. It also offers a good weekend of entertainment to local people. Coinciding as it does with Burns night, the Big Burns Supper marks the beginning of the Burns supper season, which can last for more than a month, as we all know. We in Scotland have to be grateful to Robert Burns for many things, one of which is the fact that he was born in January. The commemoration of his birth means that we have something to celebrate once Christmas and Hogmanay are over. Winter festivals such as the Big Burns Supper give us something to look forward to and enjoy during the dark days of midwinter. I very much hope that it goes from strength to strength.

I, too, welcome the work that has been undertaken by Malcolm Fraser and the national town centre review external advisory group, and its recommendations and key action points. It notes, for example, the need for work with housing providers in the private and public sectors to bring empty town-centre properties, such as those over shops, back into use for affordable housing. It recommends that local authorities recognise the importance of bringing residential footfall back into town centres and prioritise appropriate sites for town-centre housing development in their local housing strategies. I want to talk about Dumfries, the regional capital of Dumfries and Galloway. It has some fine historic buildings, some of which have, sadly, fallen into disrepair. The town centre, like others, has faced significant challenges in recent years as a result of the changes in patterns of retail demand; the town’s proximity to other major retail centres, such as Carlisle and, to a lesser extent, Glasgow and Newcastle; the expansion of out-of-town retail centres along the A75; and, of course, the rapid growth in internet shopping. The recession added further problems, as a number of retail chains with shops on the high street went into administration and, in addition, many of our older town centre retail properties that are not situated on the high street are smaller and older buildings, for which there has been little demand in recent years—indeed, some have changed their type of occupation because of that. Dumfries and Galloway Council has developed a number of projects to improve the public realm, including the flood prevention proposals that I raised last week with the environment minister, who is in the chamber at the moment. Charitable organisations such as the Peter Pan Moat Brae Trust, which is working on the refurbishment of the almost derelict town house whose garden inspired J M Barrie to write “Peter Pan”, with a view to creating a children’s museum, and the Dumfries Theatre Royal Trust, which is undertaking work to regenerate Scotland’s oldest working theatre, will also make outstanding contributions to the town’s future and its tourism offering. It is disappointing, therefore, particularly in the light of the task force’s key recommendation on bringing empty properties such as those over shops into residential use for affordable housing, that the Scottish Government rejected Dumfries and Galloway Council’s recent bid to the town centre housing fund. The bid’s title, “Dumfries: Living over the Shops”, reflected the key recommendation that I referred to earlier. It involved partnership between three private sector owners on three refurbishment projects to provide much-needed affordable housing and high-quality commercial space. It would have provided seven new flats over commercial units in the town centre to be let at mid-market rent, four new commercial units suitable for local independent traders and one improved commercial unit. The properties would have been available for affordable housing.

I am grateful to the minister for that because I believe that it is a very good project. It is in line with the Government’s own mid-market rent property strategy and has planning consent for the refurbishment of two of the sites while the third is expected to receive planning consent by March. If the bid had been successful, construction could have started in March and would have been completed by October. There is a lot to like about the proposals and I would like to hear more about other sources of funding. At the moment, the seven projects that were successful involve registered social landlords and local councils refurbishing existing properties for which they already get affordable housing supply funding, and it looks a wee bit as though the funding is being used to supplement funding for affordable housing from other sources. I have no wish to denigrate the proposals, but there has been a missed opportunity to support a really innovative project. If the minister is still interested in the project, I look forward to hearing more about how it can be funded pretty soon.

Murray.

Colleagues may be surprised that a member who represents a constituency in the south of Scotland should be taking part in a debate on a bill brought to Parliament by the City of Edinburgh Council to resolve a particular issue that prevents plans for a new school from progressing. However, I was brought up in Edinburgh and I have very pleasant memories of Portobello, particularly of the outdoor swimming pool with a wave machine, which most people here are probably too young to recall. However, that is not why I am speaking in the debate. I am interested in the issues around the common good land and the reasons why the bill was introduced. The obstacles preventing the plans for the new Portobello school from progressing have arisen because of what seems to be an anomaly in legislation that was passed over 40 years ago. Common good funds are the assets and income of the former burghs of Scotland: portfolios of land, property and investments that by law exist for the common good of the inhabitants of the former burghs, not of the residents of the current local authorities. Title to common good assets is held by successor local authorities, so the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 transferred the assets that were held by the town councils to the new district councils that were formed in 1975; after that, the Local Government etc (Scotland ) Act 1994 transferred them to the new unitary authorities in 1996. Some town councils transferred the town’s common good assets in 1975 to new trusts in order to prevent them from being taken over by the new district councils, and properties were purchased or gifted to communities for specific purposes or for the benefit of a particular group of residents. Some common good assets were owned by burghs that did not have town councils prior to 1975. The situation is very complex, so knowledge of and documentation on common good properties is often very poor. For example, a number of properties in Dumfries were recently found to be common good properties, which people had not been aware of previously. Portobello park is part of an area of land that was purchased by the council in 1898. That was two years after Portobello, which had been a burgh in its own right, was incorporated into Edinburgh by an act of Parliament, so the common good property is owned by Edinburgh rather than by Portobello. As we have heard, the land was sold on specific conditions, which has resulted in its having inalienable common good status. The Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 enables inalienable common good land to be disposed of with the consent of the Court of Session or a sheriff, and it enables the court to impose conditions that other land should be substituted for the land that is lost. However, as we have heard, inalienable common good land may not be appropriated—that is, used for an alternative use by the council. Although it can be sold off, it cannot be used for alternative uses by the same council. As we heard from Cameron Buchanan, that was not a problem before 1996 because education was the responsibility of the regional council, to which the land would have been disposed, but with unitary authorities the council is no longer able to do that. The bill seeks to address the anomaly that, in the case of this particular asset and this particular council, the inalienable common good land can be disposed of but not appropriated by the local authority for another purpose. There is no doubt in my mind that the proposed school, which will be a community school, will be of benefit to the community. I am sure that that will be the case. I note that the bill does not circumvent the planning process in any way. However, there is still an issue about whether the 1973 act needs amendment, because we could have a whole load of other bills of a similar type coming along unless we look at the principle and the problem with that act. It will be interesting to see whether the proposed community empowerment (Scotland) bill contains a proposal on the matter. Andy Wightman and James Perman undertook a review of common good land in 2005, and they recommended that we need a new common good act because the Common Good Act 1491 is still the main act that governs the use of common good land, obviously amended by all the subsequent bits of legislation. It may be that we need a consolidation bill on common good property.

The debate has been rather more interesting than its title might have suggested it was going to be. Indeed, it has concerned a number of issues on which, as we have heard, many MSPs have received representations over the years and on which the Parliament passed legislation to try to address some of the complex matters that are involved. When I said that we were having the debate, Jenny Marra confessed to me that it was partly her responsibility that post-legislative scrutiny had been undertaken on the matter. The inquiry—during which the committee took evidence on how the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 works, what its unintended consequences have been and how it could be improved—is a welcome instance of post-legislative scrutiny. The act concerns the obligations that appear in the title deeds when properties are purchased. Those are the sorts of things that buyers ought to read but often do not. Many of us are often not aware of what is in our title deeds until it is too late and consequences have arisen. I was not a member of the Justice Committee when the inquiry took place and, although I was a member of the Parliament when we passed the act, I struggled to recall the detail of its contents. Therefore, I am grateful to the clerks for the informative notes provided to me and, indeed, grateful to all the members who took part in the debate, as I have learned something from their speeches. Title conditions are a complex area of law and, although many home owners are affected by the burdens contained in their title deeds, there is, in general, a lack of knowledge and understanding of how the legislation works, what the obligations mean in practice, and whether and how they may be altered. As the debate has demonstrated, the issues that were raised in the inquiry affect many people and, in particular, can have a big effect on home owners. As the convener said, the committee focused on the provisions in the act relating to the appointment and dismissal of property factors and the operation of the land-owning maintenance model. That is an arrangement whereby a private company owns the green space and, in some cases, facilities such as the sustainable urban drainage schemes—SUDS—and requires neighbouring properties to pay for the servicing of those areas through burdens in their title deeds. I will reflect on the points raised in the committee’s inquiry and the debate and on the Government’s response to the committee’s report. Section 53 of the 2003 act gives neighbours the right to enforce real burdens against each other where there is a common scheme and the properties are related. However, the committee heard concerns about how that works in practice. Jenny Marra, in particular, reflected on the uncertainty that purchasers have about who might have the right to enforce burdens on them and the confusion that that can cause during the purchase of properties. A key recommendation of the report was that section 53 be referred to the Scottish Law Commission for further consideration, as it seems to have created difficulties and confusion. Several members commented on the fact that it has not been a satisfactory provision. The committee welcomes the Scottish Government’s commitment to refer the section to the Scottish Law Commission, and I hope that the referral will allow the issue to be resolved. On land maintenance companies, the committee heard a lot of evidence about the complexity of the law on the land-owning maintenance model. It is clear that many members are familiar with the problems that their constituents have faced and with the fact that the model can be highly unsatisfactory as far as home owners are concerned. They have no choice of service provider—the developer selects the service provider—and little recourse is available to them, as it is sometimes uncertain whether the provisions of the 2003 act apply. In contrast, the Property Factors (Scotland) Act 2011, which was introduced by my colleague Patricia Ferguson, was drafted to include arrangements on standards of service and reference to the Homeowner Housing Panel, but I was interested in Sandra White’s comments, which indicated that factors ignoring decisions by the Homeowner Housing Panel might be causing problems. Although legislation is not forthcoming “at this stage”, the Government’s commitment to provide a code of practice on dismissing and replacing land maintenance companies is welcome. Codes of practice may work well, but they may not, and I am pleased that the Government has committed to reviewing the code’s effectiveness after three years and that it has not ruled out legislating in the future if that is necessary. The committee also expressed the view that local authorities could have a role to play in overseeing the maintenance of green space around developments, and that has been reflected in the Government’s commitment in the long term to review the role of local authorities. I understand the frustration that some members have expressed about the fact that certain areas are maintained by the local authority, whereas similar areas in newer housing estates are not—that is frustrating for residents, too. However, I think that we can understand why, at the current time, local authorities might be reluctant to offer their services, given the financial restraints that they are under. Alison McInnes made reference to the fact that there is little that owners can do to seek redress when the service that maintenance companies offer is not satisfactory. I think that the committee will be disappointed that the Government does not intend to fund a mediation service, which relates to the point that Alison McInnes made. The Homeowner Housing Panel and the small claims procedure are useful mechanisms, but the committee took the view that a transparent mechanism needed to be established. Perhaps the Government could reflect further on that. The committee heard of concern about the operation in practice of section 63 of the 2003 act, which sets maximum time limits on how long a manager burden can last. In particular, when a property is purchased under the right to buy, that period is 30 years, which seems to be a long time. The minister mentioned that the Government intends to abolish the right to buy, but there will still be a number of people who have bought their property fairly recently who will have quite a long period of time to run on those contracts. It remains a concern that a two-thirds majority is required to switch property factor and that that is creating a barrier to switching. Patricia Ferguson and other members mentioned absentee landlords and commented on the fact that contact does not ensure co-operation. Mention was also made of the situation in which developments are abandoned before they have been completed, which can give rise to problems in switching factors. On data protection, the Government’s commitment to consult the Information Commissioner’s Office prior to providing guidance to the property management sector should help to clarify matters, as should the Government’s intention to provide more information on its website and guidance, and to include that in the code of practice for property factors. The committee raised concerns about lack of accessibility to the Lands Tribunal, which relates particularly to the objector’s liability for expenses. I was interested in the point that Roderick Campbell made about whether that might be of import to the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill. Christian Allard referred to the need to change the culture. It is clear that there is a need to promote a culture of mutual responsibility in relation to the maintenance of common areas, and I am sure that the committee will be interested to learn what further steps the Government intends to take, following its commitment to examine the issue in future. The committee’s inquiry has been helpful in raising issues to do with the operation of the 2003 act. I also believe that, as other members have said, it demonstrates how useful post-legislative scrutiny of acts passed by the Parliament can be. It is unfortunate that the current legislative workload of the Justice Committee makes it extremely unlikely that it will be able to undertake similar post-legislative scrutiny in the near future. However, I am sure that other committees will take up that opportunity, and I hope that today’s debate and the issues that the Justice Committee raised in its inquiry will stimulate them to undertake similar exercises.

1. Happy new year, Presiding Officer and all colleagues. To ask the Scottish Government how it will respond to recent flooding in Dumfriesshire and across the country. (S4T-00555)

The minister will be aware that Dumfries is the largest town in Scotland that suffers from regular flooding but has in place no flood prevention scheme. Dumfries and Galloway Council is, at long last, considering the details of a flood prevention scheme for the Whitesands area and is likely to require an estimated £9 million of additional funding for its implementation. Can the minister advise whether and when any central funding will be available?

I thank the minister for that information. The minister referred to the flooding in my office. At least I had several hours to prepare my constituency office for the flooding on 30 December, courtesy of the SEPA flood warning system, which covers Dumfries town. Constituents in other parts of my constituency, such as those in the 21 households that were flooded in Kirkconnel, were not so lucky, because their areas are not covered by the warning scheme. Given the increased incidence of flooding events in Scotland, will the Scottish Government consider funding the Scottish Environment Protection Agency to extend its full flood warning scheme?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the decrease in new social housing completions will have on housing supply. (S4O-02734)

That may be so, but social housing completions are down 14 per cent on last year and housing association and co-operative completions are down 25 per cent. What will the Scottish Government do “to get the affordable housing programme back on track,” in the words of the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations?

I, too, would have difficulty in supporting the amendment as it stands. I said at stage 2 that I thought that in order to give it more flexibility, any definition would be better made by regulation than in the bill. I am also concerned that the definition in amendment 25 is rather tight. For example, a victim can be “a prescribed relative ... of a person who has died”. However, it could be argued that the partner of someone who has been raped is also, in some senses, a victim. The definition in amendment 25 is too tight and we are unable to support it.

Amendments 1 and 2 aim to ensure that the specific needs, wishes and interests of children are taken into account by those persons who are required to fulfil the functions that are set out in section 1. Although much has improved in the experience of children as victims and witnesses in the criminal justice system, and despite there being significant good practice, cases still arise in which children and young people and their families say that their experience of the court case has traumatised them all over again. That could be avoided simply by asking children and young people how best to communicate with them and where they would like to meet. A lack of active involvement by children and young people in selecting the most appropriate special measures for them is commonplace. Even when that does happen, it is often the case that not enough time is given to enable a child victim or witness to give an informed view of what might work best for them. One key area of concern is the provision of information. Evidence shows that more than 60 per cent of people in the youth justice estate have difficulties with speech, language or communication. That makes it even more important for information to be made accessible. There is currently no requirement on anyone involved in criminal proceedings to communicate with children and young people in formats and ways that best suit their needs. That might include sending text messages about the date of a trial, sending out leaflets or emailing them links to videos about going to court, rather than just sending the person a lot of written material. The purpose of amendment 3 is to require that, when “setting and publishing standards” in respect of victims and witnesses who are children, that must be done “in such a way that the welfare of a child is of paramount consideration.” Many child victims and witnesses complain about the long waits for trial, which are often upwards of 12 months. In some cases, they can even be as long as two years or more. That means a large part of a child’s life characterised by waiting in uncertainty. Children do not know whether their case will be in a few weeks or a few months. Court dates are often set and then cancelled at the last minute, which causes disruption and a protracted wait. The test of a child’s welfare as being of “paramount consideration” already exists in Scots law, under section 16 of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995. In any case, the welfare of a child needs to be balanced with other tests and, in particular, with the interests of the accused and those of justice generally. Guidance on the matter already exists, to be applied in criminal proceedings in which children are involved. Amendment 3 is proportionate and necessary to ensure that the welfare test, which already applies to social work and other agencies working with vulnerable children, also applies to the justice authorities. Amendments 26 and 27 define the meaning of “child” in the relevant sections. During stage 2, the cabinet secretary expressed the view that specific reference to the needs of child witnesses should not be contained either in the general principles or indeed in the standards of service. I have therefore also lodged an alternative amendment, amendment 7, which introduces similar provisions in a separate section, After section 2A. I have lodged amendments covering both sets of provisions for Parliament’s consideration this afternoon. In the week when the Parliament has paid tribute to Nelson Mandela, I provide a further quote from him: “There can be no keener revelation of a society’s soul than the way in which it treats its children.” Throughout the bill’s passage, we have heard about some shocking experiences of children in our criminal justice system. The Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004 has made a significant difference, and the enactment of the bill before us, and its principles, will make a further difference. We also seek to improve practice. Amendment 7, like the previous amendments that I have spoken to, seeks to provide for the needs, interests and wishes of child victims and witnesses through the provision of guidance on how to fulfil duties under sections 1 and 2 in particular. At stage 2, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice argued that the aim is for the bill to have universal application and that it would be inappropriate to single out any specific group, but children are special and they require to be treated specially in our criminal justice system. Had the cabinet secretary’s argument held sway, we would not even have had the 2004 act, never mind many of the excellent measures that are being brought into law today. Amendment 7 seeks to ensure that the legal duties in the bill will be given effect through guidance that tries to take a more child-centred approach. That fits with Scottish ministerial priorities in other policy areas, and we should introduce such an approach in the criminal justice system as well. I move amendment 1.

In order to see justice done, children against whom horrific offences have been committed are required to engage with a system that was designed by and for adults. They are among the most vulnerable children in our society and they deserve to be given the support that they need to give evidence and participate in the process effectively and in a way that minimises the impact of that engagement. The court process can be confusing and intimidating to adults, never mind to children. It is essential that consideration is given to the most appropriate way in which to provide information to a child victim, whether that be orally, in writing or through other forms of communication. Child victims and witnesses must be empowered to participate as fully as possible and to understand the process and procedures that they will be exposed to during investigation and trial. Our courts are adversarial and the process is combative. Where children who may well already be traumatised by the crime that they witnessed or that was perpetrated against them are involved in the court process, their welfare must be made the highest priority. Amendments 1 to 3, with the definitions in amendments 26 and 27, remain my preference. I believe that they would enshrine the rights of child witnesses and victims in the most appropriate parts of the bill. However, the cabinet secretary continues to believe that they would not, so if amendments 1 to 3, 26 and 27 are defeated, I will press amendment 7.

At stage 2, the cabinet secretary lodged an amendment introducing section 2A, which requires the annual publication of a report assessing whether standards have been met and containing a forward look on how they might be met in the year ahead and sets out the ability of ministers to prescribe information by way of a negative instrument. At the same time, I lodged a similar amendment. In our view, Mr MacAskill’s amendment contained a serious omission, not contained in my own, in not requiring consultation as far as is practicable with victims and witnesses in the preparation of that report. Amendments 4, 5 and 6 seek to rectify that omission. Amendment 4 seeks to require those persons mentioned in section 2 to consult as far as is reasonably practicable victims and witnesses in making a report on the meeting of standards. That was the principal difference between the cabinet secretary’s successful amendment and mine at stage 2. Amendment 5 seeks to require Scottish ministers to consult the persons required to set and publish standards when making regulations that prescribe the information that must be contained in reports, while amendment 6 seeks to enable standards to be revised to meet the needs of victims and witnesses and to require publication of those revised standards. These amendments seek to ensure that victims and witnesses are and continue to be involved at all stages of the development of standards and in the reporting on how those standards are met. After all, victims and witnesses are supposed to be the legislation’s central concern and omitting them from that process seems to fly in the face of its intentions. I move amendment 4.

Amendments 32 and 33 are similar to amendments that were rejected by the cabinet secretary and the committee at stage 2. I lodged them at the request of Children 1st, which has issued a briefing supporting the amendments; they are also supported by Barnardo’s, Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People, Scottish Women’s Aid, YouthLink and several other organisations that were also unconvinced by the cabinet secretary’s arguments. The amendments would give a child under the age of 12 the opportunity to make a victim statement should they wish to do so, and should they have sufficient age and maturity. If a child was not able to make a statement, one may be made on their behalf by a parent or other qualifying individual. A child who made a statement under section 19 would have to be provided with whatever support they required to be able to do so. There is considerable support from a range of organisations for amendment 32, and I thank those organisations for circulating a separate briefing. The justice secretary suggested that we had set the appropriate age for children making a victim statement in their own right at 12. However, criminal investigations and proceedings might involve children as young as three giving evidence in their own right as victims and witnesses—often with not nearly enough support, I am sorry to say. Surely it is contradictory to allow only children over the age of 12 to give a statement about the impact of crime on them. We could have a situation whereby a child of six gives eloquent and compelling evidence as the victim of sexual abuse that helps to convict an accused, and is then denied the opportunity to tell the sheriff or judge about the impact of that offence on them. Previous legislation acknowledges both the importance of children making their views known when decisions are being made that affect them and their rights to do so. Examples include the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004 and the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2009. There is also precedent that provides for children to be supported in doing so: section 122 of the Children’s Hearings (Scotland) Act 2011 provides for advocacy for all children and young people who enter the hearings system. My amendments also seek to define more clearly who should make a victim statement on a child’s behalf. They would ensure that, first, those who have parental rights and responsibilities would do so or, if the parent or carer was unable to do so—or if it would be inappropriate for them to do so—the qualifying person list whose purpose is to determine who would make a victim statement on behalf of an adult who lacks mental capacity would be used. The definition in the bill of a carer updates that which first featured in the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003. However, that definition is designed for the specific purpose of distinguishing between those who provide unpaid care as family members for a person with support needs, and paid carers. To use that definition in this context would be inappropriate. Children can be affected by horrific crimes both directly and indirectly. They deserve to be allowed to make the court aware of that in their own words and in their own way. Where they need support to do so, whatever their age, it should be provided. My amendments would enable a relatively small number of children who have been impacted—often by a terrible experience—to ensure that what they say about the impact of crime on them is heard and listened to by the justice system. I move amendment 32.

Amendments 32 and 33 are supported by Aberlour Child Care Trust, Barnardo’s, Children 1st, Clan Childlaw centre, Professor Fiona Raitt, Includem, Janys Scott QC, LGBT Youth Scotland, the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, Parenting across Scotland, Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People, Scottish Women’s Aid, Together Scottish Alliance for Children’s Rights, the WAVE Trust and YouthLink Scotland. If members do not listen to me, I ask them to please listen to them. They support amendments 32 and 33.

Amendment 19 seeks to require the court to ascertain the victim’s views prior to making a compensation order and prohibits the making of such an order when the victim has notified the court that they do not wish to receive compensation from the offender. Victims of sexual offences, for example, might find payment in compensation for the offence perpetrated against them abhorrent. When I lodged a similar amendment at stage 2, the cabinet secretary felt that it might imply that all victims would have to be consulted even if a compensation order was not being considered. In light of that comment, I have reworded that amendment. MSPs will have received a briefing from Scottish Women’s Aid and Rape Crisis yesterday evening supporting this amendment and stating their belief that, as the bill stands, section 20 has the potential to cause further harm to victims and that compensation orders are not a helpful disposal in domestic and sexual abuse cases. Neither the bill nor the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 contains any provision for the victim’s views to be the deciding factor in whether a court makes or does not make a compensation order against the offender. If the intention is that compensation orders should be considered in every case, the victim must have the right to have their views heard. An offender in a domestic or sexual abuse case could use such an order to continue to exert a degree of control over the victim by manipulating or delaying the payment. In many cases, the victim might want no contact with her abuser and certainly will not want money from him. Moreover, a compensation order might be made as an alternative to another disposal, which again might cause the victim great distress. I move amendment 19.

I thank the cabinet secretary for accepting the amendment and other members for their support. Amendment 19 agreed to. Section 21—Restitution order

Scottish Labour will support the bill at decision time. We believe that the bill will make a positive difference to the experience of victims and witnesses during criminal investigations and proceedings. However, as others do, we believe that the bill could have gone further. I am pleased that my amendment 19, which will enable victims to object to the awarding of compensation orders, was accepted. The justice secretary said that it was not absolutely necessary, but others including Scottish Women’s Aid and Rape Crisis Scotland felt that the bill, as it stood, could make matters worse for victims. I am therefore pleased that Parliament unanimously accepted their view and agreed to the amendment. I also welcome the cabinet secretary’s reassurances to my colleague, Graeme Pearson, on amendment 17 on the rights of victims to make statements in forms other than the written form. I am sure that attention will be paid to how that reassurance is reflected in practice and the experience of victims in that regard. The reassurance is now on the record and is therefore available to victims and their representatives, which is always helpful. However, I am disappointed that other amendments that received support from and, indeed, were proposed by organisations that represent victims and witnesses were not accepted by the cabinet secretary or by Parliament. The bill as it will be passed does not recognise the rights, needs, and wishes of child victims and witnesses, in particular. As I said earlier, the justice system has been constructed by adults for adults. Investigations and court processes can be confusing and frightening for adults, so how much more frightening are they for children? Assurances have again been put on the record that might assist people who work with children in those circumstances, but can they guarantee that some of the practices that children have endured will no longer persist? For example, Children 1st has advised us of failures to keep children informed about progress and of failures to ensure that they understand the process and procedures that they are going to go through. They need to be communicated with in forms and using methods that they understand. We have heard an example in which police called at a school to talk to a young man about the court process that he was going to have to go through, so what had happened to him was made public to his schoolmates. The police visit did not take place at a time or place that he wanted, and he did not necessarily want everyone else to know about the ordeal that he was going through. Children’s rights and wishes need to be respected, but that does not happen often enough. We do not come up to scratch on that. We are also disappointed that amendments that would have improved provision of information and support for victims and witnesses were not accepted, as Graeme Pearson and Margaret Mitchell have said. Graeme Pearson described a number of personal issues and real experiences of victims who have been let down by the system, and who have had to continue to repeat their experiences to a variety of people when there have been failures to pass information back to them about what is happening in court. We have all heard about such things. I am sure that no MSP who has served for any length of time has not heard first hand about such victim experiences. Amendments to protect the victims of sexual crimes from having their medical and sexual histories revealed to the public in court were also, unfortunately, rejected. I am sorry that that happened. In particular, even if there was a problem with detailing a pilot in the bill, surely the justice secretary could have offered to run a pilot without its being in regulations. Surely that could have been the Government’s response to the suggestions, but it was not. As Margaret Mitchell pointed out, a pilot would have cost very little in comparison with the amounts of public money that are currently being used to argue one side of the independence referendum debate. The stage 2 amendments on access to restorative justice seem to me to have been watered down. However, I understand that concerns on the issue were expressed by organisations that represent victims of domestic and sexual abuse. I hope that the watering down in amendment 8 today does not signal a retraction from the purpose of the amendment, which I strongly supported at stage 2. I am sorry that the amendments that sought to enable children below the age of 12 to be allowed to make a victim statement were rejected, even though a long list of well-respected individuals and organisations have supported that. As my colleague John Pentland said, the Government seems to be reluctant to accept amendments that are offered by members of Opposition parties, even when they have attracted widespread support from representative organisations. It feels a little bit like either our faces or our politics do not fit when it comes to some amendments. Duncan McNeil made an important point about the experiences of adult survivors of sexual abuse and the disappointments that they have encountered over the years. That really must not continue, so I echo his request for updates on progress. The justice secretary said in his opening remarks that this was “the end of a stage on the journey” and not the end of the journey. I agree with that, because in our opinion the bill is unfinished business. Labour members hope—indeed, they intend—to return to the issues that were rejected today. We also intend to monitor how the bill’s provisions work in practice. We hope in the future to have the opportunity to make subsequent improvements.

I am pleased to close for Scottish Labour in this short but important debate on Scotland’s national action plan for human rights and concur with members’ comments about the appropriateness of its following the tributes to Nelson Mandela, who did so much to fight for human rights and, later on in his life, the rights of children. I welcome the opportunity that is provided by the debate to promote human rights in a positive way. Alex Johnstone referred to the public perception of human rights; unfortunately, some right-wing politicians and certain sections of the UK media that support them have promulgated the view that human rights are all about the rights of bad people. Some have actually said that our obligation should be abandoned; indeed, I thought that Theresa May herself had suggested as much. It is also unfortunate that media attention on human rights focused this weekend on those of a convicted criminal—in this case, a murderer’s claim to conjugal rights—and his successful application for legal aid instead of, on this day in particular, reflecting on why the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948. That arose because of the horrendous abuse on the grounds of religion, race, nationality and sexual orientation that had taken place in Nazi Germany—a country not unlike Britain; a western country, like us, but one in which human rights were abandoned—and the recognition that it was necessary to provide globally recognised definitions of the rights to which all human beings are entitled. The development of Scotland’s national action plan is in line with the United Nations’ recommendation that national action plans should be developed and adopted by each country. The recommendations were made as part of the Vienna declaration and programme of action some 20 years ago. Although it is good that Scotland is the first country in the United Kingdom to have developed a national action plan, we are all a little bit behind the game in taking 20 years to do that. However, I congratulate the SHRC for facilitating the process of development of the plan. It was developed through the participation of a range of organisations, which identified three outcomes: understanding and empowerment of individuals to claim their rights; tackling injustice and improving lives; and delivering on our international obligations. I was disappointed with the minister’s contribution in her opening speech, because she seemed to use it to talk about the constitutional arrangements within the United Kingdom. As John Finnie said, the relevance of the national action plan is not about whether people vote yes next year. In fact, I felt that the minister’s speech was self-congratulatory in tone in talking about the wonderful legislation that we have passed in this Parliament. It was recognised by those who developed SNAP that the plan was not all about legislation. We pass good legislation in the Scottish Parliament, but when it comes to translating that into embedding human rights in the provision of public services and individuals’ understanding their rights, that is where we do not do so well. Just talking about what a wonderful job the Government is doing was not taking the opportunity of the debate to discuss what is actually in the plan. The amendment makes a practical suggestion regarding how we can protect today the rights of a group of women in Scotland, but Malcolm Chisholm referred to a load of other actions that need to be taken regarding the rights of women and girls. I am sure that some of those actions will be discussed next week. The implementation of SNAP is a process of cultural change, making respect for human dignity central to public services and applying a person-centred approach. That approach in service delivery is not new, because there are already developments in health and social care services, such as personalisation, which seek to involve clients in the design of the services that they receive and to allow them to choose and have control of the delivery of the services. However, this is an opportunity to think about the extension of the principle into other areas of public services. As I said, the public perception seems to be that human rights is about protecting criminals. However, it is obvious that victims also have human rights, and a person-centred approach has implications for our justice system. We will discuss some of that in the context of the Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill later this week. However, a person-centred human rights approach has implications for not just the court system but the system of policing in Scotland. Some of those will need to be reflected on as we go forward. Health and Social Care Alliance Scotland made the point in its briefing that the human rights approach has important implications for the delivery of health and social care. People with disabilities and long-term conditions should be treated as human beings rather than just as people who suffer from a condition that requires health and social care interventions; and the outcomes that they desire for themselves must be taken into account when services are designed. Alison McInnes made an important point about the rights of mental health patients. Jamie Hepburn referred to Community Land Scotland. I was quite interested in its observation that a human rights-based approach has implications for land reform and the community right to buy, in protecting not just the human rights of the landowner but the rights of communities to have access to land and to create a sustainable future for themselves. I will touch very briefly on human rights for workers. My colleague Neil Findlay would have liked to take part in the debate to talk about blacklisting. There was not time for that, but blacklisting is a human rights abuse in that workers have been denied employment because of their political views or trade union activity, or because they have raised health and safety concerns. We need to take ownership of the progress of SNAP and we need to stand up to those voices that portray human rights as a negative issue. We also need to be proactive in discussing the situation of the rights of convicted criminals. We must have a mature and sensible debate about that rather than just react to things that the media brings to us. Overall, I welcome the publication of SNAP, which has vital implications for not just how we legislate but, crucially, how public services are designed. Most important of all, perhaps, is that for the approach to be successful it will require cultural change.

First, let me correct the typo that seems to have made its way into the motion. The sum of money that was awarded to Food Train by the Big Lottery Fund’s investing in communities supporting 21st century life grant was actually £590,474 over five years, not £59,474 as shown in the Business Bulletin, so we have 10 times as much to celebrate this afternoon. I had hoped to be able to welcome Scott McGill, who is the befriending project manager, Dr Rob Wells, who is the chair, and Sue Greig, who is a volunteer, to the gallery but I suspect that they have been prevented from coming by this morning’s severe weather. Nevertheless, I am delighted to bring this debate to Parliament and to celebrate the continued success of a social enterprise that began its existence in Dumfries and Galloway in 1995. It now provides services to older people in six local authority areas in Scotland, and it has ambitions to expand further. Food Train started out 18 years ago after the Dumfries elderly forum conducted a survey of older people in the town to ask what services would make a real difference to their lives. Many respondents stated that they struggled with their weekly grocery shopping, so Food Train was born. It was chaired by the redoubtable Miss Jean Mundell, who left no stone unturned or elected representative at any level unlobbied in her determination to get her beloved project firmly established. Jean Mundell’s efforts first focused on Dumfries and Galloway Council, but with the advent of the Scottish Parliament, she soon had Susan Deacon and then Malcolm Chisholm in her sights as they were holders of the office of Minister for Health and Community Care. That effort paid off in 2002, with a four-year grant from the Scottish Executive better neighbourhood fund, which enabled staff to be recruited to develop the service. Ever since, Food Train has been well supported by successive Scottish Administrations. Indeed, support from the current Scottish Government has enabled the service to be rolled out to other parts of Scotland. Jean Mundell was awarded the MBE for her services to the community in 2006. She received the award from the Lord Lieutenant in her hospice bed the day before she died at the age of 80. She is in company with Kirkpatrick Macmillan, the inventor of the bicycle, and JM Barrie, the inventor of Peter Pan, as one of three people to be selected by community vote to be commemorated by a portrait bench in Dumfries. If anyone wants to see that, it is on the Heathhall to Cargenbridge section of the cycle way. It is not far from my house, so I am often able to go and see her when I walk my dogs. When I told Food Train’s chief executive, Michelle McCrindle, that we were holding this debate today, her response was that, if she had still been alive, Jean would have been chuffed to bits to hear Food Train being debated in Parliament. I think that she would have been even more chuffed at the success of Food Train today. It has been in receipt of a plethora of awards, including the Queen’s jubilee award for voluntary service, and it now operates in West Lothian, Stirling, Dundee, Renfrewshire and Glasgow, as well as in Dumfries and Galloway. Every month, more than 500 volunteers give more than 75,000 hours of their time to support 1,250 older people with 3,000 grocery deliveries, supported by 20 grocery store partners. Food Train does not only deliver groceries. Food Train extra household support also assists people in Dumfries and Galloway, and now in West Lothian, with household tasks that they find difficult, such as changing lightbulbs, defrosting the fridge or freezer, or other small tasks that can be made difficult by decreased mobility or joint problems. In Dumfries and Galloway, Food Train friends offers a befriending service to combat loneliness with phone calls, home visits, trips out, events and clubs. Currently, 100 people receive the service, with volunteers giving 250 hours of their time each month. Esther Rantzen might have launched the Silver Line the other week to great fanfare, but Food Train was well ahead of her. The recent Big Lottery Fund award will support and expand that service throughout our region to start with. It would be easy for me to talk for seven minutes about how wonderful Food Train is and how wonderful all the volunteers are. However, it is important to reflect on why its services are so necessary, and Food Train has asked me to speak about some of its concerns. The International Longevity Centre—UK report earlier this year estimated that more than 10 per cent of older people are malnourished. That equates to about 90,000 malnourished older people in Scotland. We aspire to our population leading healthier lives for longer, but unless older people are eating properly that cannot be possible for them. The third sector is particularly well placed to provide services such as those that are provided by Food Train. Co-production of services is a fashionable concept nowadays but Food Train was doing that way back in 1995. Sadly, loneliness is also a major factor in reducing the quality of life for many older people as partners and friends die and families live too far away for regular visits. Reduced mobility creates difficulties in getting out of the house and having to give up driving isolates people, particularly those who live in rural communities where there may be little or no accessible public transport. Projects such as Food Train friends can make a real contribution, bringing friendship and fun back into people’s lives. The improvement in quality of life is of course the most important factor, but when we think about preventative spend, investment in such services can save the statutory public sector a lot of money by sustaining independent living and physical and mental health. Food Train is proud of the services that it provides, but it remains concerned that the grocery service is still available in only six local authority areas, its household service in two areas and its befriending service still only in Dumfries and Galloway. As Michelle McCrindle said in her email to me, the frailties of ageing do not discriminate, whether someone lives in Portpatrick or Portree. Food Train continues to advocate for a single standard of social care for older people and it also provides a wonderful example of how the third sector can provide the services that make all the difference. It is only about a year ago that my colleague Claudia Beamish, who is here beside me, hosted a reception in Parliament for Food Train, which was attended by many MSPs—more than are here in the chamber today, I think. We were all very impressed to learn not only about what Food Train had achieved in Dumfries and Galloway—those of us who represent the area were aware of that—but about its ambitions to do the same for the whole of Scotland. I look forward to Food Train’s continuing success and say well done to Food Train on getting the award. I look forward to it receiving further awards and being able to expand its services throughout Scotland to provide that support to our older communities.

Does the minister have any estimates of the extent of the use of legal highs in Scotland? We hear statistics that indicate that drug use is reducing, but are we absolutely confident that that does not just represent a switch from illegal drug use to so-called legal drug use?

I welcome the opportunity to debate the findings of the independent report on opioid replacement therapies, although it feels as if it has been a long time coming. It was announced in October last year, and at that time the recommendations were supposed to be produced by the spring. Nevertheless, I am pleased that we are, at last, discussing the important and often contentious issues around the treatment of people who suffer from heroin addiction. Labour members welcome the acknowledgement in the Government’s motion of the concerns that are contained in the report, which raises many important issues about how services are delivered across Scotland. I do not argue that all those issues fall at the feet of Government, but in using 11 of the recommendations to form the basis of what it terms an “immediate improvement process”, the report places the responsibility on Government to provide leadership. We feel that more urgency is required than is displayed in the Government’s motion. Importantly, the report identifies that opioid replacement therapy is an “essential” service with a “strong evidence base”. I repeat that, as the minister said, that has been verified through research in a number of countries around the world. Among the actions recommended by the report are that there should be a more co-ordinated approach from all service providers to tackle the effects of health inequality and stigma; that ORT should be offered in the context of a flexible and mixed treatment system; and that therapy should be part of a person-centred recovery programme with both the care pathway and the progress of individuals able to be objectively determined. There was clear and significant concern about the performance of alcohol and drug partnerships across the country. There is an argument that their functions need to be reviewed, as some have displayed little evidence of a real impetus towards recovery and a lack of progress towards recovery-oriented systems of care, or ROSCs, and quality assurance. The report notes that there is an urgent need to address “the lack of institutional memory” in planning, delivery and governance, which I imagine is some form of management speak for a failure to learn from past mistakes or instances of good practice. There is also a lack of accountability, including lines of accountability to the Scottish Government, and there is a need for an approach that has a track record of delivering change. Indeed, there is a lack of outcome measurement at the moment, and even the very modest SMR-25b follow-up forms are not completed for the majority of clients. Research and academic inquiry is also noted to have been poorly developed in Scotland. Our amendment focuses on the need to make real progress on the issues identified in the report, and to demonstrate commitment to that by determining a timetable for action on the required improvements that have been identified. The report notes that the average age of heroin users is increasing. Heroin does not seem to be the drug of choice of younger people—it is not seen as cool. That is good, but it may be due to the easy availability of so-called legal highs, which of course bring many dangers such as extreme psychosis and which need to be the subject of scrutiny. Perhaps we need a separate debate on that. However, the increasing age of heroin users brings with it problems, as prolonged use leads to more complex and severe physical and mental health problems, and we should not assume that current unpopularity of heroin among younger people indicates that it will eventually fall out of use. I am advised that drug popularity is cyclical and that future generations may not eschew heroin to the extent that young people do today. Heroin users do not engender much in the way of sympathy from the general public. The report noted that the UK Drug Policy Commission found “high levels of blame and intolerance” among the Scottish population and that “the fear of and the need to exclude people with drug problems were higher in Scotland than the rest of the UK”— a finding that the report describes as “sobering”. Attitudes towards medication-assisted recovery are also more negative in Scotland, and Scotland has higher rates of harm and premature death than other European Union countries have. Those rates have not fallen in the way that they have in other countries, so we have a challenge here in Scotland. In addition to stigma, the debate around drug treatments is often ill informed, with a lack of information regarding available treatments and what is meant by recovery. The lack of a shared definition of recovery is noted in the report. Although there is a definition in the “Road to Recovery” that recognises that recovery is about voluntarily moving on from problem drug use, and there is the UKDPC consensus statement on recovery, those definitions do not seem to be universally understood or accepted, and there is a perception that recovery equates to having achieved abstinence. Of course, that is the goal for many heroin users and their families, as indeed it should be: where it is possible for a user to become drug free that should be the aim, and efforts and support should be directed towards that aim, but for some it will not be possible to totally cease opioid replacement treatment, because some people are too ill ever to be able to come off medication. Before people criticise that and ask why the NHS is paying for it, I point out that we pay for the consequences of obesity, smoking and other choices that people make. This is the same issue.

I acknowledge that; indeed, I will come to that issue in my speech. The standard opioid replacement is methadone, although buprenorphine, which is also known as Suboxone or Subutox, is becoming a more common alternative. In most ADP areas only one patient in 20 is prescribed buprenorphine, although in two of our ADP areas it is one in three. Clearly, that is a clinical decision—I hope that it is not based on the fact that buprenorphine is three times as expensive. It takes longer to supervise and is easier to conceal, as it is a tablet, which can be concealed under the tongue. It is harsher on the user as he or she remains totally sober and therefore has to be psychologically and physically robust enough to tolerate its use. However, there must be something to be learned about its use from the two ADP areas that prescribe it so much more frequently. It is important that users who want to progress into recovery—and, I hope, abstinence—are offered the road most suitable for them, whether that be methadone, buprenorphine or abstinence. I want to touch on a couple of other issues in the report. The first is the HEAT target that anyone with a drug problem should wait no more than three weeks for treatment. We believe that that target needs to be refined, as it does not monitor recovery. The Scottish morbidity database reviews all clients at three months and then annually or upon discharge but, in 12 ADP areas, reviews were not followed up in more than 50 per cent of cases because data collection is not mandatory. The HEAT target should be person centred and based on recovery rather than just access to treatment. The report also pointed out that fewer than half of Scotland’s health boards can offer any access to specialist addiction psychology services. Given the problems that we have in Scotland with addiction, whether it be alcohol, smoking, gambling, eating disorders or drug abuse, I find that situation very worrying and hope that it does not indicate that a too low priority is being accorded to mental health services. An estimated £36 million is spent annually on substance misuse services in Scotland. However, the independent expert group estimates that when all the services and agencies such as justice, child protection, social services and so on are taken into account the total cost of drug addiction to the public sector in Scotland could be almost 100 times that amount, or £3.5 billion. When we are talking about a sum of public money of such magnitude, we need to get our act together to develop a more effective response to drug abuse. We must also use early intervention to support vulnerable individuals and prevent them from getting on the road to substance abuse in the first place. As Jim Eadie mentioned in his intervention, drug users have often experienced trauma, sometimes in childhood through parental drug or alcohol abuse, family breakdown, a parent in prison, the death of a key family member or sexual and domestic abuse, or poor engagement with education and social services. Many have had problematic relationships with alcohol in their early teens before moving on to misusing other substances. Indeed, some, including many of those who have left the armed forces, have experienced trauma later in life. As a result, identification of and support for people at risk of self-medicating with alcohol and drugs would save them and their families a lot of misery as well as saving the public sector significant costs across a range of services. Indeed, that is why our amendment states that the strategy should include preventing drug use from starting by identifying and supporting those who are vulnerable to its attractions. That is very important. Finally, our amendment changes the final phrase of the Government's motion. It might be the way I read it but it appears to recognise the contribution and role of the health service workforce alone and does not include everyone outside with NHS, many in the voluntary sector, who also make a vital contribution to support for and the recovery of drug users. I am thinking, for example, of the Scottish Drugs Forum, First Base in my constituency and a whole load of people in the third sector who make an extremely important contribution in a variety of ways. I hope, therefore, that members will be persuaded to support our amendment, which, as I have said, adds to the Government’s motion. I move amendment S4M-08422.1, to leave out from “the workforce” to end and insert: “everyone in delivering a recovery-oriented system of care in Scotland; supports the continued development of all those working to make recovery from problem drug use a reality; considers that the ultimate aims of the Scottish Government’s strategy should be both prevention and providing people with routes to overcome their addiction, and calls on the Scottish Government to determine a timetable to enact the improvements contained in the report.”

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the claim by the Institute for Fiscal Studies that an independent Scotland would face a fiscal gap of 1.9 per cent of national income. (S4O-02623)

Assuming for the purposes of my question that policies such as reducing corporation tax would grow the economy in an independent Scotland, growth would not happen overnight. How does the cabinet secretary propose to fill the gap in the short term? Will that be done through increased taxation, increased borrowing or reduced public spending?

I am pleased to speak in the stage 1 debate on the bill. I am not a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, but I have opposed discrimination that is based on people’s sexual orientation since I was a student, which was about 40 years ago. That was in the bleak and inhospitable place that Jim Eadie just spoke about, where sex between men was still illegal, where lesbianism was not recognised because—apparently—Queen Victoria did not think that it could happen, where same-sex partners rarely dared to express their affection publicly, where coming out to the family was a major difficulty for many gay people, and where the popular terminology that was used to describe gay people was derogatory and offensive. I found all that to be totally abhorrent, as were apartheid and racial segregation, which existed at the same time. I have had many representations on the bill from constituents, many of whom have been supportive and many who oppose the bill. To constituents who have asked me to vote against the bill because it redefines marriage, I apologise, but I do not agree with their arguments, and I will explain why. To those who told me that they will not vote for me—well, that is their prerogative. The view that marriage is solely the union of a man and a woman for procreation is outdated and simplistic; there has always been a lot more to marriage than that. For monarchs and powerful families, marriage created and cemented alliances. For others, it represented respectability and the division of labour and responsibilities between men and women. Until recently, as Jim Eadie said, women were the possessions of their husbands. Marriage signified that the woman belonged to the man so that no one else could have a sexual relationship with her and the man could be sure that the children were his. In these more egalitarian times, marriage is a public declaration of love and of the intention that the relationship will be permanent. It might or might not involve children. If it does, those children might or might not be the biological children of both or either of the parents. Many of us—myself included—have been married more than once; indeed, my oldest lad was at my second wedding. Many other people have stable long-term relationships and bring up their families without feeling the need to be married. Many families consist of one parent bringing up their children with the support of relatives and friends. The bill will enable people of the same gender who want to make that public declaration of love and permanence in a religious ceremony that reflects their faith to do so. I also support the Government’s proposal for an opt-in process and I welcome the assurances that have been given. However, some of my constituents’ representations have expressed concern about possible discrimination against people of faith. The cabinet secretary talked about circulating letters to certain members; I wonder whether he could circulate that information to all MSPs so that we can offer reassurance to constituents who have been in touch with us. Other members have reflected on how far we have come in the past 40 years. If someone had told me 40 years ago that a Conservative Prime Minister in the UK Parliament would promote equal marriage, I simply would not have believed them. I am proud of Scotland’s journey, I am proud that more than 60 per cent of Scots now agree with equal marriage, and I am proud that three quarters of those who responded to the committee’s consultation also agree. As a young woman, I read books that described the experiences of gay people, including Radclyffe Hall’s “The Well of Loneliness” and Gore Vidal’s “The City and the Pillar”. They were stories of tragedy, but the story of being LGBT today should no longer be a tragedy. I remind people who say that civil partnerships should be enough of the 1976 hit by the Tom Robinson Band “(Sing if You’re) Glad to be Gay”, which, despite its cheerful title, spoke of police harassment, beatings, and insults, and ended with—I will not say the word—the b’s “are legal now; what more are they after?” Well, like most people, they want equality. I will support the bill at stage 1 and I hope that it makes its way through Parliament into legislation. It will not mean the end of discrimination against LGBT people, but it will be an expression by this Parliament of the will to treat people equally and not to discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation or the sexual identity that a person is born with. When I was young, people used to think that being LGBT was a choice, or something their mum or their school did, but people are born that way. A person who is born LGBT does not make the choice to be that, any more than I made the choice to grow to only five foot one. [Applause.]

It is just part of the glorious diversity of human beings. Legislation should treat people equally and not discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity, any more than on the basis of gender, race or faith. The Government is getting that balance right. I am pleased to support the bill, and I am so proud of the progress that we have made in Scotland during my lifetime.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the increase in crimes of violence and indecency in Dumfries and Galloway in the period April to September 2013 compared with the same period in 2012. (S4O-02586)

Since Police Scotland came into being, reported crimes of violence have risen by 25 per cent, murders have risen by 200 per cent, petty assaults have risen by 30 per cent, domestic abuse has risen by 29 per cent, dangerous driving has risen by 55 per cent and crimes of indecency have risen by 60 per cent. The cabinet secretary says that crime is at a 39-year low in Scotland. Is it at a 39-year low in Dumfries and Galloway?

The Scottish Parliament has, over the years, debated many bills that have attracted significant media and public attention. Bills have given the entitlement to permanent housing to the unintentionally homeless, banned smoking in public places and foxhunting and, more recently, addressed climate change and reformed Scotland’s police and fire and rescue services. However, I do not think that the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill is one of those that will get everyone talking. As members have already said, it is relatively uncontentious in its general principles, although there are concerns about aspects of the detail, which I will come on to. Despite the lack of major areas of discord, I found the committee’s three evidence-gathering sessions surprisingly interesting, although I cannot promise that either of my speeches—unfortunately, there will be more than one today—will be interesting to the same extent. However, I certainly thank the witnesses for their contributions. In many respects, the bill mirrors the provisions in the UK Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, which applies to tribunals in England, and was introduced for the same reasons: tribunals have evolved through separate pieces of founding legislation; there is no coherent system of review and appeal; and there is a variety of processes for appointments and opportunities for training. The bill therefore aims to bring coherence to the devolved tribunals in Scotland, and to provide opportunities to benefit from shared good practice and expertise. However, because the UK Government is not minded to transfer into the Scottish tribunals system reserved tribunals such as employment tribunals, immigration tribunals or the social entitlement chamber, the bill will apply to only a small percentage of tribunals in Scotland, as Christine Grahame said. One of the witnesses said that it was 2 per cent and another said that it was 3 per cent, so I think that is somewhere between 2 and 3 per cent. The vast majority of tribunals will remain within the reserved tribunals system. Jonathan Mitchell of the Faculty of Advocates advised us that the proposed system will apply to around 4,000 cases annually in Scotland, while 60,000 will go through the social entitlement chamber, 20,000 will go to employment tribunals in Scotland, and 10,000 will go to immigration and asylum tribunals. At the moment, therefore, we are dealing with a small number of cases. One of the issues that was brought to the committee’s attention was the fact that, as the bill will apply not only to existing devolved tribunals but—if and when they transfer—to reserved tribunals and to any new tribunals that we might decide to set up in future, it should, as has been said already, contain some form of definition of the character of a tribunal. Lauren Wood of Citizens Advice Scotland suggested that the bill could incorporate “principles to help to guide tribunals, as there are in the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 3 September 2013; c 3125.] That might be a starting point for us to consider at stage 2 how the bill might be amended. Jon Shaw of the Child Poverty Action Group felt that, despite similar provisions being contained in the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Act 2013, “Placing a principle in the bill ... would be a real improvement.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 3 September 2013; c 3216.] Richard Henderson of the Law Society for Scotland advised that, when making reforms in different areas, such as civil courts and tribunals, we will have to ask ourselves about the linkage between them, and asking that question then prompts the question, “What is a tribunal?” The argument for having principles that define the nature of a tribunal in the bill does not contradict the fact that the existing devolved tribunals have distinctive characteristics that the new system must preserve.

I thank the member for his intervention. That was along the lines of some of the suggestions that were made to the committee, and I think that we will be keen to pursue some of those later. Although we all think that we know what a tribunal is, that is not good enough when we are dealing with matters of law. Witnesses who spoke to the committee were also anxious that tribunals’ specialisms should not be lost and that individual tribunals should be placed in the appropriate tier, pillar or chamber to ensure that expertise and character are maintained. The policy memorandum that accompanies the bill states: “The Scottish Government has made a commitment that initially mental health will be in a chamber on its own”, which the minister referred to, because at the moment no tribunals cover a similar subject. The Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland itself is satisfied that the new structure will not compromise its expertise or ethos, or substantive mental health law. However, some witnesses felt that “initially” was an insufficient guarantee. Adrian Ward of the Law Society pointed out that “five years ago, a significant change in the status of the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland almost slipped through in the context of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 10 September 2013; c 3166.] The Law Society argues that the bill itself should state that the Mental Health Tribunal should be in a chamber of its own. Any change to that arrangement would therefore have to be made by Parliament, a stance that met with the agreement of Alan Gamble, who has been a convener of the Mental Health Tribunal. I wonder—I have only just thought about this—whether there could be some form of compromise that would allow a change in status to be introduced through statutory instrument. That would mean that there would be parliamentary change, although amendment of the primary legislation would not be required. Perhaps we can look at something along those lines at stage 2. The positioning of the Lands Tribunal for Scotland is also a matter of argument. As we have heard, the bill places the Lands Tribunal in the upper tier, which is analogous to the position of the Lands Tribunal for England and Wales under the UK Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. However, the Lands Tribunal for England and Wales is substantially an appeals body that deals in a large part with valuation appeals and therefore sits comfortably within the upper tier. The Lands Tribunal for Scotland describes itself on its website as “in effect an independent civil court” that deals with disputes involving land or property. Lord Gill told the committee: “The Lands Tribunal for Scotland is a court of law in all but name”, which “has no appellate functions of any kind”, and that appeals from it go to the Court of Session. He stated that “The Lands Tribunal is not broken”— I do not think that anybody was saying that it is broken; rather, there was discussion of the structure of the tribunals system itself— “and does not require fixing.” He believed that it should be left “as a separate pillar of its own.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 17 September 2013; c 3195-6.] The minister indicated that she was not supportive of that suggestion, for understandable reasons. It would appear contrary to the purpose of the legislation to bring devolved tribunals together within a coherent structure and then start to make exceptions and stick different tribunals outside that structure. There might be a more fundamental question regarding whether the Lands Tribunal is, despite its name, actually a tribunal, which is where a definition in the bill could be of assistance. Despite its name, and despite its being one of our oldest tribunals, if it is, as Lord Gill advised, in “all but name” a civil court, perhaps it should be part of the civil courts structure rather than the tribunals structure. In that case, it could be argued that leaving it as a separate pillar until its status is resolved is a sensible temporary solution. That is something else that we may wish to return to at stage 2. The bill also contains provision for tribunals to award expenses and charge fees. As members will know, that has been a contentious feature of employment tribunals, which recently introduced significant fees of £160, or up to £250 to lodge an appeal and, if the case goes ahead, a further £230 or £950. Those charges were subject to judicial review in the High Court last month as a result of a challenge from Unison. The minister advised the committee that the provisions of section 70 were necessary because some tribunals already charge fees, and the Scottish Government’s solicitor, Michael Gilmartin, further advised the committee that any proposal to charge fees where they had not been charged previously would be required to come to Parliament for approval. My understanding is that that would be under the negative procedure, and it might be worth considering whether any proposals to introduce fees should be by affirmative rather than negative instrument, in order increase the level of scrutiny. Section 59 will give tribunals the power to award expenses. Lord Gill believed that use of those powers would not be a regular event as expenses are not generally a feature of tribunal decisions, and that the power would be used only in exceptional cases. Section 59(3)(c) makes a curious reference to “wasted expenses”, which Lord Gill pointed out was not defined. I was relieved to hear the minister state: “I am not quite sure what is meant by wasted expenses.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 17 September 2013; c 3214.] I had no idea what the expression meant, either. I wonder whether, if it is used, we need to define it. The Government’s solicitor did not seem to be terribly sure about that either, although he said that a definition could be set out in procedural rules. Section 68(5), which the convener of the Justice Committee has already mentioned, caused considerable consternation among witnesses, as it gives the president of the Scottish tribunals the power to issue directions, including instruction or guidance, on the application or interpretation of the law. The witnesses in question felt that it was quite inappropriate for the interpretation of the law to be made by a senior judge acting administratively rather than judicially. Fortunately, that turned out to be a drafting error that the minister intends to correct at stage 2. Members might refer to a number of other issues that arose in our evidence taking, including the proposal for the sift of appeals to go to the upper tribunal and whether it was necessary to set the bar so high. The provision appears to have been based on the English and Welsh legislation, which was designed to exclude a flood of vexatious requests for review. Another issue was whether the first-tier tribunal should be able to refer a case to the upper tribunal not just on a point of law but on the whole case—facts and law. Finally, the minister felt that salaried posts were unnecessary for the operation of the devolved tribunals but some witnesses argued that it would be helpful to put such provision into the bill in readiness for the transfer of reserved tribunals, which will generate a far greater workload and may necessitate the creation of full-time salaried positions. The committee agreed that the bill should allow for that possibility, should the need arise in future. I am pleased to say that I have spoken for nearly 11 minutes and therefore say in conclusion that I am looking forward to the debate and our stage 2 discussions.

I thank members for their valiant efforts to keep the debate going. I had fears that there would be a huge amount of time left for the closing speakers and that we would have to fill it all up, so I am grateful to all members for their efforts to ensure that that did not happen. At one point, I saw Mr Q licking his paws with a rather resigned air, which may have reflected the feelings of members in the chamber. However, we had some points of excitement. Stewart Stevenson implying that the convener could remember the Courts Act 1672, I think it was, was uncharacteristically ungentlemanly. At least he did not suggest that any of us could remember 494 BC. When he began to use the term “plebs”, I began to be a little worried on his behalf. Nigel Don may also have caused a little bit of offence by suggesting that members of the Parliament could remember the Oliver Franks report of 1957. That may be true of some, but I am sure that some of my colleagues would be rather offended by that. A number of members referred to the principles of tribunals. That was an issue to which speakers kept coming back. The minister wanted to hear what members were saying about that, and there have been a number of good suggestions. We also have the suggestions from Citizens Advice Scotland, which reflect the provisions in the UK legislation. All Justice Committee members have reflected on the importance of protecting the character and nature of tribunals because far more people experience administrative justice through a tribunal than will enter into the civil or criminal courts system. As we know, the majority of people attending tribunals do so within the reserved system but, as most of us want all those tribunals to come over into the Scottish system, it is important that Scottish legislation is drafted in such a way as to bring them in. I say to Colin Keir that it does not require a yes vote next year to make that happen. I think that the minister agreed with the committee—I know that she was keen to consider the matter—but nobody is suggesting that a tight definition of tribunals be incorporated into the bill. As we have heard, tribunals have been formed according to the needs and circumstances. They perform different functions, but they have characteristics that need to be preserved, such as user-friendliness and others that members have mentioned. We need to maintain that character and nature. That would be covered by a definition of principles rather than a rigorous definition. I was pleased to hear that the minister is interested in hearing more about that. I would like to reflect on a couple of issues that were raised with us in briefings prior to the stage 1 debate, but which were not raised with us in evidence—I do not know why that was—as they are interesting issues to consider. This week, CAS flagged up to committee members an additional concern about the independent review of tribunals. The AJTC, which had the remit of keeping under review the administrative justice system, has been abolished. The bill makes provision for the Scottish Civil Justice Council to review practice and procedure and to prepare draft civil and tribunal procedural rules through amendment to the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Act 2013. That act charges the SCJC with keeping the civil justice system under review and with providing advice and recommendations to the Lord President on matters that relate to the civil justice system, but there is no requirement on any body to do the same for the administrative justice system. The SCJC can review process and procedures, but it cannot review the administrative justice system as a whole; nor can it make representations or provide advice on administrative justice matters to the Lord President. CAS recommended that, at stage 2, consideration should be given to allowing the SCJC to have functions in relation to the administrative justice system that are equivalent to those that it already has in relation to civil justice. I do not know whether the minister has seen CAS’s suggestion, but I would be interested to hear her views on it. For some time, environmental organisations such as Friends of the Earth Scotland, Scottish Environment LINK and RSPB Scotland have argued that Scotland does not comply with the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters, which is also known as the Aarhus convention. As members might know, it has three pillars: the right of access to environmental information that is held by public authorities; the right to participate in environmental decision making; and the right to review procedures and to challenge decisions that are made by public authorities. Currently, decisions can go to judicial review on a point of law, but there is no right to a review of the merits of the case. Stage 1 of the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill is certainly not the occasion to argue about whether Scotland is in compliance with the Aarhus convention or whether it could end up in a European Union court, as RSPB is saying, but an environmental tribunal could be a mechanism for addressing the issues that are raised by the convention. Indeed, the Minister for Environment and Climate Change suggested that that could be so in evidence to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee on 5 June this year. He stated that he intended to set up the appropriate tribunal in regulations once the Scottish Government knew the landscape of the new tribunals system for Scotland. Environmental organisations such as Friends of the Earth suggest that, as the Government already intends to set up an independent tribunal to hear appeals on environmental monetary penalties that arise as a result of the Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill, there could be an opportunity to consider the creation of a wider environmental tribunal. Therefore, in the not-too-distant future, we might see the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill being used to create a new tribunal, rather than just being used to transfer existing tribunals. A number of members have made reference to what the committee described as the “judicialisation” of tribunals, which was also referred to as “courtification”. In using that term, we were not quite sure whether we had invented a new word. We were concerned that any judicial members who are appointed to a tribunal might not have the necessary experience to fully understand the differences between a tribunal and a court. That is yet another argument for having a clearer definition in the bill of what a tribunal is. I note that, in the minister’s written response to our report, she stated her intention to use composition orders to specify which type of tribunal member will be required for which type of case. I look forward to receiving more detail on how such orders may be scrutinised. Several members raised concerns about fees, including John Pentland, Sandra White, Graeme Pearson and Lewis Macdonald. Lewis Macdonald and John Finnie spoke about issues to do with employment tribunals, and John Finnie expressed the wish that we might be able to take those into a Scottish system and address some of the issues relating to the charging of fees. I am sure that there is no intention to allow the problems that have arisen in UK employment tribunals to arise here, but the issue could be addressed by transferring some of those tribunals to the Scottish system. That would give us more control over issues such as the charging of fees, which already appears to be causing problems for people who wish to go to employment tribunals. That is very much to be regretted, and the bill may provide us with opportunities to address some of those issues.

11. To ask the Scottish Government what plans are in place to address seasonal pressures on health services in Dumfries and Galloway. (S4O-02542)

According to the annual review of NHS Dumfries and Galloway, wards in Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary were closed on five separate occasions in 2012-13 due to outbreaks of norovirus. Just last month, two wards had to be closed due to another outbreak. Does the health secretary intend to issue further guidance on the prevention both of the introduction of viral infections to hospitals from the community and of their spread within hospitals? Does he recommend restrictions on visitor numbers and visiting times when such infections are circulating within the wider community?

Will the member give way?

I intend to—[Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I intend to address the issue of policing in Scotland not south of the border, which Mr MacAskill frequently referred to in his diversionary tactics. Scottish Labour supported the creation of a single police force. We believed that it could provide the most effective and efficient use of policing resources, especially at a time of financial constraint, and that it could enable all parts of Scotland to benefit from specialist units that smaller units in particular would not be able to maintain. We also believed—this is very important—that economies of scale should release resources to strengthen local policing. Of course, there were always concerns about local accountability, although we were assured that it would be enhanced following the creation of Police Scotland. It was always difficult to see how this would work in the case of Dumfries and Galloway, which had its own force, but the arguments throughout Scotland that policing would be accountable to every local authority rather than to multi-authority police boards implied that, generally speaking, accountability to local government would be improved. However, in the first six months we have seen increasing centralisation rather than the preservation and promotion of local policing. The wholesale destruction of employment in the police staff sector has contributed to the disappointment that is felt. Police Scotland stated in written evidence to the Justice Committee that it was expecting 800 jobs to be lost in 2013-14 alone; that will contribute £25.5 million to the required savings of £70 million for next year. The chief constable told the Justice Committee last week that, although savings would be sought elsewhere, there was “no doubt” in his mind—given that almost 90 per cent of Police Scotland’s budget goes on staff costs—that “as the years pass, there will be further reductions in the number of civilian staff.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 29 October 2013; c 3406.] Those posts are being lost even before the number of control rooms is reduced. We are told that the decisions about the number and location of control rooms have yet to be taken, but part of the process of reducing the numbers of civilian staff involves closing police office counters—and the primary reason for those proposals is the SNP Government’s budgetary cuts. Unison, as the union that represents police staff, believes that the police and fire reform exercise has been rushed, and that a massive de-civilianisation exercise—which is designed to reduce the budget rather than duplication—is in full swing. As Unison has consistently argued, posts in certain areas of the organisation must be backfilled by police officers to allow staff to be released on voluntary redundancy or early retirement schemes. The chief constable argues that there is no strategy to use police officers for backfilling, but that does not mean that it is not happening.

That is not my argument. My argument is that, while you dictate the number of police officers, you say when we come to discuss the number of police staff that that is an operational matter. There is a double standard in the way you treat staff in the police service.

My colleague Graeme Pearson highlighted the use of police officers to deliver citations. We have heard it argued that that is police out on the streets, but people want to see police on the beat, deterring and preventing crime, not chapping on the door and delivering citations. Christine Grahame implied that the counter closures were somehow releasing police, but that is not the case. The counter closure proposals have nothing to do with releasing police officers to give them time to work in the community. The jobs that will go are, again, civilian posts. The argument that the counters that are being closed are not used is hollow too. Some might not be used, and in those cases there will be very little public resistance, but some are very well used. The Edinburgh Evening News—which is hardly an organ of the Labour Party—has pointed out that 100,000 visits are made every year to the 10 police counters that are proposed for closure in Edinburgh and the Lothians. A third of those counters are in West Lothian, as my colleague Neil Findlay pointed out. The times of operation of other counters are being drastically reduced. We heard about counters in large stations in Glasgow that it is proposed will have their hours reduced from 24-hour opening to daytime only, many in unsuitable locations. The idea that the 101 number or social media can somehow replace the reassurance of contact with a member of police staff at a police office counter at a time of crisis is risible. I was interested to hear what Kezia Dugdale told us about Kenny MacAskill’s constituents, and I was even more amused by the idea that he is, at the same time as boasting about an all-time low in crime, surveying his constituents about an increase in break-ins and anti-social behaviour.

I am pleased that Police Scotland has recognised public concern, and has agreed to extend the consultation period—or at least to accept and consider late responses—for another 30 days. The revelations in the press last Friday that Police Scotland may be considering promoting some senior officers with pay rises of at least £8,000 is hardly going to increase the morale of the much-put-upon civilian staff. It is no wonder that so many of them are offering to leave on ER and VR schemes. The cabinet secretary loves to argue that these are operational matters for Police Scotland. However, the Government cannot continue to claim credit for all the good news such as 1,000 more police officers—320 of which are paid for by local authorities—while distancing itself from the unpleasant consequences such as the loss of civilian posts and the police counter closures. John Pentland was right to say that the Government needs to take responsibility for the consequences of its actions. It cannot claim operational distance on some issues and claim credit on the rest.

I am pleased to speak in the debate on the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s community transport report. I am no longer a member of that committee, but I was at the time of the inquiry, so I echo the thanks to the clerks and to the witnesses who came before the committee. I had been aware for many years of the important role that community transport plays in my constituency. I recall accompanying Sarah Boyack many years ago when, as the then transport minister, early in the life of the Parliament, she handed over a new minibus to the Annandale Transport Initiative. Many of my constituents, community groups and voluntary organisations in rural Annandale and Eskdale have in the years since then benefited through being able to use fully accessible minibuses and other accessible transport in areas where public transport is infrequent and, sometimes, unavailable altogether. So, like Alex Johnstone, I thought that I knew a fair bit about community transport, but during the inquiry I found that there was quite a lot that I did not know. For example, I had mistakenly assumed that community transport was predominantly a rural development, but the recent Age Scotland campaign and the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s inquiry have made me realise the extent and diversity of community transport provision. Community transport also provides services in cities for people who are physically unable to use public transport buses, perhaps because the vehicles are not suitable for wheelchair users, because the traveller cannot get to the bus stop in the first place, because there is no local bus service, or because the nearest service is too far to get to. As other members have said, community transport is not provided only using buses and minibuses; it includes transport by volunteer drivers who help people to get to hospital appointments or make other visits with their own cars, for example. Some community transport providers are social enterprises, such as Coalfield Community Transport in Cumnock, which I visited during the committee’s inquiry. It is a non-profit-distributing company limited by guarantee that owns eight minibuses, which can be hired. It offers services such as a day hopper club, which provides excursions, and an away hopper, which offers short breaks. The local council, East Ayrshire Council, contracts it to run some public transport services under a section 22 licence, so it is eligible for the BSOG and the concessionary travel scheme for those services. The organisation is large enough to have paid staff, in addition to volunteers. In contrast, Thornhill and district community transport, which attended the same event as Coalfield Community Transport did, has one minibus and relies completely on volunteers. The services of community transport providers—whether they are large or small—are much valued by their users, but keeping such services functioning in times of financial austerity is challenging. Initially, central Government provided funding through the rural community transport initiative and the urban demand-responsive transport initiative, which enabled groups such as Annandale Transport Initiative to purchase fully accessible vehicles. As the minister said, the Scottish Government transferred those funding streams to councils without ring fencing, as part of the 2008 concordat with local authorities. Some local authorities have remained financially supportive of community transport providers, but the committee was told that others have been less so as they have become more financially constrained. We were told that, since funding was transferred to local authorities, growth in the community transport sector has slowed considerably. Vehicles that were purchased through the RCTI and the UDRT initiative are now ageing and need to be replaced. Maintenance of older vehicles places a greater financial strain on providers, and many have no funding stream that can provide the significant sums that are required to purchase replacement vehicles. That issue will increasingly urgently require to be addressed. My local rural community transport providers have made the point, which I have raised in Parliament over the years with ministers—not just in the current Government, but in its predecessors—that many of their customers are eligible for free bus travel but do not get the opportunity to use their entitlement because appropriate public transport is not available. I was and am more sympathetic to Age Scotland’s still waiting campaign than some other committee members are. A major issue of inequity is involved. Under the concessionary travel scheme’s current rules, I will be entitled at the end of 2014 to apply for a bus pass, which would enable me when I stay in Edinburgh to travel from my flat to Parliament for nothing. I also have a D1 entitlement, so I could drive a minibus, too. There is something wrong when people—who will include me, in 2015—who are in well-paid jobs are able to travel to work for free, while others who are far less well off, including members of my parents’ generation rather than mine, or people who suffer from limiting disabilities, have to pay for the transport that they need to get to medical appointments, to go to the shops or to have some form of social life, because they cannot access public transport to use their entitlement card.

The Labour Party brought in the concessionary travel scheme and we still support it, but if we cannot debate the major inequity that affects many of my constituents who live in rural areas, we are not doing our job as parliamentarians. There are significant problems with simply extending the national concessionary scheme to community transport, which became evident during the committee’s inquiry. The problems include funding for the extension and installation of the necessary ticketing infrastructure, and reimbursement—public transport providers receive 60 per cent of the cost of an adult fare, not the whole cost of a ticket. As others have said, even greater problems would be involved in extending the system to use of private cars, which provide community transport under some schemes. A simple extension of the national concessionary transport scheme appears to be fraught with difficulties, and there might be a better way of achieving the result that I want, which is equity in the provision of free transport for community transport passengers—especially those who live in rural Scotland, including my constituents. The committee came up with no alternative suggestion; it merely suggested that the Government should seek a mechanism for addressing inequity in the context of community transport provision, which I suppose is a bit of a cop-out. If community transport cannot be included in the NCTS, I urge the Government to address the inequity that has persisted since the scheme was introduced.

As I said, I have raised the issue with ministers in successive Administrations on behalf of my older constituents who are not served by accessible public transport.

1. To ask the Scottish Government for what reason its planned investment in 2014-15 using the non-profit-distributing model has decreased by £164 million since September 2012. (S4O-02472)

According to the Scottish Parliament financial scrutiny unit briefing on the 2014-15 draft budget, planned NPD investment this financial year is 45 per cent less than was estimated in September last year and the projected spend for next year is down by 17 per cent. How accurate are the current figures for planned NPD investment? Will they, too, be reduced by September next year?

Some people—nobody in the chamber, I imagine—might think that the CAP is of peripheral interest, but I was struck by the statistic that 77 per cent of the European Union landmass is defined as rural. Of that, 47 per cent is farmland and 30 per cent is forest, and half the European Union’s population lives in those rural areas. The CAP may involve huge sums of money and, either directly or indirectly, it affects a large proportion of Europe’s residents. The European Parliament, commissioners and Council of Ministers announced agreement on reform of the CAP post 2013 on 26 June. According to the Commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development at the time, the reformed CAP will “make direct payments fairer and greener, strengthen the position of farmers within the food production chain and make the CAP more efficient and more transparent”. Let us hope that that is, indeed, the case. As members have mentioned, aspects of the reform are welcome. However, experience of the previous CAP and the common fisheries policy suggests that we will not be able to make a judgment until we see how it works in practice. The two pillars of support—direct support and rural development—will remain, despite earlier suggestions that direct support should be discontinued. I think that everyone in the chamber welcomes that. By 2019, no single member state will receive less than 75 per cent of the EU average, and subsidies will be levelled by subsidising acreage farmed rather than production. As the cabinet secretary informed us, member states will be able to offer further help to small and medium-sized farms by allocating higher levels of subsidy to the first hectares of a holding. By 2019, no farm will receive less than 60 per cent of the EU average subsidy disbursed in a single administrative area. Unlike the current system of subsidy, which is based on land area and past subsidy levels, the new income support regime will be available only to active farmers. We all think that that is a welcome development. The suggestion is that landowners who engage in other, specified, non-farming activities should be excluded, but the problem with that is the potential for loopholes. I share the concerns that other members have expressed that that needs to be tightened up. We have also heard that measures can be taken to encourage young farmers to set up in business with a 25 per cent aid supplement for the first five years. I welcome the fact that 30 per cent of direct payments will have to be linked to environmentally friendly farming practices such as crop diversification and the maintenance of permanent pasture. I also welcome the fact that 5 per cent—increasing to 7 per cent—of land will have to be left fallow to encourage wildlife and biodiversity or be subject to measures that deliver similar environmental benefits. As David Stewart and Graeme Dey have said, for many in Scotland’s rural communities outwith those who are involved in active farming, the development and implementation of the Scotland rural development programme will probably have a greater impact, so that is what I will now focus on. Thirty per cent of the rural development programme will have to be allocated to agri-environmental measures, which will have to set and meet higher environmental protection targets. However, as the cabinet secretary will be aware, at the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities convention on 28 June, it was agreed that local government should be allocated at least a third of the 2014 to 2020 EU funds in order that councils can better decide how those funds might be prioritised for the benefit of their rural communities. Some members may dismiss that as COSLA always asking for more money, but I think that a genuine case can be built around that argument. The reasoning behind that request from COSLA is that a reduction in CAP direct payments will have a particular impact on rural areas. Local authorities believe that one of the best ways to mitigate the effects of that reduction would be to ensure that the SRDP has sufficient flexibility to support economic and social programmes that are designed to address the needs and priorities of specific regions. In previous years, local communities have had limited access to rural and maritime programmes, which constitute 50 per cent of EU funding in Scotland. The current discussions offer an opportunity to reassess how spend could be reprofiled to address development and diversification needs and priorities in individual local authority areas and their rural and coastal communities. Structural, rural and maritime funds could complement one another in supporting activities in rural communities, such as community-led development, tackling deprivation, skills and training provision, and the provision of business support and other locally focused programmes. For example, the EU specifies a 5 per cent minimum threshold for the LEADER initiative, but Governments can choose to allocate a higher percentage. I am told that €30 million of SRDP moneys that have not yet been allocated could be used to expand LEADER or to support rural business development through the business gateway. Local authorities argue that, if too much EU funding is channelled through national agencies, the result will be uniform and inflexible arrangements that are unable to address the specific needs of different and diverse rural and coastal communities. Devolution to local authorities, COSLA argues, would deliver more tailored solutions, complement the community planning approach and accord with the Scottish Government’s own approach to its partnership agreements with local authorities. I understand that early meetings are to be sought between COSLA spokespeople and the relevant cabinet secretaries Mr Lochhead, Ms Sturgeon and Mr Swinney. Therefore, I would be grateful if the cabinet secretary or the minister—I do not know which of them will sum up today’s debate—could advise whether any such meetings have been arranged to discuss the Scotland rural development programme. Perhaps whoever is responding to the debate could also clarify what consideration is being given to a greater devolution of responsibility for administering the SRDP to local authority level. Obviously, any such change would need to happen within EU rules, but COSLA argues that its proposal would offer a more focused approach to addressing the differing needs of our rural and coastal communities. From Dumfries and Galloway to the north of Scotland, we have diverse rural communities with diverging needs. Local people could probably address those needs better than large national organisations or agencies, which may not reflect the needs of particular areas.

As many members have said, this has been a consensual debate. No amendments have been lodged, which has allowed some of our colleagues to be elsewhere, a little north of here, and they may be quite happy to be there. Nevertheless, we have an important issue under discussion. As we have heard, the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 defines periods after which people who have convictions for less serious crimes are considered to have been rehabilitated, if they have not reoffended during that time. An individual then does not have to disclose his or her conviction, for example, on application for employment, and the employer cannot take action against him or her should that employer subsequently find out about the conviction. Of course, since the 1974 act was passed, the Police Act 1997 has brought in provisions for access to criminal records for employment purposes, and has created three types of criminal conviction certificates, which we commonly know as disclosures. Basic disclosures reveal only unspent convictions. Standard disclosures contain information about both spent and unspent convictions, cautions, and spent and unspent alternatives to prosecution. Enhanced disclosure contains all that information along with other information that is considered to be relevant by the police or by specified Government bodies. The Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 was Scotland’s response to the Bichard report, which was commissioned after the Soham murders. It introduced a membership scheme for people who work with vulnerable groups and barred from that scheme persons who had committed acts that were considered to be harmful or inappropriate towards a child or a protected adult. The consequence of that was that the exemption from having to disclose spent convictions to a potential employer was disapplied in those cases. As others have said, the situation is, therefore, quite complicated, and one of the criticisms of the 1974 act is that it is poorly understood. We have had very few confessions today, other than the fact that Jamie Hepburn has not done yoga. However, I have a confession.

That is not as good as my confession. In 1982, I was fined £40 for riding my bicycle at half past 10 in a pedestrianised street in Cambridge. I committed the offence unintentionally, as I had forgotten that the street had recently been pedestrianised, but the rather aggressive woman police officer who dragged me into a police van was not inclined to accept forgetfulness as a defence, and treated me with considerable hostility. Thereafter, I have always felt that I should disclose that offence when asked by a potential employer whether I have any convictions. That happened most recently when I applied to join Labour’s panel of candidates for the Scottish Parliament elections in 1999. I was asked whether I had done anything that would be an embarrassment to the party. I have done lots of things that are embarrassing to me, but not necessarily to the Labour Party. Nevertheless, I felt that I had to tell the party that I had been done in 1982 for riding my bike on the pavement. Members will, therefore, understand my relief when reading the Scottish Government’s discussion paper on the reform of the 1974 act, 31 years later, which suggests that my conviction for riding my bike in a pedestrianised zone is spent and I am now considered to be rehabilitated. To be serious, this is an important matter. The stakeholders whom the Scottish Government consulted feel that there is a need for the 1974 act to be reviewed. As we know, the UK Government has already amended it through the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 which, among other measures, increased from 30 to 48 months the length of custodial sentences that can be considered to be spent. It also reduced the length of time before a person’s conviction can be considered to be spent. I am not going to make any suggestions along those lines at the moment, because we have not considered any evidence so far. However, I was interested in the references that Willie Coffey and John Pentland made to alternative approaches that are taken in other jurisdictions. As others have said, rehabilitation of offenders is a much wider issue than whether and when a person’s convictions can be considered to be spent. Whether or not a conviction is ever spent, rehabilitation should be part of whatever sentence is imposed. The cabinet secretary and Graeme Pearson—along with other members—referred to the statistics that almost one in three men in Scotland and a tenth of women have criminal convictions. I am not sure whether I am one of that 10 per cent. They also referred to the fact that persons who have been sentenced to less than six months in prison are more than three times as likely to be reconvicted within a year than are people who serve sentences of more than 48 months. Margaret Mitchell and Sandra White referred to the problems with short-term sentences. Nonetheless, if those who have served longer terms reoffend, their offences tend to be a lot more serious that those of short-term prisoners. The recently published reconviction rates in Scotland for 2009-10 show a reduction of 4.5 per cent in the number of reconvictions within one year over the past nine years. However, unfortunately, 28.4 per cent—more than a quarter of offenders—reoffend within a year, with 32 per cent or so of offenders who have been given a community payback order also reoffending within a year. Male offenders are more likely to reoffend than female offenders, and the under-21s are more likely to reoffend than older offenders.

The fact that the reconviction rate has fallen over the past nine years—which includes the recession—suggests that there has been an improvement despite the recession. I will move on to another statistic, if Margo MacDonald will forgive me. The reconviction rate for offenders who are given drug testing and treatment orders—about two thirds of whom reoffend within a year—has also declined, but that is an extremely complex issue. Most offenders who have been given DTTOs have a complex series of problems that are associated with drug use. They might have become involved in drug use as a result of traumas that they have been through. The offences that they commit after being given a DTTO might not be drugs offences—they might be offences such as stealing, which they indulge in simply to eat, for example. Although the reduction by 0.5 per cent each year over the past nine years of the number of reconvictions within a year is more welcome than an increase in reconvictions would be, it is still the case that reconviction rates and frequencies are high, and there is no room for any of us to be complacent. Moreover, the statistics refer only to reconviction within a year, which is a considerably shorter period than the time that it is considered necessary for a conviction to be spent and the offender rehabilitated. We need to look at many other issues. Several members asked whether our prison sentences address the need for the offender to engage in meaningful work for sufficient proportions of the day and week to give him or her real experience of what it is like to be in work, and to train him or her in a way that will be recognised when they apply for employment after release. During the summer, I visited Cornton Vale prison, where I saw an interesting bicycle recycling project. Women are learning how to rebuild bicycles, which look as good as new afterwards. The prisoners are acquiring skills that women might not otherwise have expected to get. As John Finnie said, many prisoners do not have the necessary communication skills, so education in that field is also important. We also need to ask whether our community sentences involve work that benefits and repays the community, and provides the offender with the satisfaction of contributing to the community, and taking pride in doing so. At the violence reduction unit, I heard about a project at Hawkhill in Alloa, where offenders on community service have helped to create a community garden, which the community appreciates. Anne McTaggart drew attention to the need for early intervention and the need for adult literacy and numeracy problems to be addressed. Mary Fee and Christine Grahame pointed out that agencies must work together better when offenders are released from prison, because they often need support to adopt a law-abiding lifestyle. Recently, I spoke to Dr Oliver Aldridge of NHS Lothian, who showed me various statistics on clients on DTTOs who live in bed-and-breakfast facilities. They are likely to have little more than £12 a week to spend on food. How can someone who is on benefits, who is living in a B and B and who has a kettle but nowhere to store their food live on £12 a week without committing crime? All those issues need to be addressed when we look at rehabilitation.

8. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to introduce measures to improve the safety of the A76 between Dumfries and Kirkconnel. (S4O-02429)

The minister will be aware that an improvements scheme to the A76 at Ellisland was scrapped in 2010 on the basis of cost. Which of the safety measures that have been implemented following the review by Transport Scotland have been implemented along that section of the A76, which would have been covered by the former Ellisland improvements scheme?

One of the most important functions of the committees of this Parliament is to scrutinise legislation that is proposed by the Scottish Government; it is a role that is particularly important because of the Parliament’s unicameral nature. I believe that it is therefore not appropriate that Parliament should determine its position on a very controversial element of a Government bill prior to the stage 1 consideration of the bill. The abolition of corroboration is a proposal in a bill that is currently before Parliament. The issue concerns whether the innocent are unjustly convicted or, indeed, whether the guilty go free, so the evidence for the proposed change must be carefully and rigorously examined. I do not think that the Parliament should make a decision on the issue after having a debate in the chamber of less than an hour and a half. The Justice Committee will take evidence at two sessions in November and December, so the decision ought to be taken at the end of stage 1 consideration of the bill.

No, I do not think that it is. There have been many controversial provisions in Government bills over the years, but they have gone through the committee process and we have examined them. It is part of our job to undertake such examination and make recommendations at the end of stage 1. It is the case that 12 organisations, many of which represent the victims of crime, support the Government’s proposals on the abolition of corroboration, and 15 expressed degrees of concern ranging from outright opposition in some cases to concern in others about the need for additional safeguards or a wider definition of what constitutes corroborative evidence. Many of the organisations that support abolition believe that it would assist with the prosecution of crimes such as sexual offences and domestic abuse, for which corroborating evidence can be difficult to produce. The requirement for corroboration means that there must be a source of evidence that is independent of the primary accusation that a crime has been committed and the accused has committed it.

I am sorry; I only have five minutes. Removal of the requirement for corroboration would theoretically permit cases to go to court on the evidence of one witness or victim, but other safeguards can be put in place. Mr Stewart mentioned the six-month period in 2010 when two thirds of sexual offence cases—some 95 cases—were dropped that could reasonably have been prosecuted if corroborating evidence had not been required. That is a matter of concern. Of course, it is not necessarily the case that guilt would have been proved beyond reasonable doubt in all those cases.

No. I am sorry, but I only have five minutes and I am halfway through. Supporters of abolition argue that the proving of guilt would be dependent on the quality of the evidence rather than its quantity. That is the view of Police Scotland, for example, which states in its written evidence: “the ... requirement for corroboration of every material fact is ... an anachronism.” However, there are some potent arguments on the side of the retention of the requirement for corroboration. The Law Society, the Faculty of Advocates and Justice Scotland argue that it is a fundamental principle of the Scottish criminal justice system and that the proposed two-thirds majority verdict is an insufficient safeguard against possible wrongful conviction on the evidence of a plausible and convincing liar. The Scottish Government consulted on other safeguards, such as giving judges the power to acquit the accused without reference to the jury if it is considered that no reasonable jury could convict, and also removing the third verdict. It is important that that is considered, and I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary has said that he is prepared to consider it. As colleagues will know, Michael McMahon MSP has proposed introducing a member’s bill to that effect, and it could be considered at the same time. The abolition of the requirement for corroboration could have other consequences. The Scottish Police Federation and the Law Society of Scotland fear that, if it is removed, there could be more malicious prosecutions of police officers and people who work in one-to-one situations, such as social workers and prison officers. The Police Federation and Justice Scotland argue that conviction rates in England, where there is no requirement for corroboration, are little different from those in Scotland, so there is no evidence that removing the requirement for corroboration will result in more successful prosecutions. Organisations that represent the victims of crimes such as sexual violence, while welcoming abolition and opposing—as it happens—the increase in the majority verdict, argue that the education of juries and a fundamental change in attitude are central to the successful prosecution of domestic and sexual crimes and to encouraging victims to come forward. Therefore, it is not as simple as just taking away the requirement for corroboration; that will not be sufficient to solve the entire problem. We believe that the Justice Committee must give due consideration to the arguments on both sides and the necessity or otherwise of additional safeguards should abolition be agreed to, and indeed to whether the definition of corroboration could be widened to take account of some of the issues, as Margaret Mitchell implied. The Parliament should not make the decision today, and I therefore move amendment S4M-07791.2, in the name of my colleague Graeme Pearson, to leave out from “overwhelming opposition” to end and insert: “opposition to this proposal from parts of the legal profession; believes, however, that the proposal to abolish corroboration is supported by many organisations representing the victims of crime, in particular sexual crimes, domestic violence and human trafficking, and by Police Scotland; further notes that the stage one consideration of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill by the Justice Committee began this week, and believes that scrutiny of the bill should be allowed to proceed to allow full consideration of the arguments for and against the abolition of corroboration prior to any decision being taken regarding whether the Scottish Government’s proposals to abolish corroboration should proceed.”

Coal mining is not perhaps the first industry that people would associate with my constituency in Dumfriesshire but it has played an important part in the economy in parts of my constituency, with deep mining having been important in Canonbie and Rowanburn—the last of those collieries closed way back in 1922—and more recently in Upper Nithsdale, where the Fauldhead mine in Kirkconnel closed in 1968 but employment in deep mining continued until the demise of the industry during the 1980s. Opencast mining has continued to be one of the very few sources of well-paid skilled employment in Upper Nithsdale, although it has not been able to provide the number of jobs that were previously provided in deep mining. Nevertheless, in an area where the local economy was decimated by the demise of the deep mining industry, those jobs have been very important. That is why there was so much local concern when ATH Resources, which operated the Glenmuckloch mine—the only remaining opencast mine in Dumfries and Galloway—went into administration in December last year, with the potential loss of 60 very important jobs. The news was not unexpected, because in May last year, share prices in ATH had halved, plans for an extension of the site had had to be put on hold and 11 workers had already been made redundant. Fortunately, however, there had been early discussion between various parties with an interest in the site, including the landowners Buccleuch Estates, who were understandably worried about the possibility that restoration would not happen. Indeed, it was noted that the bond did not cover the costs of restoration at that time. ATH was honest about what was happening and came forward to talk to people about its problems. We also had important discussions with Dumfries and Galloway Council and with the Scottish Government, which recognised last year that the problem was not a one-off and that what was happening at ATH was the beginning of a problem that then manifested itself in problems at Scottish Coal. I put on record my personal thanks to one of my constituents, Professor Russel Griggs, for his hard work in facilitating discussions and keeping me informed in confidence on the progress of those discussions—a confidence that I respected during that period. I was very grateful for being kept up to date on what was happening on behalf of my constituents. As a result of the work that was done prior to ATH going into administration, the remaining 60 jobs were not lost, work continued on the site and Hargreaves purchased the debt. A restoration plan has now been agreed, which interestingly includes forestry, carbon capture and the development of renewable energy sources. Indeed, they are looking at a hydro scheme that would be able to store energy from wind turbine schemes, which would be an interesting development on that site. There is now hope for job creation on the site instead of job losses. Restoration is, however, dependent—as the minister said—on the extension of the opencast site to fund it. If there was no extension there would be no restoration and there would be no jobs. In my view that would be a lose, lose, lose situation for my constituents. I believe that the transformation from the serious threat of job losses in an area where unemployment is high to a good news story with the potential for further job creation is due to the various stakeholders and partners being prepared to sit round the table together to seek a resolution to both the employment and restoration concerns before the situation turned into a disaster. Of course, that does not mean that everyone will live happily ever after. The resolution is still at an early stage and many of us will be keeping a close eye on developments. As Claire Baker mentioned, one issue of concern is the application by Hargreaves to Dumfries and Galloway Council to use the local road network to take coal to the railhead at New Cumnock. That may not affect my constituents as much as Adam Ingram’s constituents, but I, too, have significant concerns about increasing heavy-vehicle use of the A76 road, which already has a number of issues. The Scottish Coal story, however, is less encouraging. The workforce knew that the company was in trouble, but the sudden announcement on 19 April this year, at the end of a shift, that the company was going into administration with the immediate loss of 590 jobs was shocking, even though 450 workers—including 45 of my constituents who worked in East Ayrshire—had been placed on notice of redundancy the previous month. The workers had been in discussions with management but were receiving very little information. MSPs, including me, MPs and local councillors had all been seeking information with the intention of facilitating any meetings that might help, but everyone was kept in the dark. National Union of Mineworkers president Nicky Wilson spoke for many of us when he said that he was disgusted with the way in which the workers had been treated. PACE, too, had not been informed of the forthcoming announcement, so it was unable to make contact with the workers prior to their being made redundant. That made the work of the PACE team considerably more difficult. Most of those workers are still out of work, but I hope that, as the minister said, within the next six months 300 of them will be back in employment. The workers also discovered that the company had not appropriately accredited their skills, so their opportunities of obtaining employment in other industries such as construction were seriously compromised. I am pleased that so much progress has been made on accrediting the skills of those workers with the MPQC through the opencast mining task force, as the minister mentioned in his opening speech. The purchase of some of the sites by Hargreaves provides hope that some sites will resume production shortly. Of course, there remain serious concerns about the future of the coaled-out sites, which were previously in the ownership of Scottish Coal but disclaimed by the administrators—I will be very careful in what I say about that because of the on-going legal issues. However, it is true that, as others have said, the sums of money required to restore the sites runs into millions and at present there is no indication how such sums of money might be obtained. That must remain a concern for us all. Finally, I agree with Adam Ingram that the Upper Nithsdale area needs a regeneration strategy that takes us away from overreliance on coal and develops other jobs and training opportunities in what is an area of high unemployment. We need to focus on that going forward.

I am slightly puzzled by Patrick Harvie’s assertion, because two companies are currently considering the revival of the deep mines at Canonbie, which actually produce a good-quality coal. I am sure that those companies would not be interested if there was no future for the industry.

Mary Scanlon gave a great exposition in her speech of the species that she champions. I have since been unsuccessfully attempting to insert references to the natterjack toad or the tadpole shrimp into my contribution. Scotland currently has 145 hydro electric schemes, producing 12 per cent of Scotland’s electricity, with a capacity of around 1,500MW. Malcolm Chisholm, Claire Baker and the minister referred to the large-scale pump-storage schemes planned for the Great Glen, which would have a combined generation capacity of 900MW. It is interesting that those could be the first pump schemes to be developed in the United Kingdom for 35 years. The current theme of the story of hydro power is the rediscovery and redevelopment of older technologies. Possibly the main opportunity now for the expansion of hydro power is in developing the several thousand small hydro schemes with individual capacities of under 5MW, including the run-of-river hydroelectric schemes. More than half of Scotland’s current hydroelectric plants are in the Highlands. However, there are six in Dumfries and Galloway: Carsfad, Drumjohn, Earlstoun, Glenlee, Kendoon and Tongland. None of those is in my constituency, but I have the permission of the MSP for Galloway and West Dumfries, Alex Fergusson, to mention his constituency in this context. The Galloway hydroelectric power scheme, which is operated by Scottish Power these days, draws water from the River Ken, the River Dee and the River Doon, through reservoirs at Loch Doon, Kendoon, Carsfad, Clatteringshaws and Tongland. The scheme is still capable of production power of around 106MW. It predates Scottish Hydro Electric by some years, having been authorised by the Galloway Water Power Act of 1929 and built between 1932 and 1936. The stations in the Galloway hydro power scheme are of particular interest, having been designed by Sir Alexander Gibb. They are now listed, as they are among some of Scotland’s earliest modernist buildings. For example, Tongland power station outside Kirkcudbright is an impressive grade A listed building with large windows. It really does not look like a power station at all; in fact, it reminds me slightly of St Andrew’s house for some reason, and it is a considerable tourist attraction. Despite the architectural merit of some of those power stations, they are among the least expensive power stations that have built in the United Kingdom, at a total cost of only £3 million. Mike MacKenzie mentioned that hydroelectric schemes were controversial at the time. The local poet WGM Dobie wrote: “A raider comes today who kills The glories of our glens and hills With unheroic acts and bills And private legislation The Company Promoter’s pen Will dam the Deugh and dam the Ken And dam the Dee—oh damn the men Who plan such desecration”. Controversy surrounds power generation of all sorts. The Galloway scheme makes use of the large lochs and rivers in the area, but I believe that there is much potential for small hydro schemes in the east of the region in my constituency, which would make a change from wind turbine applications. Small-scale hydro schemes are of course not new, as rivers were used to power mills in centuries past. The Robert Burns centre in Dumfries is situated in the town’s 18th century watermill where, during the first half of the 20th century, the River Nith powered a low-head turbine that drove a 100kW direct current generator that for a number of decades supplied power to the Troqueer area in Maxwelltown. Much more recently, hope has been expressed that the waters of the Nith might again generate power. In 2011, the Nithsdale area committee of Dumfries and Galloway Council agreed to support exploration of the potential for a small-scale hydro plant opposite the Whitesands that would deliver about 100kW. It is a pity that Stewart Stevenson is not here, because the scheme would use a reverse Archimedes screw system, which he described to us in such detail. Interestingly, the Archimedes system is very ancient and is thought to have been used in the irrigation of the hanging gardens of Babylon. Originally, it was a way of bringing water uphill rather than producing power by allowing it to flow downhill in a reverse scheme. The scheme is potentially being developed as part of an art installation in the river and might also be progressed through flood protection measures. As someone whose office has frequently flooded, I would welcome the art installation and the flood protection measures. The Forestry Commission encourages the development of renewables on its estate. However, when I looked on its website, I was rather disappointed to find that there is only one operational hydro power site in Dumfries and Galloway, at Buchan Burn near Newton Stewart, and that it generates only 0.006MW. Given the extent of forestry land in the region, there must be considerable potential for small-scale hydro development that is so far untapped. As Mary Scanlon said, the dash for wind has distracted attention from other forms of renewables that could be developed, such as hydro power, and that is certainly the case in my region.

That is the forest estate as a whole, but I am arguing that, unfortunately, there does not seem to be sufficient development in the south of Scotland. I would like more hydro development to be explored in Dumfries and Galloway and across the south of Scotland, because I am certain that there is potential for that. There is also potential for tidal power in the Solway Firth. The possibility of a Solway barrage was mooted in the 1960s and was revived again in 2006. However, a report that was commissioned by Scottish Enterprise suggested that it could be extremely expensive and rather environmentally sensitive. It has since been proposed that the use of spectral marine energy converters attached to a bridge structure might enable tidal generation with an estimated output of 180MW. Hydro power seems to be experiencing a renaissance, despite the challenges with things such as feed-in tariffs, which Ken Macintosh described in considerable detail. Of course, hydro power must be part of a balanced energy policy. I have argued for many years that other things such as nuclear energy should be part of the policy, too. However, I believe that there is much untapped hydro potential outwith the Highlands and Islands. I hope that it will be developed and that the balance between wind and hydro in the Dumfries and Galloway area might be tipped a bit more towards hydro.

I, too, congratulate Paul Martin on bringing this important subject to the chamber. Community-controlled housing associations were first set up in Glasgow in the 1970s and 80s. They were characterised by the prevalence of tenants and residents on their boards and they specialised in the renovation of older housing stock and the regeneration of neighbourhoods, through accessing private sector funding that was not otherwise available to the public sector. The model subsequently became a feature of the social housing sector in Scotland, but it remains particularly strong in Glasgow and the west of Scotland. When council housing stock was transferred to Glasgow Housing Association in 2003, the intention was to have a two-tier stock transfer process, with a smaller second-stage stock transfer to local housing associations, which would own and manage their own stock. That has happened to some extent, although perhaps not as quickly as was expected. The community housing movement has delivered many benefits to neighbourhoods in Scotland. In addition to its central purpose of providing good-quality affordable housing through renovation and new build, community housing has delivered investment and employment, community empowerment and local accountability. The sector has also supported community enterprises, education and training, childcare and community cultural events. Our smaller housing associations are particularly vulnerable to financial pressures. Paul Martin’s motion highlights the cut in the development funding budget in Glasgow and the consequences for rents and borrowing costs. Labour MSPs have on a number of occasions raised concerns expressed by the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and others about the reduction in the housing association grant from an average of £70,000 across Scotland to an average of £40,000. Coupled with the difficulties in accessing borrowing, that is making the building of new homes for social rent more and more difficult. Payment after building instead of in stages adds more pressures. The SFHA estimates that the rent from a social rented property raises enough funds to cover only a third of the cost of borrowing. The HAG covers another third of the cost. In the past, the other third might have come from reserves and other sources, but they are running out, so that is not an option for small community-controlled housing associations. That is one reason why last week I asked the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth whether the consequentials arising from the financial transactions announced in the UK budget, which have to be used for equity or loans and must be repaid to the Treasury, could be used to provide loans to housing associations at a lower cost than they can access through banks and other private sources, for the purpose of building homes for social rent. I hope that the Government is prepared to look into that possibility. The current situation is likely to have one of two possible consequences. Community-controlled housing associations will be forced out of building and regeneration projects or, as Paul Martin said, they will be taken over by large housing associations from other parts of the United Kingdom, with the loss of the character of the Scottish housing association sector. For example, 384 homes were transferred from Dumfries and Galloway Council to Irvine Housing Association back in 1999 after a vote by tenants—it was a very successful stock transfer. That took the housing association’s stock to about 1,900 properties, and it invested something like £12 million in regenerating the area and modernising the properties. IHA took over a number of other properties and had about 2,000 tenants. Now, it has become part of Riverside, which is based in Liverpool and which has more than 85,000 tenants and residents. I do not know that housing association, which might be perfectly fine, but I am very concerned that smaller community-based housing associations will be taken over because they cannot survive in the current financial situation and that their essential character in their communities will be lost. Scotland should be proud of our tradition of community-controlled housing associations but, unfortunately, the current funding regime threatens associations’ ability to build new homes for affordable social rent and might threaten their continued existence.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the chief constable regarding the number and location of control rooms required by Police Scotland. (S4O-02201)

There are 45 civilian staff and 12 police officers in the control room in Dumfries. Can the cabinet secretary impress on the chief constable the need to consult and communicate with those staff in advance of the final decision being made?

I, too, congratulate Patrick Harvie on securing the debate, as the failure of many landlords to comply with the regulations by the required date last month is a matter of considerable concern. The Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 gave ministers the power to introduce regulations that would establish tenancy deposit schemes. A Scottish Government review in 2009 found that a significant majority of tenants in the private sector had deposits partially or totally withheld at the end of their tenancy, and that in around three quarters of those cases that was done unfairly. There was evidence that quite a lot of that was going on. Such evidence has been presented to us in the briefings that we have received from CAS and the NUS and, as Patrick Harvie suggested, many of us know from personal or constituents’ experience that such practice goes on. For example, my eldest son has rented a number of properties in the Leith area over the past four years. He has had to fight to get his deposit back when moving from one flat to another. He has heard excuses about having to send in cleaners when, in fact, the property was considerably cleaner when he left than it was when he moved in. On two occasions, he has faced problems in finding out from the letting agent who the landlord was: once when his boiler blew up and, on another occasion, when the pipes froze due to being inadequately insulated. Tenants can face a lot of problems with trying to find out who their landlord is. The 2010 consultation on the introduction of the regulations found widespread support from most people—other than from private landlords and letting agents—for the introduction of the tenancy deposit scheme. Landlords are now required to do a number of things. They are required to register the deposit with a tenancy deposit scheme within 30 days of the beginning of a new tenancy or by 15 May for existing tenancies. They are also required to provide the tenant with certain information about the deposit—the kind of information that we would reasonably expect tenants to get from a landlord: the amount of the deposit; when it was received; the address of the property; a statement confirming that the landlord is registered with the local authority; and the name of the tenancy deposit scheme with which the money has been registered and the conditions under which it can be retained. Those are fairly simple bits of information. The problem lies not so much with the regulations but with awareness and enforcement. Tenants can indeed receive up to three times their deposit in compensation if their landlord does not comply with the regulations. However, that requires a tenant to know their entitlement and to be prepared to take their landlord to the sheriff court for non-compliance, and it requires landlords to know their obligations and what the consequences could be of not conforming to them. In its briefing, the ESPC said that the Government should take action to raise awareness of the regulations among tenants and landlords. It could also be argued that the Government needs to facilitate the enforcement of the regulations, because, as Marco Biagi said, many of the private sector tenants are young and might not feel comfortable about threatening their landlord with court action if he or she does not provide the necessary information within 30 days of the start of the tenancy, or asking their landlord whether their existing deposit was lodged in a tenancy deposit scheme by 15 May this year. Of course, we do not know the reasons why so many landlords have not complied. It may be due to ignorance on their part, but it might be that some landlords and letting agencies are simply chancing their arms and ignoring the legislation, as they do not believe that they will be caught. In answer to a question from me on 22 May, the minister indicated that local authorities have the power to take action when there is evidence of non-compliance with tenancy deposit legislation, and that that could be taken into account during landlord registration. I would therefore welcome further detail regarding how local authorities can access information. Would it be through tenants providing evidence of a lack of compliance? As Alex Johnstone stated, there is some concern about the success of landlord registration. I have certainly heard that the legislation is not always adequately complied with or enforced. Indeed, as with any other offence, the knowledge that offenders are likely to be caught and punished acts as a considerable deterrent.

I, too, congratulate Alison McInnes on securing the debate. I also congratulate Age Scotland on pursuing its campaign on behalf of the users of community transport services. Many years ago, I raised the issue of the use of concessionary bus passes on community transport vehicles with the transport minister in the Labour-Liberal Scottish Executive. I have supported the idea since, and support for community transport was part of the Labour debate in the chamber on 26 January 2012. I raised the matter because it had been raised with me by the Annandale transport initiative after the nationwide concessionary fares scheme was announced in 2004 by Tavish Scott, if I remember correctly. ATI was one of the first organisations to take advantage of the Government’s rural community transport grants scheme, securing about £90,000 for a new bus in August 1999. Since then, with a number of vehicles, it has provided an invaluable service to many of my constituents across Annandale and Eskdale. The issue of support for community transport has also been raised by organisations such as the WRVS. The same issue has been the subject of previous members’ business debates that were initiated by—to mention just two—Karen Gillon and Jim Hume. It has always been clear to me that pensioner residents in rural parts of my constituency are disadvantaged by having poor or non-existent bus services because, although they may be eligible for a bus pass, they have no opportunity to use it. However, it took the still waiting campaign to make me realise that the problem does not affect only rural pensioners. At its launch, the campaign highlighted the predicament of a lady living in Leith who, because of her disability, is unable to access the—normally very good—services provided by Lothian Buses because she cannot get to the bus stop. She is therefore reliant on community transport provision. We know that community transport is also essential for many pensioners when they attend hospital or visit patients in hospital. Community transport operators provide an essential service for many parts of the health service. As Jim Eadie said, the issue of concessionary bus pass use on community transport vehicles has been raised in the evidence given to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee. Under a permit issued under section 22 of the Transport Act 1985, community bus operators are permitted to run public services on which passengers can use their free bus pass, which is of course very welcome. However, many buses that are used by individuals or groups, such as for trips to the shops or for medical appointments, have only a section 19 licence, under which the operator is currently not eligible to participate in the concessionary bus pass scheme. The Age Scotland campaign seeks to address the needs of users of those services. Having listened to the evidence to the committee, I appreciate that the issue might not be as simple as it initially sounds. The reimbursement to operators for passengers who use their free entitlement is set at around 60 per cent of the adult fare. Therefore, if all the passengers on a trip were eligible to use their bus pass, the income for the community transport operator would be only 60 per cent of the fare that it had previously charged. To avoid that loss of income, Age Scotland proposes that community transport operators should be able to reclaim the cost at 100 per cent of the charge. One problem is that the concessionary transport scheme is—and always was—intended to assist users rather than subsidise operators. Arguably, if more people started using community transport because they could use their bus pass, the commercial operators might complain that the community transport operators were being subsidised. I am not sure whether that would be permissible. However, it should not be impossible to get around that obstacle, and I think that the issue needs to be looked at. Perhaps we need to consider a more innovative solution that I hope will take into account the fact that the contribution that community transport can make to the wellbeing of older people is surely a form of preventative spend.

This Government never really fails to disappoint on the height of the complacency and self-congratulation to which it aspires. There are really only two themes for Scottish Government debates: either “We are fantastic” or “The United Kingdom is rubbish”; it varies, but ministers just repeat one of those mantras. I am not arguing that nothing has been achieved in the railways, because that is patently not true. However, the Labour amendment is intended to counteract the rather vainglorious tenor of the motion and to present a reminder of what the Government has not done with regard to projects that it has not fully delivered, has delivered more slowly than it promised or has not delivered at all. It is important that the amendment also serves as a reminder of the opportunity that was not taken, but was presented by the end of the current ScotRail franchise, to discuss more fully what we expect of our railways and to examine whether a different model of delivery could be developed that would recycle profits back into real service improvements rather than into shareholders’ pockets. We agree that rail services in Scotland have improved, but that is because there has, since the Scottish Parliament was reinstated 14 years ago, been a welcome focus on rolling back the damaging effects of the Beeching cuts. That has been due to the attitude of successive Governments, supported by members of the Scottish Parliament. May 2007 was not year zero and just because a project was completed during the reign of the Scottish National Party does not mean that its achievement is solely to its credit. For example, the re-opening of the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line in 2008 was due largely to investment by Clackmannanshire Council and the Labour-Liberal Scottish Executive of 2003 to 2007, and the Airdrie to Bathgate line was also initiated by that Administration. The Airdrie-Bathgate Railway and Linked Improvements Bill was passed in 2007; and the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill was passed in 2006. Some improvements have even taken place despite Transport Scotland and Scottish ministers. For example, the electrification of the Paisley canal line was achieved through an initiative by ScotRail and Network Rail, without Transport Scotland’s involvement. That was just as well, as Network Rail and ScotRail achieved the upgrade for £12 million, and Transport Scotland had estimated that it would cost £28 million.

I am more than happy to congratulate that young engineer; I just do not particularly want to congratulate the Scottish Government. Of course, there are the projects that have not happened. The Edinburgh airport rail link was scrapped shortly after the SNP took over Government in 2007, and the Glasgow airport rail link bit the dust in 2009. Glasgow crossrail, which would have brought benefits not only to Glasgow, but to rail links to the south-west, including to Dumfries—in my constituency—Ayr and Kilmarnock, was abandoned in 2007, despite having been assessed as presenting a good business case in 2006 and having been about to move to a parliamentary bill. Ironically, Network Rail intends to electrify that route, but only to enable empty electric stock to access the Shields Road maintenance depot. Does not that seem to be a missed opportunity to use investment to achieve additional benefits? Furthermore, Aberdeen crossrail was also abandoned in 2007.

Glasgow crossrail was actually in the infrastructure plan. In fact, it had gone as far as being moved to a parliamentary bill, so it was a little bit further on than being on a wish list at that point. There are the projects that have been delayed or deferred. Thanks to a debate in Labour time last year, Parliament got the opportunity to discuss the changes to the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme, which were trumpeted then and now as efficiency savings by the Scottish Government, but were in reality a scaling back of the project that was promised in the SNP manifesto of 2011. The parts of the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme that were “deferred”, as ministers described it, included electrification of the Falkirk Grahamston loop; the Cumbernauld-Falkirk-Grangemouth line; the Stirling-Alloa-Dunblane line, which I believe is now coming forward; the Dalmeny curve, which would have linked the Edinburgh to Glasgow line directly with the Edinburgh to Fife line; and the grade-separated junctions at Greenhill and Polmont. In addition, of course, there was the earlier scrapping of the Garngad chord link in 2011. The journey time between Edinburgh and Glasgow on the electrified route will be reduced by only six to eight minutes, rather than the promised 13 minutes. In addition, although Transport Scotland and Network Rail protest that there will be no delay in its delivery, others report key obstacles, including the need to close part of the route for three months to undertake work on a tunnel and the requirement to reach a deal with the owners of the Millennium hotel, part of which will need to be demolished to enable the platforms at Queen Street to be extended. Maybe I am being a bit cynical, but I am suspicious of the reasons why Transport Scotland’s website now contains scant information about the EGIP project or its progress, despite more than £70 million having been spent on it. However, it is not just with EGIP that there are problems. The Perth to Inverness main line upgrading was originally promised for December 2011, but has now been deferred until 2025. The Aberdeen to Inverness line upgrading was scheduled for 2016, but has been deferred until 2030. The Borders railway, too, has been subject to delays, thanks to confusion over its funding mechanism. It is now projected to be up and running by September 2015—four years later than was the plan when it was approved by MSPs in 2006, following the scrapping of the tender process and the project being handed over to Network Rail for development. The second part of our amendment highlights the opportunity that the ending of the current ScotRail franchise could have presented for a wider discussion of how our rail services could develop in the future, and for the exploration of how other models of delivery, such as not-for-profit or mutually owned companies, might be developed.

I will not just now; I want to develop my point. When he was asked by Ken Macintosh last week whether the Scottish Government would encourage a not-for-profit bid for the next ScotRail franchise, Keith Brown stated: “On the substantive point, the Railways Act 1993 prevents the Scottish Government from encouraging a public sector bid.” He made the same point earlier today. In an answer to Alex Johnstone, a couple of minutes after he had responded to Ken Macintosh, the minister admitted that the legislation that he had mentioned “specifically prohibits public sector bids, not not-for-profit bids.”—[Official Report, 23 May 2013; c 20222.] The Welsh Government, however, is not so timid. It is currently considering the consultation responses to a report that was written by Professor Paul Salveson and was produced by the Co-operative Party, the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen, Co-operatives and Mutuals Wales and Co-operatives UK, in advance of the Wales and borders contract coming up for renewal in 2018. That document argues that franchising does not work well for railways, and instead proposes the establishment of a not-for-profit enterprise—rail Cymru—operating as an arm’s-length enterprise, with the Welsh Government as its principal funder. Instead of hiding behind the Railways Act 1993, the then Welsh transport minister Carl Sargeant—now the Minister for Housing and Regeneration—was able to advise the Welsh Assembly during a debate on 28 November that he had “already raised with the Department for Transport the issue of a fair level playing field for all franchisees, whether they be not-for-dividend or profit seeking.” He continued: “There should be a fair opportunity for people to bid, because the upfront costs are sometimes prohibitive for organisations to create the right business case to move forward. I have already raised that with the Secretary of State for Transport.”—[Official Report, National Assembly for Wales, 28 November 2012; p 134.] If the Welsh transport minister can raise that issue, why cannot the Scottish transport minister do the same?

I agree that that needs leadership. What I am saying is that that leadership is being shown in Wales. Indeed, the Labour Party at UK level is also considering a similar document. The minister said that state-owned rail companies in other countries could bid for the Scottish franchise. If he feels bad about that, I am surprised that he is not prepared to pursue options to encourage the submission of a mutual and co-operative bid as an alternative to private sector bids from elsewhere.

Quite honestly, I do not believe that it is for Ed Miliband to tell the Scottish Labour Party what it believes. He can consider what he wants for the United Kingdom. I am not saying that either the model that is being considered by the UK Labour Party or the model that is under consultation in Wales is necessarily correct, but what is disappointing is that the Scottish ministers seem to have no interest in having that wider debate. Instead, any time that anyone asks a question, as Kenneth Macintosh did last week, we get prevarication about the 1993 act, rather than a willingness to discuss matters in more detail. I suggest that, instead of patting themselves on the back about their achievements, Scottish ministers need to use more imagination to envisage what a successful future for Scotland’s railways might look like. I move amendment S4M-06766.2, to leave out from “high levels” to end and insert: “; believes that this is due to the importance attached to improving rail services by successive administrations since May 1999; is disappointed however that the first phase of the Edinburgh Glasgow Improvement Programme has been scaled back, that projects such as the Borders Railway have experienced significant delays and that others, including the Glasgow Airport Rail Link, have been cancelled altogether; notes that the level of public subsidy for Scotland’s railways in 2013-14 will be £511.5 million; further notes the publication of Rail Cymru - A People’s Railway for Wales and Rebuilding Rail in 2012, and believes that the renewal of the rail franchises in 2015 should be an opportunity for discussion of the future development of rail services in Scotland, including the option of a not-for-profit or mutual company running Scotland’s railways.”

Would the member like to remind us what Rail magazine had to say about the cutbacks to EGIP?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth had with his ministerial colleagues prior to allocating the most recent round of Barnett consequentials. (S4O-02174)

In answer to parliamentary question S4W-14615, the cabinet secretary stated that financial transactions totalling £290.8 million were available to the Scottish Government to support loans and equity investment but would have to be paid back to the Treasury in future years. Has the Scottish Government considered using part of that funding to support loans to housing associations for the construction of homes for social rent, given that many are experiencing problems securing loans from conventional sources such as banks?

Homelessness has been an issue that has concerned the Parliament since its early days, which is why we passed very early legislation to provide people with the right to settled accommodation by the end of last year. However, as we know, good intentions are not enough, and just passing legislation does not ensure that the problems will disappear. Individuals and families fall into homelessness for a variety of reasons, but we know from Shelter’s statistics—this is borne out by the experience of local authorities and housing associations—that significant numbers of homelessness applicants are single people. In 2011-12, 42 per cent of homelessness applications came from single men and 22 per cent came from single women. As the minister advised, a third of all applicants are young people and I think that around half of single applicants are young people. Of the others, some may be people whose problems that led to homelessness began when they were young. That is one of the many reasons why the Equal Opportunities Committee’s report is so important. The causes of homelessness among young people need to be understood if suitable interventions are to be made. As Mary Fee said, the committee noted a number of causes, including family breakdown, mental health problems and addiction issues, all of which will be familiar to us from our casework in dealing with constituents’ housing problems. Such issues are sad when they affect people of any age, but they are particularly sad in the case of young people, who should have a bright future ahead of them. Of course, those causes are further exacerbated by the experience of homelessness. Homelessness does not necessarily mean being roofless and sleeping on the street; it may involve a continued rota of sleeping on the couches and floors of friends and acquaintances. Sadly, many young people go directly from the family home into homelessness. That can happen for a variety of reasons, such as domestic abuse or substance misuse, or because the young person does not get on with a parent’s new partner or because the parent is under stress—for example, for employment or financial reasons—and unable to cope with the young person’s behaviour. It was reassuring to read in the committee’s report that the housing options hubs specifically address the issues that can create homelessness among young people and that the hubs have been able to record some success in reducing the numbers of homelessness presentations from young people. As others have said, the committee report notes the role of mediation in giving family members a break from one another to prevent a situation from escalating into breakdown. It also highlights the role that the education system can play in ensuring that young people have a realistic perspective of what homelessness means and what type of accommodation they might be offered. However, teachers may not have the training to deal with young people in those situations and, as the report points out, social workers and teachers are not necessarily the people whom young people at risk of being homeless might listen to. In that regard, the report makes a number of recommendations to the Scottish Government on data collection, the identification of what preventative work is being undertaken and whether that work is successful and how any obstacles identified might be removed. The report identifies that young people leaving care are particularly vulnerable to homelessness. Overall, I am sorry to say, we continue to fail young people in care with regard to their future life chances, whether those are measured in terms of educational achievements, employability, homelessness or the likelihood of them becoming an offender and spending a period in prison. We must develop a more holistic and person-centred approach to supporting young people in care and during their transition to adulthood. I believe that the supported accommodation implementation group report came to a similar conclusion. Managing to get a tenancy is only the beginning of the story. Many young people have difficulty in sustaining a tenancy, whether that is due to problems with budgeting or to behaviour that is unacceptable to neighbours. The curriculum for excellence recognises the importance of building financial capability, and there are many organisations that can support schools to do that. The report notes how the lack of essential life skills can disadvantage young people and asks the Scottish Government to investigate how resources might be made available through the curriculum for excellence. I was interested to hear the minister’s comments on how that is being taken forward. However, education prior to gaining a tenancy can do only so much, and many young tenants will require support when they are first in a tenancy. As the report identifies, young tenants can feel isolated. They are often in poor standard accommodation in the private sector, and they can be vulnerable to being targeted by criminal elements who are involved in drug dealing and sexual exploitation. The ideal is supported accommodation for young people. Last summer, Dumfries and Galloway Housing Partnership, which is the largest housing association in Dumfries and Galloway, opened a development of 10 self-contained units—I believe that they were opened by the minister’s predecessor—which are specifically for young people leaving care. Such accommodation enables young people to work with trained support staff to develop the skills that they need to live alongside others and to sustain a tenancy either with DGHP or another registered social landlord. Clearly, as the report identifies, welfare reform will make it more difficult for many young single people to maintain a tenancy. Councils and housing associations have housed single people in two-bedroom properties because one-bedroom properties are in short supply. I know from my casework that the bedroom tax is already having an effect, with tenants who are in receipt of housing benefit falling into arrears. Some of those people will move into the private sector—where rents are probably even higher—and, because there has been no legislative change or further financial assistance to councils and housing associations to address any financial deficit, some tenants could face homelessness through eviction for non-payment of rent that has arisen purely from the bedroom tax. I hope that the Government will review its decision in that regard, because I know that most housing associations will use eviction only as a last resort. However, given the restricted financial situation in which housing associations find themselves, in part as a result of the reductions in subsidy from the Scottish Government and in part because of the attitude of the banks from which they borrow, many housing associations, particularly smaller ones, will struggle to cope with an increasing burden of unpaid rent. I hope that the Scottish Government will monitor evictions resulting from the bedroom tax, especially those involving young people.

7. To ask the Scottish Government whether private landlords had lodged all eligible deposits with tenant deposit schemes by the deadline of 15 May 2013. (S4O-02161)

The minister will be aware of reports that only half of landlords registered their deposits by the deadline. Can she advise us how the scheme is being policed? What sanctions will be taken against the private landlords who have not complied with the legislation?

As the minister has said, the bill is very short. It abolishes the Forth Estuary Transport Authority and transfers its assets to the Scottish ministers. It transfers the staff who work for FETA to the bridge operating company and it trunks the existing Forth crossing and the surrounding roads. There is little in the bill to amend. However, I lodged an amendment at stage 2 to allow discussion of an issue to which I will refer later. I have not brought that amendment back at stage 3. First, it would not get through, and there seemed little point in dragging every member of the Parliament into the chamber for one unsuccessful amendment. Secondly, I do not think that an amendment to this very short bill is required to achieve the changes that I wish to discuss, given that the issues involved are not contained in the bill. Committee members are aware of the concerns expressed by the City of Edinburgh Council about the abolition of the Forth Estuary Transport Authority and the consequent lack of input from local elected members and lack of availability of information on how management decisions will be made. The Forth Estuary Transport Authority includes councillors from four local authorities: the City of Edinburgh Council, Fife Council, West Lothian Council and Perth and Kinross Council. The minutes of FETA meetings were recorded and published—they were certainly published on the Edinburgh council website. During stage 1 consideration of the bill, none of the councils other than Edinburgh expressed concerns. Before this debate, I contacted councillors from the other councils represented on FETA, and it turned out that they all agreed with Edinburgh’s concerns. Some went further and said that they felt that FETA’s abolition exhibited a centralising tendency on the Scottish Government’s part and, by implication, on the Scottish Parliament’s part. They were concerned that the bridge’s operation was being privatised. One councillor told me that he was disappointed with the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee members for not opposing FETA’s abolition, because he would have liked FETA to manage the new crossing, in addition to the existing one. If that approach had been possible, it would have attracted my support. However, Graham Porteous advised the committee on 16 January that FETA would not be permitted to manage both bridges, because it is fully funded by the Government. He said that, if it used Government funds to bid for the contract, that would constitute state aid and would contravene European Union legislation. No evidence was brought to the committee at stage 1 or subsequently that contradicted his advice. Committee members have to base judgments on evidence rather than make them because other people say that they do not like the decisions that have been made. The fact that the committee was not presented with evidence that contradicted the advice that we were given is one reason why I did not pursue the proposed option.

I accept that it is possible that the Scottish Government did not receive such suggestions. In fact, I did not receive them until I asked councillors whether they agreed with the comments that the City of Edinburgh Council had openly made. However, I got that feedback from all the councils that are represented on FETA. There was general agreement that it made sense for both bridges to be managed by the same organisation. It was also stated that new legislation would have been required, even if it had been possible for FETA to bid to operate both bridges. There were also issues about demonstrating value for money if FETA entered the tendering process, as it was deemed to be difficult to produce an accurate figure for FETA to operate both bridges. On 6 February, Barry Colford from FETA stated that the focus needs to be on the best outcome for road users, although he expressed disappointment that the company was to be discontinued. I will move on to the amendment that I moved at stage 2, which I did not bring back. I think that there has been confusion over what was being requested for the continued involvement of local councillors after FETA’s abolition. The minister argued that it would be wrong for local authority elected representatives to be “involved in looking after an operating contract that is wholly the responsibility of the Scottish ministers” and that that would be “not dissimilar to asking for the Scottish ministers to be involved in a local roads management project”. He believed that that would “muddy the waters” with regard to the “line of accountability about who is responsible for taking the decisions on the operating contract and who is responsible for the expenditure”.—[Official Report, Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, 27 February 2013; c 1436.] The minister recognised the need for local representation and advised that he would establish a forum to deal with issues that might arise during the building of the bridge and after it is completed. Local community representatives will be welcome on that forum, as will council officials, I understand. However, for reasons that I still fail to understand, councillors will not. The forum will monitor the building and operation of the bridge; it will not operate the bridge, so objections regarding lines of accountability do not apply. The minister argued that democratic accountability would be ensured because “Transport Scotland and the Government will stand behind the contract”. He also said: “We should not complicate that further by putting in elected representatives who would not be responsible for the spending decisions.” The thing is that the forum will not make spending decisions, which will be made by the operating company; the forum will monitor the operation of the bridge and scrutinise spending decisions. Graham Porteous went on to explain: “if community groups are unhappy with what the contractor is doing, they have the avenue of the forum to make representations on their behalf.”—[Official Report, Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, 27 February 2013; c 1437.] I was really asking for local councillors to be able to be part of the forum and make representations on behalf of their constituents, or more generally on behalf of their local authorities, which will, after all, be affected by the operation of the bridge. In addition, in the interests of accountability, the minutes of the forum’s meetings should be published and made available to interested members of the public, who might not be members of the forum. That was the gist of the amendment that I lodged at stage 2. The minister did not think that it was appropriate to establish another quango in legislation, and I accept that argument. My amendment was probably lopsided in that it referred only to local elected member representation and did not fully encompass the responsibilities of the operating company, which will operate the old bridge as well as the new bridge. Let us be honest—we had not taken evidence on making the forum a statutory body at stage 1 so, in fairness, perhaps the amendment was not appropriate. I decided not to lodge another amendment at stage 3 because I do not think that those things are for the bill. However, they are concerns of councillors who represent the authorities with the principal interest in the Forth crossing and I hope that they can be discussed further.

As Alex Johnstone said, the debate is probably considerably longer than the bill. I, too, am not terribly sure that there is a great deal more to be said, although members have raised a number of issues. When Richard Lyle talked about crossing the Forth by ferry, that took me back; as a young girl I was brought up in Edinburgh and my grandparents lived in Fife. One of the attractions of going to visit my grandparents—aside from the attraction of seeing them, because they spoiled us—was sitting on the ferry eating our sandwiches. It made going to Fife feel almost like voyaging to a foreign country.

I think that people there might well have thought we were foreigners coming in. However, that is a pleasant memory. I, too, remember seeing the Forth road bridge being built, which was an exciting time. Who would have thought that, only 40-odd years later, we would need another crossing because of problems with the bridge? That is a bit of a surprise to those of us who are long enough in the tooth to have spanned the entire life of the bridge. A number of members commented on the name of the new bridge. I, too, thought that St Margaret’s crossing was quite a good name for historical reasons, until I heard Alex Johnstone, who totally put me off calling it that. He also shocked other members including David Torrance, who had already voted for calling it St Margaret’s crossing.

Indeed. There might be a certain amount of resistance to that. A number of members talked about staff issues. Margaret McCulloch and Jim Eadie welcomed the fact that the wages and conditions of the staff will be preserved. We on the Labour benches welcome the fact that the Scottish ministers will act as guarantor for FETA employees’ pensions, and that jobs and conditions will be protected under TUPE. I am sure that it will be a relief to the 60 existing pensioners and other previous employees that they will remain part of Lothian Pension Fund. Alex Johnstone also mentioned the consultation. Initially, there were concerns over the lack of consultation of the relevant trade unions. However, I believe that, as Margaret McCulloch pointed out, the trade unions UCATT and Unite are now happy with the conditions and the assurances that they have received. Much of the essential detail is not in the bill. That is a matter of fact; it is not a criticism of the bill. As several members made clear, the conditions in the operating contract are crucial and must work in the public interest. Therefore, as Margaret McCulloch said, the procurement process will be important. It must ensure quality and sustainability and should not just be about getting the cheapest price for operation of the bridge. I, too, look forward to learning more about the proposed minimum standards on procurement and how community benefit will be ensured. Apprenticeships and job opportunities for people who are long-term unemployed must be part of the procurement process. The recent report of the Scottish Affairs Committee on the heinous practice of blacklisting has shocked most, if not all, members. Many of us want companies that are known to have been involved in blacklisting of applicants—because of their political views, trade union membership or simply because they have in the past raised legitimate concerns over health and safety issues—to be excluded from accessing public sector contracts. Many firms that are known to have used blacklists are in the construction sector, but action against blacklisting must be taken across the board and must include companies that might bid for operation of the bridge. The issue of operation of the bridge took up a bit of time. I was interested to hear from Helen Eadie about the good work of FETA, of which I know she has a lot of personal experience. I, too, acknowledge the good work that FETA did over the years in developing things like the park-and-ride scheme and Halbeath. On the issue of creeping privatisation, the problem for the committee was that we had no evidence presented to us that we could do anything else, or that FETA could take this over. That was a problem for the committee, which we could not really get over. I feel that Alex Johnstone still misunderstands what I was arguing for. I was not talking about the continuing existence of the current scheme, which is not possible. I was not talking about councillors invading Transport Scotland and dictating to it how it goes about operating its assets. I was asking for local councillor representation on the bridges forum, alongside the community council representation, and not just council official representation, which is not quite the same thing. Council officials are not accountable to people who vote. Like civil servants, they are there when the politicians are long gone, so they do not have the same stimulus, if you like, to be responsive to the views of constituents. Therefore, I think that it would be appropriate for councillors to be on the forum that monitors operation of the bridge. That does not mean to say that they would make decisions, but they would play an active part in scrutinising on behalf of their constituents. I hope that consideration will be given to how minutes of meetings of the forum are publicised and disseminated to members of the public. We will support the bill at stage 3. The issues that I have outlined can be considered after the bill is passed. I hope that the minister will do so.

Having attended a briefing with the ORR at lunchtime, I am confident that it has been listening to what people have been saying. I thank the minister for his statement. I did not see the advance copy as I was in the chamber when it was released, but as a member of the task force at the minister’s invitation—I thank him for that—I know that the task force is rightly concentrating on the immediate employment and restoration problems caused first by problems with ATH and now by problems with SRG. Will the minister advise me whether part of the task force’s remit will be to investigate how we could better progress economic development in coalfield areas, such as Upper Nithsdale, to ensure that their economies are less vulnerable to any future problems in the industry?

As a resident of the far south of Scotland, I am not a frequent driver on the trunk roads around Aberdeen. However, on those few occasions when I have driven between Inverness and Elgin and Aberdeen and to the south, the Haudagain roundabout has certainly made a lasting impression on me. It has been a surprise to me that a city the size and importance of Aberdeen has such a poor ring-road system. The delays since the preferred route was announced in 2006 and the legal challenges, culminating in the decision of the Court of Session, must have been immensely frustrating to all concerned, but the lack of action on the Haudagain itself must surely have added to those frustrations.

Not just now, Mr Stevenson—I will come to you later. I congratulate Christian Allard on his maiden speech, and on paying tribute not only to Brian Adam but to the people of his region. As far as I am concerned, he can go on and speak in French, as I would like to hear it. As we heard in Richard Baker’s opening speech, there have been many motions and parliamentary questions about improvements to the Haudagain roundabout since the Parliament was established. On 31 May 2005, Brian Adam, who was then the MSP for what was at that time the Aberdeen North constituency, lodged a motion noting that the Haudagain roundabout had been labelled the worst roundabout in the country and that, as it was part of a trunk road, it was the responsibility of the then Scottish Executive, and calling on ministers to make its improvement a priority. It is not at all surprising that a diligent constituency MSP such as Brian Adam would lodge a motion that demanded action on an issue of concern to his constituents. However, the motion was also signed by John Swinney and Alex Neil. The former became Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth two years later, and the latter served as Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment for a period. If the improvement of the roundabout was a priority in May 2005, why did it cease to be a priority when they could do something about it?

They are both important—one cannot be singled out. What is the most important project for the SNP? We all have a list of important projects, and some of us may disagree with each other about which ones are more important. Eight years later, the roundabout improvement is still just part of a commitment to improve transport in the north-east, and we are awaiting the completion of the Aberdeen western peripheral route before an improvement scheme can even commence.

No—just because you have a loud voice, Mr Stewart, it does not mean that I will necessarily give way to you.

It is no wonder that Stewart Stevenson talked about anything other than the Haudagain roundabout in his contribution, because it constitutes a U-turn by his Government. In January 2008, when Stewart Stevenson was Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change, he apparently pledged—according to the Aberdeen Evening Express—that he would have the roundabout “fixed” by the time the bypass was built.

He told the Aberdeen Evening Express that he was confident that congestion could be cracked without a flyover. In that publication on 31 January 2008, Mr Stevenson was quoted—it may be a misquote—as saying: “The sooner we fix this, the happier I’m going to be, not just as the Minister for Transport, but also as someone who drives the Haudagain.”

I hope that the member told the Aberdeen Evening Express that on 31 January 2008 it was totally wrong. Keith Brown said that Richard Baker has not raised the issue in Parliament—[Interruption.]

However, Mr Baker has lodged a number of questions. He was told first that the AWPR was due to be completed in 2018, and that the Haudagain would not be started until at least nine months later, which takes the project into 2019. I ask the minister to listen to what my colleagues in the Conservative Party are saying in this instance about making the roundabout a shovel-ready project. Why could the planning application not be submitted now? There is surely more that the Government could be doing to ensure that the project gets off the stocks.

The Government already has the route, and it has committed £3 million to the design of the project. It should get a move on and submit the planning application. My colleague Jenny Marra referred to the need for a commitment on costs if the roads are to be detrunked in the sequence that the ministers are proposing. I heard the minister say that the Scottish Government will pay for that, but has he made that commitment in writing to Aberdeen City Council so that it is legally binding? The minister is committing a future Government—not himself—to that timescale. Has he made that a legally binding commitment? [Interruption.]

Delay is frustrating for the hard-pressed users of the roundabout and those who live in its vicinity. In 2011, it was the only Scottish entry to be included in the shortlist for something called “Roundabout Idol”—which I had never heard of before—as one of the worst roundabouts in the UK. That is hardly something to be proud of. Even Nestrans confesses that it takes between seven and 22 minutes to cross the roundabout. As Richard Baker mentioned, the Institute of Directors estimates that such delays cost £15 million to £30 million a year in lost time, environmental pollution, fuel consumption and productivity. As Jenny Marra said, the amount of money that we are losing could pay for the scheme several times over, so we must ask how much more cost there will be to the local economy. Indeed, given the way in which the costs of capital projects escalate, how much more will the final cost be due to such delays? Presiding Officer, sorry, do I have seven minutes in total?

I hope that Kevin Stewart listened carefully to Lewis Macdonald’s speech, which explained in great detail what option 5 meant and what the STAG report—as opposed to the scaremongering that has been put about—actually said about lane closures causing minor disruption. For example, on the A75 in my constituency, a very welcome project is under way that everyone knows will cause some delays, but constituents are prepared to tolerate delays for a short period if they will get a far better result in the longer term.

I have taken three interventions, so I will not take any more.

Once again, this is a case of SNP members saying one thing when they are in opposition and another when they are in government. People have longer memories than ministers may think, and commitments made and later abandoned will come back to haunt them.

I was interested to hear the minister welcome the opportunity to discuss the MVA Consultancy report on RET on commercial vehicles in the Western Isles, because Labour asked for a ministerial statement on that report and it was refused. Of course, the minister made a statement to Parliament on NorthLink Serco’s failure to maintain a lifeline service from Scrabster to Stromness because repairs were required to the MV Hamnavoe. However, we felt that the Parliament should be discussing a number of other issues to do with ferries. That is why we brought what the minister described as a “disparate” motion to the chamber—because we were refused the opportunity of a ministerial statement.

It was an appropriate matter for a statement and we had other important issues that we wanted to discuss two weeks ago, as the Minister for Parliamentary Business will probably recall. The Minister for Transport and Veterans came to Parliament on 24 April with a statement on the Scottish Government policy on canals, which, to be frank, was a fairly flimsy document that told us that canals were an asset to the country and that Scotland should make the most of them—something that not one of us across the chamber could possibly disagree with—and yet when we asked for a statement on ferries and some of the important issues, it was refused. It therefore fell to Labour—as it did in the case of the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme—to ensure that important transport issues were brought to the chamber for debate. One of those important issues, of course, was the MVA Consultancy report—rather delayed in its publication—which had been published. After the report’s publication, one of the minister’s SNP colleagues—the Western Isles MP Angus Brendan MacNeil—apparently accepted that commercial RET had been beneficial to communities and that it was “regrettable” that the SNP Government had imposed increases. That is one of the SNP MPs who seems to believe that. On 23 February last year, the Government amendment to a Labour motion on the issue asserted that “only 7% of hauliers passed the full benefits on to consumers” and, in his closing speech, Mr Neil stated: “a lot has been made of the hauliers not agreeing with the Scottish Government when we say that the benefits to the hauliers of RET were not passed on. It is not the Scottish Government that says that; it is the hauliers.” He then said that I “should listen to this and ... be educated.”—[Official Report, 23 February 2012; c 6539.] Perhaps it is he or his successors who should listen to the results of the MVA Consultancy study that the Scottish Government commissioned and then delayed publication of for several months. As others have said, the MVA study found that the introduction of RET had a positive impact for local businesses and that the removal of RET for commercial vehicles had significant negative impacts on hauliers and a variety of businesses across the islands, with businesses in the primary sector affected most. If Mr Neil was correct in stating that hauliers were not passing on the benefits of RET, how could its removal possibly have had such an effect—which Mary Scanlon and Rhoda Grant have detailed—on businesses across the islands? Perhaps Mr Neil—or Mr Brown or Ms Sturgeon on his behalf—would like to apologise for his assertion. Kenny Gibson listed a number of new routes in his constituency and spoke about the benefits of RET to his constituents; I wondered whether he was trying to prove the point that Liam McArthur made in his opening speech. Rob Gibson suggested that the results of the MVA Consultancy report were due simply to trade downturns, but that rather suggests that the consultants were incompetent in producing their report, in which the Government had specifically asked them to investigate the effects of the RET reduction on commercial vehicles. I doubt that the consultants that were employed were so inefficient that they could not do that. As other members have said, I hosted a drop-in session on 8 May on behalf of the Transport Salaried Staffs Association to discuss CalMac’s proposals to reduce the salaries of around 70 port staff by approximately 25 per cent. That would be the result of a number of proposals to remove weekend working premiums, night work payments and annual holiday bonuses and to cut shift allowances. There was also a proposal to change rostering, which would increase the working week’s length by two hours. Other members, such as Margaret McDougall, detailed CalMac’s proposals for service changes, and the employees at the meeting told us about the effects that the proposals would have on them, their salaries, their ability to pay their mortgages and their standards of living—[Interruption.]

Indeed, some of the employees said that they would no longer be able to afford to pay their mortgage or use a car to get to work, despite the excellent service that they have provided to their employers over the years. At that time, the TSSA expected to meet CalMac management on 15 May. I was pleased, as I think that all of us who were at that meeting were, by the genuine cross-party support for the workers. Members of four parties—four political groupings in the Parliament—were present, and every single person who was there expressed their support for the workers. We felt that the best way in which we could express our support for the TSSA members was to lodge a motion, which Kenny Gibson kindly offered to do on behalf of all the MSPs. We hoped that the TSSA members would be able to take that motion with them to the meeting with CalMac in order to demonstrate the cross-party support for them, and I was pleased to hear that 41 signatures to the motion have now been recorded. Margaret McDougall was right when she advised us that CalMac is no ordinary company. It is the principal subsidiary of David MacBrayne Ltd, which is wholly owned by Scottish ministers, and it provides services under public service contracts with the Scottish Government, for which it receives a grant. We therefore ask the minister to join MSPs on all sides of the chamber in saying to that publicly owned company that it is unacceptable for it to treat its workforce in such a manner and to reduce its staff’s wages by 25 per cent. I was pleased to hear the minister say in his intervention on my colleague Rhoda Grant that CalMac is considering the TSSA’s counter proposals. I hope that the message comes out of the debate that all members oppose the imposition of such conditions on the workforce and that we would not expect hard-working employees to be treated in that way. On the NorthLink issue, Keith Brown told us in a statement to Parliament last year that “One change that users ... will ... appreciate” with Serco taking over the contract “is that Serco NorthLink is taking a fresh approach to vessel overhauls”. He said that he understood that “during the winter there will be no interruption to services, in contrast to the long dry-dock period of last year.”—[Official Report, 5 September 2012; c 11050.] That raises the question whether that “fresh approach” and cost-cutting by Serco led to the problems that we have discussed today. Liam McArthur raised important questions about the contract that Scottish ministers agreed with Serco and whether the same requirements were placed on other bidders.

I thank members for the opportunity to discuss those three important issues. I appreciate that the debate has been short, but it is important that the message goes out to CalMac about the changes in wages and conditions that the company is trying to impose on its workforce.

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth recently made an announcement in the form of an answer to a written question on the Barnett consequentials arising from the United Kingdom budget. Does the minister anticipate that local authorities and housing associations will benefit from those funds?

I have not been involved in the bill’s passage but, although I recognise the concerns that members have expressed, I want to use the very short time that I have to welcome the provisions on the Solway cockle beds that the minister did not really have the time to describe in his speech. The Solway cockle beds have had a very chequered history, having been overfished in the early 2000s and closed in 2002. The Solway Shellfish Management Association, which was formed in 2006 by a statutory instrument from this place, was given the unenviable task of regulating the cockle fishery when it reopened, as well as certain enforcement powers. However, of the more than 100 licences that were granted by the association, 50 per cent were local and the other 50 per cent were not. There was a huge stramash and loads of people turned up at my surgeries to complain about licences and all the rest of it. Unfortunately, despite those actions, cockle stocks declined further. No more licences were issued after 2007-08 and the beds had to be closed again in 2011. Enforcement has always been extremely difficult. In past centuries, the Solway was infamous for the activities of pirates and smugglers and the physical features that aided those individuals—that coastline of bays and coves with few points of access to the sea from public roads and many crossing private land—also aided the illegal cocklers. Before and after the reopening of the fishery, I received reports from constituents living near the coast of possible illegal activity, including vehicles on the beach, caravans on private land that seemed to contain what might have been migrant workers and boats being launched from private access points. Although those reports were passed to the police and the SSMA, it was very difficult to follow them up. Of course, such activity is not only illegal but potentially extremely dangerous. The incoming tide in the Solway is famously known as being faster than a galloping horse—in other words, more than 25 to 30mph. It is certainly faster than a person can run and faster than a vehicle can drive in soft sand, with the result that those who are exposed to illegal cockling are also in great danger of losing their lives. Indeed, we remember the events in Morecambe Bay in 2004, when 23 people lost their lives in a gang incident. The same thing could easily happen on the Solway. At stage 2 we passed amendments to allow the courts to consider circumstantial evidence pointing to illegal activity—

Moreover, police now have powers of access to private land and can enforce that right in order to investigate the reports of possible illegal activity that I have received in the past. That was not possible before and it will be extremely important in detecting and preventing such activity. Some campaigners think that the bill should have gone further, but I am pleased that the need for action has been recognised and that these measures have been included in the bill.

I echo members’ good wishes for David Stewart and Adam Ingram. I hope that they will both be back in Parliament with us in the near future. I had little knowledge of the petition as I am not a member of the Public Petitions Committee, and I looked into it only recently. I will not go through the details of it, because Chic Brodie and other members have explained them well. On the issue of cross-subsidy, although it is clear that a lower percentage of properties in Scotland are at risk of flooding, SEPA’s recent letter to the committee said that it does not fully accept the argument that there has been no development on once-in-200-years flood plains in Scotland since 1995. It feels that such a claim cannot be substantiated, so we should not be too complacent about flooding. As other members have said, SEPA advises that approximately 112,000 residential properties and 14,000 business properties—one in 22 homes and one in 13 businesses—are at risk of flooding. As recent weather events have demonstrated, the problem is worsening every year. I should perhaps declare an interest, as my constituency office is one of those 14,000 business properties that are at risk of flooding. In fact, it has flooded twice since 2009—that experience is even more common for businesses that are situated by the River Nith on the Whitesands.

We could have a flooding competition. I am sure that Nigel Don agrees that, until it happens, we do not realise how devastating flooding is. It is not like when the bath overflows. When rivers and drains flood, the experience is completely different. On 19 November 2009, a month’s rainfall was deposited in one day along the River Nith. I get SEPA’s flood warnings, and on that day, they were issued for the Whitesands and the bottom of Friars Vennel, where my office is situated. We took on that constituency office back in 2000 and, at that time, we were told that there had sometimes been flooding in that area. However, until 19 November 2009, the highest that the flood waters had ever reached was on to the steps outside the office. Apart from having to roll up my trousers to wade out of the office on occasion—a spectacle that, I am sure, amused passing constituents—I had never experienced anything worse than that. We all had a false sense of security. When the flood warning came, we removed furniture from the lowest part of the office, thinking that the water would come in there, and we thought that we were safe. In fact, the flood water came into the office at a height of about 18 inches in the main part of the office, and it caused several thousand pounds of damage. On that one flooding occasion, the cost of the damage to Dumfries was estimated at £5 million. My office had to be rewired and replastered, and the telephones and electricity were out. All the files in the bottom of filing cabinets were contaminated with water that contained sewage and had to be taken away to be burned, so some of my constituents’ files no longer exist. The office carpet had to be taken up and much of our furniture was soaked in sewage-contaminated water, so it also had to go. I can advise members that the smell is appalling and that it gets worse over days. It is also extremely cold. Nigel Don mentioned Paul Hendy, who became very familiar with Whitesands, Friars Vennel and, indeed, my office after the flooding, as he came round with various people to stick probes into the walls to see whether they were drying out. We had to get rid of stationery and stamps that had been stored in the cupboards—that all had to be destroyed. My Westminster colleague had tower computers on the floor; they were all damaged and had to be sent back to Westminster for some boffin to recreate the disks and get the information off them. We had dehumidifiers running—ineffectively—for what seemed like weeks. However, what struck me was that at least that was only my workplace, and I could turn the key in the door and go to a nice warm home at night. That really brought home to me how devastating flooding in the home must be, because that affects people’s personal belongings. Ours was just a parliamentary office. I do not mean that our job is not important, but it was not a business that we had painstakingly built up over the years as were most of the properties that had been affected by the flooding of the River Nith. Many of those properties were involved in the preparation and retail of food, and we can imagine the damage that flood water does to the equipment for that. People had to buy tens of thousands of pounds-worth of equipment to replace what they had lost. Our insurance premiums did not go up, but the excess shot up. Indeed, the excess for some of the properties that were worst affected went up by about £5,000, and some cannot get insurance at all now. Needless to say, almost two years to the day later, we had a similar warning and the flood water came back in again. Between times, Dumfries and Galloway Council had assisted businesses with the purchase of flood gates so, in 2011, we managed to seal all the doors to the office so that the water could not get in. I was quite pleased with what I had done. We had got sandbags that inflated when they came into contact with water and I was sure that we were well sealed. I went down at half past 10 at night and poked my head around the door, and the carpet seemed to be dry, but the next morning, it was absolutely soaked. The water had come right round the back of the property and in through the wall. The measures that I took do not seem to work with old buildings.

Something similar happened to one of the properties across the road from us. The water was kept in, and it did not get back out again until the doors were opened. Those are difficult situations. Over the years, there have been a number of discussions about how we will deal with flooding, and that is a frustration for people—we have talked and talked about what we will do about flooding. Many years ago, somebody came to demonstrate a temporary flood barrier that we could put along the side of the river, but the proposal was never taken up, because there was a dispute about who would be responsible for taking it down, where it would be stored and who would install it. That never happened. We have also discussed opening up the flood plains further upstream, which would be very much in the spirit of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009, which promoted sustainable solutions. I believe that that has now been discounted as a solution, although I am not quite sure why. Dumfries and Galloway Council recently organised something called a charrette. I got quite excited when I heard that there was going to be a charrette on the Whitesands—I thought that it might be some sort of French festival, but apparently it was some sort of discussion about possible ideas for tackling the flooding of the River Nith. The problem is that, although ideas are being exchanged, the finance is not there. That will always be the problem. Since then, nothing very much has happened. In the end, it will come down to funding.

I was a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, which examined the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill and the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill, and I agree that we have done a lot in Scotland in terms of passing legislation. The prevention of flooding is better than insurance. It does not even matter whether someone is insured when such destruction gets into their home and causes so much disturbance. Preventing the flood from happening in the first place is the best solution, but that costs an awful lot of money. That is the problem. As other members have said, as we build more throughout the countryside and as the climate changes, flooding incidents are getting worse. How we identify and fund the required measures is a major problem. Money is not the only problem with the River Nith, although it is a big problem. I do not think that anybody is quite sure what the solution is. We hear many different ideas, but we do not know what the solution is. I asked a councillor with whom I am very well acquainted what was happening and what the council was doing. He said that he would bring the matter up with the planning, housing and environment services committee at its next meeting to find out what was happening. There is a difficulty in identifying the solutions, which I am sure is also true for Stonehaven and other places. Thank you, Presiding Officer, for giving me the chance to relate our experiences of flooding, which I hope might be useful to future deliberations.

I am pleased that the Conservatives have chosen energy as a topic for one of their debates this afternoon, even if the Labour Party is unable to subscribe to the entire content of the motion. Energy production has been and still is important to Dumfriesshire, which allows me to be parochial. Members who have known me over the past 14 years in the Parliament will know that I have consistently supported a balanced energy policy, even when that was not the policy of the Scottish Executive in the first two sessions of Parliament. Chapelcross nuclear power station was an important employer in Annandale for more than 50 years. I regret that, because of the Scottish Government’s policy, there was no opportunity to consider whether it could be replaced by a new and cleaner alternative. As Murdo Fraser said, coal production is in troubled times. I am grateful to the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism for inviting me and others on to his opencast mining task force. I was even more pleased that all members of the task force believe that the preservation of employment in that industry over the medium and long term is a priority, and that they see the coal industry in Scotland as having a future. I have to say a bit about wind farms, because the view of many of my constituents is that there will be too many of them in Dumfries and Galloway if all the proposals go through. I give the example of the development of 71 213MW turbines at Harestanes, which Dumfries and Galloway Council and most of the local community opposed but which the Scottish Government nevertheless consented to in late 2007. Even though that development is only under construction, Scottish Power, which is, of course, a subsidiary of the large multinational company Iberdrola, is already proposing an extension and a further 19 turbines on an adjoining site. I am perfectly happy to have some wind farms and I like seeing some of them as I drive up to Edinburgh, but an alarming number of potential sites is being proposed all the way up the A76 and the A701. My constituents feel that Dumfries and Galloway is doing its bit.

Dumfries and Galloway Council approved an interim planning policy more than a year ago, but its decisions are too often overruled on appeal or when applications are referred to the Scottish ministers.

I do not have enough time. Way back in 2004, the Enterprise and Culture Committee recommended in a report on renewable energy in Scotland that the Scottish Executive should develop a national strategic framework for wind farm applications. In October 2004, Richard Lochhead said that he was “almost begging” ministers to bring forward a framework; indeed, John Swinney urged the ministers of the time not to “kick the issue into the long grass of 2006.”—[Official Report, 6 October 2004; c 11038.] After six years of this Government—after all that time—on the eve of a debate that was prompted by the Conservative group, a planning framework and a Scottish planning policy came forward with some reference to wind farms. That offers some protection for scenic areas in some parts of Scotland, but it does not offer protection to any scenic parts of Dumfries and Galloway other than a part of Merrick. Indeed, there is concern in my area that the Government’s proposals may increase the likelihood of developers focusing on Dumfries and Galloway as they are excluded from developing elsewhere.

As well as the jobs that Ms McAlpine mentioned, in the past few weeks we have seen the loss of more than 40 jobs at Interflora in Dumfries, and statistics released by United Kingdom ministers to my colleague Russell Brown MP suggest that more than 2,000 private sector jobs have been lost in Dumfries and Galloway since 2010. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the time has come for the relevant agencies to develop a more proactive approach to job creation and retention in Dumfries and Galloway?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement and the strategy document. In November 2012, Scottish Canals issued a consultation that stated that the finalised heritage strategy would be available by 31 January. That document does not seem to have materialised. Can the minister advise whether the document that has been issued today includes the response to that consultation? If it does, why has the action plan for 2013 to 2018, with its 20 specific objectives, not been included? If it does not include that response, can he advise when the finalised, detailed strategy will be published? Can the minister also advise whether the actions and communications training, educational opportunities, knowledge transfer and—importantly—funding and fundraising that the consultation document anticipated would have commenced by now are under way? Can he tell us whether Government funding additional to the annual £10 million budget of Scottish Canals has been allocated to the strategy? If so, what other organisations have been identified as partners in the implementation of the strategy?

5. To ask the First Minister what progress has been made on changes to the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme. (S4F-01312)

The First Minister refers to Network Rail’s claims. However, industry sources stated in Scotland on Sunday on 31 March that the first phase of EGIP “may not be finished until 2019”, which is three years later than he claims. Which estimate does the First Minister agree with? That of his transport ministers or that of the industry experts?

I know that.

However fundamentally I disagree with Margaret Thatcher’s political philosophy and however angry I feel about the effects that her Government’s policies had and, indeed, are still having on many of my constituents, I begin by recognising that this debate has been prompted by a person’s death: a woman who had family, friends, followers and party colleagues who mourn her passing. Those of us who recall the passing of John Smith and Donald Dewar understand the pain that Conservative Party members are going through, and I offer them my condolences, as do my colleagues. I am pleased that the timing of the debate has changed, as to have had it on the same day as Mrs Thatcher’s funeral would have been distasteful. Former MSP Lord James Douglas-Hamilton used to like to tease me by pointing out similarities between Mrs Thatcher and me, including an appreciation of whisky. She was, like me, originally trained as a physical chemist. I have always been perplexed not only by her dislike of scientists once she got into power, but that she did not use a more scientific approach in politics and was such an avid proponent of assertion trumping evidence. Some people call that conviction politics, others the inability to accept that you might possibly sometimes be wrong, and others might describe it as a narcissistic personality disorder—if it is that, it is probably quite common among successful politicians. However it is described, it is very much at odds with scientific training. Many words have been spoken about Mrs Thatcher’s legacy. Those who journey up the A76 from Dumfries through Sanquhar and Kirkconnell into the former East Ayrshire coal-mining areas such as New Cumnock will see part of that legacy. Communities had arisen because of the deep-mining industry; they were situated there because that is where the pits were, and those communities are still struggling to find an alternative economic role. Moreover, the housing waiting lists for councils or housing associations are the legacy of her housing policy, with dozens—in some areas, hundreds—of applicants waiting for properties in areas where the annual turnover is perhaps in single figures. Because her Government and ministers inflicted the poll tax on Scotland a year ahead of the rest of the UK and because the manufacturing industries that their policies decimated were essential parts of many Scottish communities, Mrs Thatcher and her Government are often perceived as being particularly anti-Scottish. However, I think that that is a mistake.

I am sorry, but no. I am pushed for time. I lived for all but the last two years of Mrs Thatcher’s reign in the south of England and married a miner’s son from the north of England who was the first person in his family ever to attend university and came from a community that is very similar to those on the A76 and which is still suffering from the same consequences. People up and down the UK, including in the south of England, were affected; trade unionists, north or south, were the enemy within; and manufacturing throughout the UK was abandoned in favour of financial and other service industries—and we all know where that brought us. Although I will never blame any tenant who bought their council house under the right to buy, the aversion to replacing those houses made social housing rarer and rarer and turned it into the housing of last resort rather than the mainstay of many communities and the first home for young people setting up on their own. The perception that everyone in the south of England was well off and benefited from the Tory Government’s actions in the 1980s at Scotland’s expense was as untrue then as it is now. Sections of the population there were also affected by poverty, unemployment and poor housing. Entire communities might not have been written off in the manner that they were in the northern parts of the UK, but many individuals still suffered the same deprivations. One of the most frequently used adjectives applied to Mrs Thatcher has been “divisive”. However, that should be no surprise, given that division is fundamental to right-wing ideology. We cannot understand how Mrs Thatcher’s Government operated if we fail to accept that it involved that old-fashioned concept—class. While serving the interests of financiers and big business, her Government sought to appeal to the middle class and those who aspired to be middle class. Right-wing politics succeeds through division by saying to the majority that outsiders and the less deserving, whether they be working-class trade unionists in Mrs Thatcher’s time, current recipients of welfare, the unemployed, single mothers and—as far as the UK Independence Party is concerned—foreigners, are somehow benefiting at their expense. We need only look at the right-wing press. We delude ourselves if we think that no one in Scotland is susceptible to those siren voices; I have certainly heard those views expressed on the doorsteps in my very own constituency.

That is doubtless the case, but I am arguing that division is fundamental to right-wing ideology and that we need to understand that if we are to combat it. Despite the many good things that happened to me during the 1980s, the most important of which was the birth of my children, I look back at that decade with a feeling of distaste. It epitomised greed, selfishness and a lack of social conscience. Those who had paraded their wealth in the faces of those who had not; the view was that anyone could succeed and that if someone did not it was their own fault. Mrs Thatcher’s political children in the present UK Government have embarked on a savage attack on the poor in Britain. Mr Cameron has said that she “saved Britain”, but what did she save it from? From having a manufacturing base? From the scourge of available social housing? From the social chapter and the minimum wage? From having a social conscience? From being tolerant towards sexual diversity? From believing that poverty and unemployment are stains on society that reflect badly on us all? No, she did not save Britain.

I suspected that procurement as a topic for debate may not have set many members’ pulses racing, although I am encouraged to hear that the debate is tightly subscribed. As the previous two speakers have said, public procurement in Scotland is extremely important. It is worth £9 billion annually, and half of that expenditure is made by our local authorities. How that significant financial resource is distributed, which businesses benefit from that expenditure and the conditions attached to the awarding of successful contracts are of great importance not only to the national and local economies but in ensuring that small and medium-sized and social enterprises are able to access public contracts and in the provision of social and environmental benefits. The debate, which comes in advance of the forthcoming bill, gives members the opportunity to contribute their views on what the bill should contain. It also gives us the opportunity to discuss what can be improved. The cabinet secretary has spoken about improvements to procurement that have happened without legislation. Legislation is not necessary for all the improvements—indeed, some respondents to the Government’s pre-legislative consultation expressed the view that legislation is not necessary. That view was also voiced by some participants in the David Hume Institute seminar on this topic on 29 January. They argued that what is required is a change in the attitudes and approach to public procurement rather than in the legislation that governs it. The arguments surrounding that viewpoint will doubtless form part of the evidence that the committee will take on the bill. I think that the discussion will centre on that sensitive balance on what may be done and what should be made a requirement. The bill’s progress is slower than originally expected. I listened with interest to the cabinet secretary’s response to Patrick Harvie. I appreciate that the Government is awaiting the detail of the new EU directive in order to ensure compliance. The cabinet secretary mentioned supported businesses. In that context, I highlight the concerns raised with members over article 17, which will replace article 19 in the EU directive. It is due to be discussed in plenary at the European Parliament this week, and it was the subject of an email from Councillor Paul Carey of Glasgow City Council, who has raised concerns that the protection offered to supported factories and businesses, such as Blindcraft, is being downgraded by the reduction of the threshold of disabled employees from 50 to 30 per cent and the extension of the definition to include disadvantaged people. I started by commenting that members might not have been excited by the selection of this topic for debate but, judging by the number of briefings that we have received, many stakeholders recognise its importance. Some stakeholders are disappointed by what appears to be a shift in emphasis in the proposed bill from sustainable procurement to simply procurement reform. They are concerned that that signals a move away from the social and environmental benefits that good procurement practice can achieve to a more technical reform of the system that is beneficial to business and, I hope, smaller businesses and social enterprises but which misses the more widespread and ethical benefits that a more encompassing bill could provide. Many stakeholders, including the Federation of Small Businesses, the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund and the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, have reflected on the effect of the focus on achieving cost savings rather than on taking a more holistic view of the overall benefit of the spend to local communities and the maximisation of social benefit. Jim and Margaret Cuthbert’s report “Using Our Buying Power to Benefit Scotland” illustrates how procurement practice can work against economic and social development when it results in Scottish companies, particularly smaller companies, being locked out of public sector contracts for a period of years. I appreciate that the Cuthberts’ report was published some time ago, but there is still a need to consider carefully some of the points that they made in their research. I listened to the statistics that Gordon MacDonald and the cabinet secretary quoted about access for small and medium-sized enterprises, but I think that there is an issue with the definition of what constitutes an SME. Defining an SME as an enterprise employing fewer than 250 employees means that SMEs can be pretty big, as there are not many enterprises of that size in my constituency. The definition actually encompasses something like 90 per cent of Scottish businesses, so I am not sure that we have quite the success that has been claimed. The Federation of Small Businesses report “Local Procurement—Making the most of small businesses” tells us that 70 per cent of SMEs across the UK do not even bid for public sector contracts. Small businesses are deterred not only by onerous time-consuming prequalification questionnaires—although I appreciate that the Government is looking at that issue—but by the relatively high cost of submitting a bid compared with the value of the contract, the aggregation of contracts and joint procuring that puts contracts beyond the reach of small businesses, and the long-term frameworks for major construction contracts. Some of those deterrents could be removed without additional legislation. Both the reports that I have mentioned contain illustrations of how procurement in other EU countries is managed differently. The problems that are encountered by small businesses in Scotland and the rest of the UK are not due solely to EU directives, as is often suggested. The procurement reform bill presents us with an opportunity to define what we expect to be delivered in return for the £9 billion of public sector procurement spend. That should be defined not only in terms of the goods and services that are purchased; such a level of spend should be a powerful lever to promote good practice across a whole range of behaviours. For example, we should expect those businesses that receive public money to pay their taxes. Companies that conceal their wealth in tax havens while exploiting some of the poorer countries in the world should not be awarded contracts for the tax-paying public in Scotland. The public sector should pay its workers a living wage, but it should also persuade its contractors to do the same. We should not subsidise—

Sorry, I have only 10 seconds. We should not subsidise low pay in other sectors. I know that my colleague Kezia Dugdale is considering taking forward John Park’s proposed bill on that issue.

Workers’ rights must be respected. The cabinet secretary also made some good points about the use of community benefit clauses. I look forward to the introduction of the procurement reform bill and its passage through Parliament.

There has been a fair degree of consensus during the debate. Several members have commented that the bill cannot be a panacea for all procurement ills, but that there is a big opportunity to use public sector procurement to produce social and economic benefit and benefit for business. Many members have commented that best value is about far more than just achieving the lowest cost; that a cheap price is not necessarily value for money; and that the level of spend can have a major impact on society and the environment. Many members spoke about the advantages of enabling smaller businesses to access public sector contracts more easily. A number of examples were given, many of which seemed to reinforce points that Jim and Margaret Cuthbert have made. For example, Margaret McCulloch described how smaller businesses can be squeezed out and reduced to trying to get the less lucrative subcontracts rather than have access to the more lucrative parts. Tavish Scott gave us a concrete example from his constituency, where the tendering process for a new school through hub north Scotland has lacked transparency. There seems to be little information on whether local businesses were even involved, never mind getting contracts. Anne McTaggart described the importance of enabling small businesses, given the local employment opportunities that they can offer. Access to public sector contracts can allow small businesses to grow and to increase local employment opportunities. Nigel Don drew our attention to project bank accounts and retentions, the problems of late payments to smaller subcontractors by major contractors and the delays in money getting down the food chain to the smaller contractors that really need it. Jayne Baxter gave an example about the loss of the Fife advocacy service because of procurement decisions, which meant that people with mental health issues could no longer access the services that they needed. As many members have said, the bureaucracy of the procurement process is an issue. Linda Fabiani and others mentioned the pre-qualification process, which can be onerous and repetitive. We all welcome the fact that the Government intends to take action on that. Nigel Don mentioned integrated project insurance, which chimes with some of the issues that were raised in the FSB report, which noted that insurance requirements are often disproportionate for smaller businesses. The bill consultation favoured the prohibition of charges for the issue of tender documents, as such charges can deter smaller businesses. One of the larger companies—Morrison Construction—that attended the seminar that I mentioned in my opening speech says that, at as much as £1 million for a £40 million contract, the cost of bidding can be disproportionately high. A number of issues can be problematic for small businesses. Many members talked about the ethical obligations that can be included in procurement legislation. Several members referred to the need to take action against companies that are involved in the insidious practice of blacklisting. There has also been reference to the opportunity that the legislation offers to encourage the payment of a living wage. There seemed to be some dispute between members as to how that could be achieved. I was interested to hear from Chic Brodie that he had some legal advice that indicated that including a living wage requirement in the legislation would be possible, and Neil Bibby referred to advice from Thompsons Solicitors, so the question of how far we are able to go on that might bear additional scrutiny. There is a consensus—certainly between Labour and the SNP—that we need to look at how we can use legislation to counter the heinous practice of blacklisting, and I welcome the commitment to work with the trade unions on that. Patrick Harvie raised an interesting additional issue relating to the possibility of excluding zero-hour contracts. The use of such contracts is an insidious practice that is often perpetrated on young workers, and I hope that there might be an opportunity to address that in the legislation.

We are looking not at excluding zero-hour contracts, as we cannot do that, but at whether there is a possibility to exclude from the procurement process companies that operate such practices. That is what I am talking about. There has been much discussion around the EU directive. I agree that there is often a rigid view—perhaps a gold-plated view—about what one is allowed to do within the terms of EU directives. As Kevin Stewart said, the barriers that are perceived to exist are sometimes not there. The report by Jim and Margaret Cuthbert, to which John Mason referred, gives a number of examples of different EU countries that have been able to use national legislation to break down procurement into smaller lots that are more accessible to small businesses. We might want to look at a number of other issues, including the importance of offering feedback and debriefing information—particularly for smaller businesses—following an unsuccessful tender so that businesses know why they did not get the contract, and the need to look at opportunities for growing small businesses by anticipating gaps in local provision and seeing what action can be taken to fill those gaps. The bill presents us with many opportunities to investigate some of those issues further and to look at how action can be reinforced through the legislative process.

We would all appreciate faster road journey times between Dumfries and Glasgow, but I am sure that the minister will agree that speed limits should be observed while undertaking the journey. As regards rail journey times, is the minister aware that, although Thornhill is on the Nith Valley line, its residents need to travel 14 miles south to Dumfries or 13 miles north to Sanquhar to catch a train? Can he advise what progress is being made on distributing moneys from the stations fund? What community support would he expect to be demonstrated in any successful bid to reopen Thornhill station?

This is a relatively uncontentious bill, although concern was expressed to the committee about some issues, which might merit additional exploration at stage 2. As the minister has described, the bill abolishes FETA, transfers its assets to Scottish ministers and designates the Forth road bridge as a trunk road, which is likely to be operated by a private sector operator who will be appointed by Scottish ministers. To that extent, it sets up a form of public-private partnership—I know that the party of Government was not keen on those when it was in opposition, but it seems to have come around to a different point of view in government. As others have said, questions were asked about why FETA could not manage both bridges, instead of abolishing FETA and bringing the existing bridge under the control of Scottish ministers and Transport Scotland. That was FETA’s preferred option, although Barry Colford said that, in view of evidence, it was preferable that a single authority should have responsibility for the management of both bridges. The minister and the convener of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee have described the reasons why FETA’s involvement was not appropriate, in relation to infringement of EU state aid rules and issues around value for money. On that latter point, I was slightly puzzled by the suggestion that it was impossible to prove FETA’s value for money, as FETA has operated the current bridge for many years. The convener has spoken of the concerns about the consultation process and the exclusion of UCATT. The unions that made representations were particularly concerned about the 70 or so staff who currently work for FETA, and wanted to ensure that they would be protected under the TUPE regulations, and also that there would be no compulsory redundancies. I am pleased that that has been guaranteed and that the operating company will join the Lothian Pension Fund, which means that employees will continue within their current pension schemes. As the convener said, assurances were sought that no company that has been engaged in blacklisting workers because of their trade union membership or activity would be awarded a contract, and the committee received assurances that the contract will guarantee workers the right to trade union membership and collective bargaining. Labour would like the contract to go further by, as the trade unions suggested, excluding companies that are known to have practised blacklisting in the past. The City of Edinburgh Council raised concerns about a couple of important issues. The first was that the compensation claims against FETA for construction work should not be transferred to it, as there were concerns—disputed by Transport Scotland—that the claims could run into millions. The committee received assurances on the record—which have been repeated by the minister today—that Transport Scotland and the ministers will inherit any claims. I believe that that has been sufficient to allay the council’s concerns. However, if that is not the case and the issue needs to be addressed again at stage 2, I would welcome further communication from the council. The transport convener of the City of Edinburgh Council, Lesley Hinds, also raised the issue of local accountability. Elected members of the local councils are currently represented on FETA, but they will be replaced on the Forth bridges forum by council officials. The committee raised that issue with the minister, who said that he had given consideration to the inclusion of elected members but felt that an arrangement that involved councillors sitting on a board that was looking after a project that was wholly the responsibility of Scottish ministers would be, in his words, “unique”. He was also unclear about what was being considered, with regard to which councils would be involved and whether the councillors who would sit on the board would be local members for the areas that are affected by the bridges or the transport conveners. He stated that the forum had been established to resolve issues that might arise both during and after the construction of the bridge and that, therefore, it was important to ensure that local community representatives had a say on the forum. However, he did not think that it was appropriate to add elected member representation. In an unrelated session, the committee recently took written evidence from community groups regarding their relationship with Transport Scotland over issues arising from some of the current preparation and construction work. That suggested that the communities were not totally satisfied with the way in which Transport Scotland reacted to their concerns. There needs to be further discussion around the matter. I raised that when we discussed our stage 1 report, but I did not push it hard because, like the minister, I was not terribly clear about what representation was desired, whether the concern that had been expressed by City of Edinburgh Council was reflected by the other councils that currently had representation on FETA and whether they aspired to have elected member representation. If clarity can be achieved about what is wanted and if the councils that are currently represented on FETA would like the matter to be discussed further, I would be happy to take the matter up, through an amendment at stage 2, to allow further discussion with the minister. I felt that, in his response to the committee, he was not totally unsympathetic to the view; therefore, there may be ways in which we can raise the matter for further discussion later. The committee was also assured that minimum standards on procurement, community benefit, apprenticeships and job opportunities for the long-term unemployed would be written into the contract. We were aware of the issue around the purchase of steel for the construction of the bridge and the fact that Scottish steel manufacturers have lost out to overseas competitors. Assurances regarding the future operation of the bridge are, therefore, welcome. However, the nature of those minimum standards and how employment opportunities will be achieved in practice will be important. I realise that this is early days in the consideration of the bill. However, I would appreciate any light that the minister could shed on the process. I am sure that other members of the committee would, like me, also appreciate being kept apprised of any progress on that—particularly progress on the employment and blacklisting issues as we move towards the issuing of the contract. If there are ways in which the committee can examine some of those issues, I am sure that we would be interested in doing so. Labour will support the bill at stage 1. However, I look forward to further discussion and clarification as the bill progresses, as there are one or two outstanding issues. There is an opportunity in the stage 2 process to go back to some of the issues that have been raised with the committee, using the amendment process to develop the arguments further to see whether there are ways in which those concerns can be addressed.

This is my second time on my feet this afternoon, so I should apologise to anyone who sat through my earlier speech. First, I welcome the process that the Parliament has adopted in examining RPP2. I was a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee when, as our contribution to the budget discussions in 2011, we decided to examine how RPP1 was being delivered. We found the process quite frustrating, because many of the issues that we wanted to examine came under the remit of other committees and therefore the emphasis that was placed on the examination of climate change measures depended on the emphasis that those committees wished to place on that rather than on other budgetary issues. The process for examining RPP2 has allowed all the relevant committees to scrutinise the whole document. There might be an issue about how all that scrutiny is tied together, but the exercise itself has been useful. As Maureen Watt pointed out, it is unfortunate but perhaps inevitable that given the limited time committees had to gather evidence some witnesses were unable to attend the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s round-table evidence sessions on housing and transport. As Malcolm Chisholm has made clear, both sectors are vital to the delivery of emissions reductions. Concerns were expressed about the balance between policies and proposals, particularly in the transport sector. RPP2 cites seven policies and five proposals on housing but, for transport, there are only two policies, both of which result from EU directives on decarbonising vehicles, and four proposals. Some witnesses expressed concern that the policies were reliant on EU car emissions standards instead of being led by the Scottish Government and, as a result, RPP2 was very dependent on the EU’s improving its emissions reduction targets from 20 to 30 per cent. The minister argued that that was not the case and that we would still meet our targets even if the EU did not improve its own, but other witnesses suggested that the Scottish Government would then be required to implement every policy and proposal in RPP2 to achieve the 2020 target. A 100 per cent success rate is really quite a tall order. There might have been some confusion over what constitutes a policy and what constitutes a proposal, with the perception that there is less commitment to proposals. I accept that the Government can cite as a policy only what it is undertaking in this parliamentary session and funding in the current spending review cycle and that proposals are what it intends to do over a long timescale and what might be suggested for later spending reviews. The criticism, therefore, really relates to the question whether some proposals should have been brought forward to become policies in the current spending review cycle. As other members have pointed out, the decision to publish RPP2 in a different format from RPP1 makes it more difficult to assess progress. The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee noted that the transport section in the draft RPP2 contained no estimate for abatement potential and costs for the Scottish Government’s initiatives, and that the five proposal headings were new and not used in RPP1. There seems to be an overreliance on the emissions savings to be made in the final three years from 2025 to 2027, with a saving of 750 kilotonnes of CO2 in the final year but little indication of how that will be funded. The Minister for Transport and Veterans told us “we cannot know the technical and policy contexts that will apply up to 14 years from now”.—[Official Report, Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, 27 February 2013; c 1444.] Although I am sure that that is true, surely it is unwise to place such reliance on a large reduction at the end of the RPP period in the hope that technological and policy development will somehow make it happen. With regard to the housing sector, housing for social rent will be required to reach minimum energy efficiency standards by 2015. According to recent research, 75 per cent of social rented properties in Scotland achieved a good rating under the national home energy rating scheme in 2011 compared with 62 per cent of owner-occupied properties and 52 per cent of private rented properties. It is very likely that the social rented sector’s higher achievement is due at least in part to the response to the 2015 target. That is why some witnesses argued that it was important to introduce regulation and minimum standards for existing private homes earlier than the 2018 date that has been proposed. Targets in the private sector could focus efforts and the UK and Scottish Government energy efficiency programmes can provide routes for financing the necessary improvements. I realise that covering the entire private sector is, indeed, ambitious, but the committee has asked the Government to investigate—

I am about 10 seconds away from the end of my five minutes.

How much time?

All right, I will not waste time. I think that I probably need to make progress. The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee has asked the Government to investigate whether it will be possible to introduce the standards more quickly. Obviously, it has not been possible for me to cover the 53 pages of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s report in five minutes. I reiterate the committee’s recommendation that the Government should respond to all its conclusions and recommendations in the final RPP2.

On 18 September 2014, the sun will set at about 20 past 7. The First Minister has kept Scotland in the dark about the date of the referendum. On 18.11.14, many Scots may have to go to vote in the dark. In view of the darker nights and the vagaries of the Scottish weather, will the First Minister explain what action—[Interruption.] This is actually important in terms of people exercising their right to vote, Ms Ewing. Will the First Minister explain what actions he and his Government will take to ensure that every eligible voter who wishes to cast their vote finds it easy and straightforward to do so? [Interruption.]

I, too, congratulate Jackie Baillie on bringing the motion to the Parliament’s attention. I associate myself with members’ comments about Irene Oldfather and Tommy Whitelaw. A significant number of people in Scotland live with dementia, and the number is likely to increase. At the same time, there is a significant number of carers, who provide vital services to their loved ones and, as members have said, save the taxpayer significant sums of money. I come from a fairly long-lived family. My grandmother was 95 when she died and her mother was 93. Uncommonly for someone of my age, I am lucky enough to still have both my parents alive, and very much so. I am even more fortunate in that I have never had to suffer the particular pain of watching a loved one succumb to dementia. Touch wood, but I have never had to suffer losing the person that I love while at the same time having to care for the person that they have become. I take my hat off to the members who have had to go through that experience. It is tragic that people who are suffering that bereavement have difficulty finding out about the condition from which their loved one is suffering or about services that are available to help them. In October last year, I was honoured to accept an invitation to open Alzheimer Scotland’s dementia resource centre in Gordon Street in Dumfries along with Mrs and Mr Crouch, a dementia sufferer and her carer. Mr Crouch described to me what the centre offered and how it gave him some respite while his wife enjoyed and benefited from the services. There is a day centre, access to a dementia adviser for carers and the award-winning fortnightly musical minds group, which has been so successful that it has had to move to larger premises and has recently set up a similar programme in Moffat. For those who prefer sport to music, there is a monthly football reminiscence club, members of which recently visited Alzheimer Scotland’s national resource at Hampden, along with similar clubs from across Scotland. The centre is decorated to a high standard, with objects and photographs that are designed to stimulate memory. In fact, my grandparents had possessed similar objects when I was a young girl, so they stimulated my memory, too. They included a stone hot-water bottle, which when I was a wee girl we always referred to as “the pig”. I think that that was because it was cold. I do not know whether that was a particularly Fife expression, but my grandparents had one of those and I was excited to see it. People with dementia and their carers can be supported in a number of ways. Some of them are fun and involve things such as sport and culture; others involve uplifting people even while suffering from this dreadful disease. Members might have visited the exhibition of quilts entitled “Yes we can—together!” in the garden lobby at the end of last month, which was exhibited by my constituent Ann Hill, who is Alzheimer Scotland’s quilter in residence. She creates quilts for people who are suffering from dementia, after speaking to them and their carers about the things that were important in their earlier lives. The quilts have a variety of themes, but they mean special things to the dementia sufferers who receive them. They help by stimulating the memory and reminding people about the things that they love. Ann is encouraging other quilters to take up the Hampden challenge of covering the pitch at Hampden with these quilts during dementia awareness week in June. If anybody is handy with a needle, I encourage them to help Ann in her efforts. Many older people are terrified that they might succumb to dementia. Often, in old age, people are more frightened of that condition than of many other killer diseases that are prevalent in Scotland. However, when I spoke at the event in October, it struck me that we do not talk about dementia enough. There used to be a similar attitude towards cancer; people would not refer to cancer. Fortunately, we are over that but we need to take the same view of dementia and talk about how dementia can be treated medically and therapeutically and about how carers can be supported. Events such as tonight’s debate help to raise the profile of dementia and will, hopefully, encourage people to talk about it.

The First Minister has told us that he has brought this debate to the Scottish Parliament in order that we may learn the lessons of the Iraq war. Unfortunately some—although not all—of the speeches from the Government seats, and of the attitudes of the Government party’s back benchers suggest that, like many of the debates in this chamber, the Scottish Government’s motion is motivated by a desire to denigrate the United Kingdom and to promulgate the case for independence. Bruce Crawford actually said that at the end of his speech. If that is the purpose of the debate I find it, as Jenny Marra did, cynical and distasteful—

Because I mentioned Mr Crawford, I will give way.

I mentioned that Bruce Crawford spoke about independence; he is not the only person who has used the issue in that way. It is indeed distasteful that all the pain and suffering in that war could be used as a tool in what I see as the First Minister’s increasingly desperate attempts to find a persuasive argument for independence. That is not about the rights and wrongs of the war; it is about how this debate is being used. I know that the First Minister will not recall this—because he was not a member of this Parliament at the time—but after the debate on 13 March 2003, I broke the Labour whip. Like Kevin Stewart, I am not a pacifist, but I hate war and think that it should never be anything other than a last resort. Therefore, after much discussion with colleagues in my local party and with many constituents, I came to the view that there should be another attempt to resolve the crisis through the United Nations, so I voted for an option that was—if I remember correctly—put forward by the Liberal Democrats. I was a minister at the time and had therefore that morning written to the First Minister offering my resignation. My decision was not universally popular with my constituents. Some thought that it was principled, but others saw it as self-indulgent and disloyal—particularly because this Parliament did not have responsibility for the decision to invade.

I am sure that Margo MacDonald will accept that I do not believe that she necessarily goes along with all the views of the SNP back benchers. I am not trying to attribute anything to her. The war was not peaceful Scotland being dragged to war by the warmongering UK; we try to rewrite history if we believe that everyone in Scotland opposed the war. Many Scots supported it, especially in the early days after Saddam Hussein was overthrown. Many Scots were proud that UK forces had helped to oust from power a dictator who had perpetrated acts of extreme evil against his own people. This month is not just the 10th anniversary of the Iraq war; it is the 25th anniversary of the poison gas attack by Saddam Hussein’s regime on the Kurdish town of Halabja, where some 5,000 people were killed. It is also 22 years this month since Iraqi helicopters mowed down Shiites and Kurds after the ceasefire at the end of the first Gulf war had been signed. I did not easily disagree with my party’s position on the Iraq war. Labour colleagues including Russell Brown in the UK Parliament also found that they were unable to support the Prime Minister. However, I believe that the decision to support the invasion was every bit as difficult to take. I watched “Panorama” last night, which seemed to suggest that some members of the Central Intelligence Agency and MI6 were overinfluenced by false information that was given by people such as Curveball. Indeed, it was said that Tony Blair misled himself. I think that he did. I do not believe that Tony Blair, a father whose eldest child at the time was 19, callously sent young British service personnel to a conflict in which lives would be lost, or that he would have inflicted that most terrible of tragedies—the loss of a child—on other parents if he had not believed that he had no other option.

No. I have taken enough interventions. I do not believe that the loss of civilian Iraqi lives that was bound to follow was of no consequence to Tony Blair.

No. I have taken enough interventions. I disagreed—I still disagree—with Tony Blair’s decision to invade without UN approval, but I understand that those who supported it also did so after considerable thought and because they sincerely believed that it was the right course of action. The history of Iraq since 1917 is one of conflict within the country, with its neighbours and internationally. The war that commenced 10 years ago deposed Saddam Hussein’s tyrannical regime, but as we have heard, the country still has immense problems. Many organisations are working hard to regenerate the country. The lesson that we need to learn at international level is how best to support the Iraqi people. As other members have said, many of our service personnel still bear the mental and physical scars of their involvement. We must learn how to offer support to them and to the bereaved families—of whom Kevin Stewart spoke—whose sons and daughters did not return. Hard decisions will continue to have to be made on how best to assist peoples who are oppressed by tyrants. Perhaps most pressing of all is this question: What lessons did we learn from Iraq that could be applied to Syria? At the end of the day, that is not a decision for this place.

If the decision to hold the debate was about trying to denigrate the United Kingdom or argue for independence, it is the SNP that is diminished and not the people who supported or did not support the invasion of Iraq.

I, too, congratulate Neil Findlay on bringing the motion to Parliament and commend him for the diligence that he and his Westminster colleague David Hamilton have displayed in pursuing the issue. Deep mining was more than a job in the communities of Upper Nithsdale: it was the core of the community and the reason why some of its villages, such as Kelloholm, existed at all. When, on 9 March 1984, thousands of local miners came out on strike, they did so to protect the jobs on which their communities depended, their way of life and the cohesion of their communities. Those miners were aware of the Conservative Government’s determination to destroy the power of the trade unions, and of the National Coal Board’s plans to close 20 pits with the loss of 20,000 jobs. The NCB planned to develop a number of superpits using new technology with less manpower—a move that signalled the end of mining in Scotland, Wales and many parts of England. I and my colleagues John Syme and Jim Dempster, both of whom are Upper Nithsdale councillors and former Upper Nithsdale miners, were happy to sign up to Neil Findlay’s campaign for an investigation into cases against striking miners who were prosecuted by the police in Scotland. We were advised by our local chief constable of the procedure for individual complaints. John and Jim have been asking local ex-miners about their experiences. So far, no one has come forward, although I believe that there is a story of someone who ended up in a police cell wearing his pyjamas because he just happened to go for a pint of milk at a time when a lot of miners were picked up. I well remember the miners’ strike, but I did not live in Scotland at the time. I had been living and working in southern England since 1976, and my role during the miners’ strike was to go round the doorsteps in Slough, where I lived, collecting money for the striking miners and their families on a Sunday morning. Although Slough was not a mining area and was an extremely diverse community, I am sure that the miners would have been encouraged and touched—as I was—by the generosity towards them, and the solidarity with them, that was displayed by members of the community, who did not have much money themselves but were glad to make donations in support of the miners. I do not want to imply that there is widespread corruption in the English or Scottish police forces, but I have personal experience, going back to 1979, that individual police officers believed that they were above the law. I was active in the Anti-Nazi League when the National Front was active in the run-up to the general election in 1979. Some members may remember the death of Blair Peach, whom 14 witnesses saw being struck by police officers. That case was never taken to court. The day before that, I was at a demonstration in Leicester, where I observed an agent provocateur encouraging demonstrators to throw stones and then being ferried off—quite happily—in a police van. I also observed fleeing protesters being pursued by police dogs and mounted police officers. On one occasion when I was on a picket line, I was assaulted by a police officer who, on seeing a small and—in those days—thin and slight lady, believed that he could drag me in. If I had been dragged in, I dare say that I, too, would have ended up with a criminal conviction. That happened in 1979. A Conservative Government was then elected, which, in 1984, described trade unionists and socialists as “the enemy within”. Like the miners, we were the enemy within. I believe that there were miscarriages of justice. Miners lost their employment, got criminal records, were blacklisted and lost their pensions. They were persecuted for political reasons. That might have happened many years ago, but they still deserve justice, and they deserve an inquiry in Scotland, just as they deserve an inquiry elsewhere in the UK.

I, too, am glad to take part in the Scottish Government’s debate on food policy, not least because food production is an important part of the economy of Dumfries and Galloway and because the link between tourism and local produce is increasingly being realised. Dumfries and Galloway produces a fifth of Scotland’s beef cattle and a sixth of our sheep. Our mild and—admittedly—somewhat damp climate is greatly suited to rearing high-quality livestock. The cabinet secretary mentioned savour the flavours—a project that is partly funded by the Scottish Government and the European Community through the LEADER 2007 to 2013 programme. I and others who represent Dumfries and Galloway have spoken in debates about its success and I make no apologies for doing so again. Savour the flavours supports Dumfries and Galloway’s food and drink industry through working with producers, chefs, manufacturers, farmers markets, events organisers, schools and consumers to raise awareness of local produce. Dave Smith, who runs the Buccleuch Arms hotel in Moffat, revived the organisation in 2009. Since then, Dave, his project manager Liz Ramsay and the savour the flavours committee have facilitated events, festivals and work with young people to promote the region’s fine produce. Savour the flavours is in its last year of LEADER funding and I hope that further funding can be identified to support this worthwhile project—that is a bit of a hint, cabinet secretary. The horsemeat issue has presented an opportunity to our local producers, retailers and outlets to promote their products. Savour the flavours issued a press release last week launching its “Neigh horse meat here” information campaign and I was one of the politicians from across the different parties who supported its Twitter campaign to commit to purchasing locally produced meat. That commitment was not difficult for me because I already purchase locally produced meat. I live within walking distance of a busy farm and farm shop where I can purchase free-range beef, pork and lamb that is reared on the premises. Indeed, if I wished, I could undertake a farm tour to visit the belted Galloways, blackface sheep and spotted pigs that I might consume at some point in the future. I have no need to fear that any equine has found its way into my mince or sausages and I can be sure of the quality of the food that I am buying. The products are around the same price as the products that I would buy in a supermarket. I sound a note of caution on that point about prices, because I would be buying the top-of-the-range products in the supermarket, too. I can afford it on an MSP’s salary and my husband and I like food and we like cooking, so we are happy to pay the premium in order to get the best. However, not everyone has the luxury of being able to afford to do that. During the horsemeat scandal and during discussions about the research that was published last week on the health risks of consuming too much processed meat, some commentators have seemed to blame the poor for the food choices that they are forced to make, for the deceit that has been perpetrated by some parts of the international food supply chain, and indeed for the consequences for their own health. I can peruse the range of top-quality products that are offered by my local producer or by my supermarket, but that is not true of all my constituents. What about the family that is about to be hit by the bedroom tax next month, the disabled person who has lost the disability living allowance and has not been transferred to the personal independence payment, or the working parent who has lost their tax credits due to rule changes that disallow those who work fewer than 27 hours a week? The Scottish Government’s 2009 national food and drink policy quoted figures from some years ago—from 2005-06—that indicated that the poorest decile of UK households spent 15 per cent of their income on food and non-alcoholic beverages and that the second poorest decile spent 17 per cent of their income on those items. I can only imagine that the proportion of their income that is spent on those items by such households today is significantly higher. The other criticism that is levelled at consumers concerns the use of convenience foods and pre-prepared meals. I heard a rather posh sounding older man on the radio the other day who made me shout at the radio—he said, “Young women nowadays don’t know how to cook!” I do not understand why it is the responsibility of women to cook. Also, people use convenience foods because they are time poor and sometimes because they are cash poor. Home cooking can be perceived as time consuming, expensive and difficult. That perception is reinforced by many of the television cookery programmes and competitions, in which ingredients are expensive, recipes are complex and the presentation is a work of art.

Along those lines, l would like to see greater concentration on the cooking of healthy but inexpensive dishes—dishes that can be frozen for those whose time is under pressure. My time is often under pressure, but I freeze food. We need to concentrate more on that or on how to make good food go further, so that the higher-quality but more expensive products can be afforded by those who are on lower incomes. The cabinet secretary spoke of the importance of children being educated about how their food is produced and cooked—that emphasis is welcome. I saw an excellent example of that when I visited the Scottish Agricultural College in Dumfries with pupils from Annan academy. What young people see at home has the greatest influence, and I think that more needs to be done to support and enable all our people to enjoy a quality diet—a diet in which local produce plays a strong part. There is a message that we need to get out there, and doing that is not just the responsibility of Government. We need to make good food accessible to everybody. That is an equalities issue, as well as a quality issue.

At stage 1, many of us expressed concern about the fact that the bill did not give environmental and social benefits the same weighting as commercial benefits. Therefore, I welcomed the amendments that the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee agreed to at stage 2. I was also supportive of the amendment that Jim Eadie lodged at stage 2, but which he did not press, so I very much welcome amendment 25, which will further clarify and strengthen the consideration of environmental and social benefits. I am happy to say that Labour members will support it.

I suspect that the consensus is about to break down. When I lodged this amendment at stage 2, the cabinet secretary argued that the inclusion of peatlands in the bill was artificially stretching the definition and that including them did not support the bill’s purposes. Having reflected on that, I note that the bill uses the definition of “water resources” set out in the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003, which does not cover peatland habitats. Indeed, the strict interpretation of the 2003 act has already led to peat bogs being discounted as wetlands in Scotland. As a result, in bringing back this amendment, I do not propose to introduce any changes to the implementation of the 2003 act. However, I feel that the amendment would ensure that the sustainable management of Scotland’s peatlands could be taken forward under the bill’s purpose of developing Scotland’s water resources, which would deliver great economic, environmental and social benefits. The cabinet secretary’s argument that amendment 1 would artificially stretch the definition of water resources is, in my view, inconsistent, given that the second report on proposals and policies and RPP1 both recognise that peatland and wetland management are, in fact, the same thing. RPP2 states that “Incorporation of wetland management data into the net Scottish emissions account” will enable “peatland restoration to be counted towards Scotland’s climate change targets”. Moreover, given RPP2’s recognition of the importance of peatlands in retaining and filtering water, they ought to be included in the definition of “water resources”. I move amendment 1.

In his intervention, Malcolm Chisholm illustrated the difference in views: I believe that peatland is a water resource because of its function in improving the quality of our water. I will therefore press the amendment and go for the division.

Amendments 2 and 3 are also a rehash of amendments that were lodged at stage 2. At that time, the cabinet secretary said that it was not appropriate for subsidiaries of Scottish Water to be included in the list of designated bodies, which is the purpose of amendments 2 and 3. She also said that it would be for Scottish Water to decide how to fulfil ministers’ directions, whether that be through its core functions or through one of its subsidiaries. I argue that giving ministers the power to issue directions through subsidiaries does not require them to use that power, but enables them to use it if an issue is sufficiently important that that is the best way of delivering the Government’s intention. Indeed, it could be advantageous for ministers to have those powers to, for example, issue directions to Scottish Water Horizons, which is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Scottish Water that is described as a commercially sustainable, standalone business that uses innovative ideas, knowledge and assets to encourage sustainable growth and renewable technologies. Those are high priorities for the Scottish Government and ministers could need to use their powers of direction for those purposes. The fact that Horizons is a standalone business might make it more complex for directions to be cascaded down from ministers via Scottish Water rather than it receiving ministerial directions without Scottish Water acting as an intermediary. I move amendment 2.

The short debate that we have had on amendments 2 and 3 illustrated fundamental differences of opinion. Alex Johnstone will not be surprised to hear that I completely disagree with him. Scottish Water is a public company, which displays excellence and which is responsible to the Scottish ministers. Subsidiaries that are wholly owned by the company should be capable of direction by the Scottish ministers, when such direction would be in the best interests of encouraging sustainable growth and renewable technologies. I press amendment 2.

Given the confusion—I, too, am slightly confused by the amendments and about how the parts of the bill will interact—it would help to have more reassurance from the cabinet secretary on the record. Some stakeholders—probably not the stakeholders who were referred to in relation to amendment 12—have raised the use of the term “commercial” in amendment 14, which should in no way diminish the need to consider biodiversity and sustainable development duties. Will the cabinet secretary make it clear that the provision is not contrary to a contribution to the wider aspiration of developing Scotland as a hydro nation? There seems to be an element of conflict, as more emphasis appears to be given to commercial value than to social and environmental value. It would help to have it clearly stated that the provision in no way conflicts with the bill’s other aspirations.

The bill enables Scottish Water to enter into agreements for the purpose of protecting or improving raw water quality. Such management agreements will help to contribute to sustainable catchment management, whereby drinking water quality issues are addressed at source rather than through more expensive water treatments further down the chain. The cabinet secretary stated at stage 2 that Scottish Water is not obliged to meet those objectives, but my contention is that that is not correct. As Scottish Water is designated as a responsible authority for the purposes of the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003, it is obliged to contribute to the delivery of the water framework directive and the WEWS act objectives. As a public body, Scottish Water also has a range of other statutory duties, such as contributing to sustainable flood management and furthering the conservation of biodiversity. Amendment 4 is slightly different from the amendment that I lodged at stage 2—members will be relieved to hear that. It aims to ensure that, in delivering sustainable catchment management, Scottish Water integrates that with its existing statutory duties. The amendment that I lodged at stage 2 had a similar purpose, but there was a lack of clarity in the way in which it was drafted with regard to its intention. The amendment has therefore been redrafted to make it clear that the intention is not to give Scottish Water powers to enter into agreements that would, for example, reduce flood risk while not improving raw water quality. The amendment is intended to ensure that Scottish Water meets and integrates its various different statutory duties. I move amendment 4.

The debate on the amendment has been helpful because it has helped to clarify some of the issues around section 28. I am content with the explanation that has been given of the way in which the statutory duties must be fulfilled and the nature of section 28. I therefore intend to withdraw the amendment as I am content with the explanation that we now have on the record. Amendment 4, by agreement, withdrawn. After section 33

I am sure that members will be happy to hear that this is my final amendment. I lodged the same amendment at stage 2 to try to ensure that the offence of the discharge of fats, oils and grease would cover a wider range of establishments. The discharge of those substances causes an estimated 55 per cent of sewer blockages. The bill gives us an opportunity to prevent the problem by ensuring that the offence covers potentially high-risk establishments. Public sector premises such as educational establishments and offices can have large catering facilities. It is therefore sensible to treat them in the same way as public sector hospitals and care homes, which are already covered due to their inclusion in the definition of trade premises under the Sewerage (Scotland) Act 1968. At stage 2, the cabinet secretary stated that public sector premises, with the exception of hospitals and care homes, are currently excluded from part 2 of the 1968 act, which is the point that I am trying to make, and also said that my amendment raised the question whether the consent regime ought to be extended to cover such premises. In fact, there is a case that they should be. It seems illogical that some public sector premises are covered and some are not. I believe that amendment 5 would give additional power to the legislation to prevent the discharge of these materials, which causes more than half of the sewer blockages in Scotland. I move amendment 5.

I am slightly confused by the cabinet secretary’s arguments, I must admit. It seems illogical that hospitals are covered by this regime but other parts of the public sector that have large catering facilities, such as schools, are not. The cabinet secretary argues that Scottish Water has not reported any problems with the current system. If there is no problem, the powers will not be used. The powers are there in case a problem arises. I am sure that there are probably historical reasons why certain parts of the public sector and certain public sector establishments are included and others are not, but that does not mean that the situation could not be tidied up at this point. Because I do not really understand the differences between those different types of public sector establishments in respect of this offence of discharging fats and oils, and given that the discharging of fats and oils into the sewers is a problem in general, I cannot see what would be lost by the inclusion of educational facilities and so on in the legislation. Therefore, I intend to press the amendment.

The bill has not changed a great deal since the stage 1 debate at the end of the December, which makes it a bit difficult to think of anything terribly new to say about it. I did my best to protract the amendment stage—obviously without a great deal of success. The bill is not particularly radical—it is less radical than we had expected after the hype that had preceded its introduction. The provisions are reasonable in relation to the bill’s aspirations to promote the economic, environmental and social benefits of a natural resource that Scotland possesses in so much abundance; they are also sensible and something on which we can all agree. Stewart Stevenson is not in the chamber—we will all, I think, be thankful that presumably we will be spared his analysis of the composition of his body that he gave us at stage 1. I am pleased that progress has been made on issues that were raised at stage 1. The most important example is that of the changes that have been made to ensure that the value of Scotland’s water resource specifically includes not only economic benefits, but social and environmental benefits. That issue was addressed initially in an amendment that the cabinet secretary lodged at stage 2, but it has been reinforced further by Jim Eadie’s amendment 25. Of course, I was disappointed—but perhaps not surprised—that my amendment on the specific inclusion of peatlands has been unsuccessful. We often talk in the chamber about the enormous contribution that Scotland’s huge natural peat bogs and other peatlands resource make to our environment. Indeed, peatlands—like our water resource—are a resource that Scotland possesses in abundance. Although stage 3 offered an opportunity to address the situation, there seems to be a reluctance to follow up the rhetoric with legislative action. The information that was given at stage 2 on how the Government is supporting the restoration, protection and maintenance of peat bogs and peatlands is, of course, welcome. However, the bill presented an opportunity to progress the sustainable management of peatlands specifically as part of the development of Scotland’s water resource. I am disappointed that neither the Government nor, indeed, other members agreed. I am disappointed about my trade effluence amendment, too. I hope that no incident occurs, but if any public sector body causes problems and there is an incident, I will be the first to run up and say, “I told you that we could have solved these problems in the bill”. At stage 1, concerns were raised about part 2, which is on water abstraction, with many witnesses questioning the necessity of that part of the bill, which was added fairly late on in the process. At stage 2, Alex Johnstone, supported by the RSPB, the Association of Salmon Fishery Boards and other stakeholders, unsuccessfully attempted to have the provisions on abstraction removed. I understand that regulations will be introduced on the information that will accompany an application. I presume that those will come before the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee for examination. The issue of the non-consumptive nature of water abstraction for the whisky industry was raised at stage 1, and I will be interested to learn whether that issue will be addressed through the regulations. During stage 1, some concerns were raised about the adequacy of the reporting provisions in the bill and about the wider hydro nation project. Indeed, the committee agreed that it wished to scrutinise the bill, if enacted, annually during the first reporting period. That, too, has been addressed by an amendment that has been agreed to, and I am sure that the committee will be pleased to take on that responsibility. At stage 2, I suggested that the bill should make specific reference to the registration, care and maintenance of septic tanks and the need for SEPA to educate the public about and raise awareness of the legal obligations on septic tank owners. From time to time, those of us who represent rural areas are approached by constituents with issues that have arisen as a result of how private septic tanks are—or are not—maintained. Alex Johnstone expressed support for an amendment on the matter that I lodged at stage 2. I did not move the amendment, because the cabinet secretary told us that SEPA, Scottish Water and Scottish Government officials had agreed to a work plan to address issues such as increasing the registration of septic tanks, sharing data on locations and generally raising public awareness of owners’ responsibilities to maintain and empty their tanks. The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee has been offered briefings from Scottish Water and SEPA about progress with that work, and I hope that there will be time to include the issue in our work programme. Members such as me who represent rural areas, where there are many private septic tanks, can help to promote such work in our constituencies and can assist with the raising of public awareness. I am looking forward to learning more about the work plan, and I hope to be able to play a part in publicising progress with it in my constituency and in ensuring that my constituents are made more aware of their responsibilities. Reference has been made to the desire of some members to privatise Scottish Water. I was a member of Strathclyde Regional Council when it held a referendum on whether the then Conservative United Kingdom Government’s plans to privatise water services should be followed. I think that about 90 per cent of people rejected those privatisation plans.

I thank Mary Scanlon for that intervention. The referendum that was held by Strathclyde Regional Council was fairly clear. It asked the people of Strathclyde whether they wanted their water services to be privatised. At the time, Strathclyde Regional Council had responsibility for the water supply in Strathclyde. The privatisation of water services was comprehensively rejected by the people of a region that comprised almost half the population of Scotland, and I do not think that the position in Scotland will have changed greatly since then. Scottish Water is a success story. It is more efficient and cheaper than many of its private sector comparators south of the border. Of course we all receive complaints from constituents from time to time. Those complaints often have substance and we follow them up, but I have always found Scottish Water to be efficient and prompt in responding to any issues that I raise with it. A few weeks ago, I and the convener and deputy convener of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee attended a David Hume Institute seminar, at which we were advised that Scottish Water is the only public utility in the UK that has achieved the gold standard in procurement. I had not known that. We should be proud of such achievements. We should not go down the line of, “Public sector bad; private sector good.” There are times when we should celebrate the fact that the public sector is doing better than the private sector. It can do better than the private sector and, with the right powers and the right direction, it will. In one of my amendments, I made reference to the subsidiaries of Scottish Water, which include Scottish Water Horizons, Scottish Water Business Stream—I do not know about other members’ experience of that body, but I find it remarkably diligent in pursuing payment of bills that have only just been dispatched—and Scottish Water International, which was formed at the beginning of last year and which is already using Scottish Water’s expertise to the benefit of a number of other countries. I recognise the concern that Neil Findlay expressed at stage 1 and earlier today. We would not want such work to be engaged in at the expense of people who live in poorer countries, and we certainly would not want Scottish Water, as a public company, to participate in the privatisation of water resources in other countries. However, it can bring a lot of expertise and experience. Scottish Water proves that the public sector can deliver excellence and it would be a great mistake to sell it off for the sake of a one-off injection of finance. In fact, that money might not necessarily help the financial situation in Scotland; the UK Treasury might also lay claim to it. The public sector is often depicted as bloated and inefficient but that is not true of this public company. As I have said, Scottish Water is a testament to the public sector’s ability to deliver excellence and the additional responsibilities conferred by the bill will enable it to develop our water resource further—

I certainly agree with the member. As she will know, we have been in favour of partnerships between the public and private sectors. Others in the chamber might in the past have expressed their dislike of public-private partnerships but even the Scottish Futures Trust is taking forward models based on them. That work is very much to be welcomed, and I think that the public sector can play a strong role in it. I do not want a successful public sector company such as Scottish Water to be sold off to the private sector. The bill will enable Scottish Water to develop our water resource further, which I believe will deliver multiple economic, environmental and social benefits to Scotland.

I believe that in his objection to one of my amendments the member said that he regretted that the bill did not enable Scottish Water to become “a private company”.

This has been a useful debate in illuminating the failure of the Scottish Government to deliver on its promises to invest in Scotland’s infrastructure through its much trumpeted Scottish Futures Trust. The SNP Government deploys two principal arguments. The first, of course, is that everything bad that happens is Westminster’s fault. The current UK Government has been doing many things that I do not like—that is one of the reasons why I will be campaigning for a change in Government in 2015. However, I do not think that we can put every terrible disaster at Westminster’s door. The second argument that is deployed by SNP Government is that assertion trumps evidence, because if it says something, it must be true, however contrary the evidence. If it says that it has delivered projects, it has, even if those projects are as invisible as the emperor’s new clothes. To cut through the guff about the recession, the SNP manifesto in 2007 declared that the SNP would propose a new system of infrastructure funding as an alternative to PFI/PPP and that it would introduce a not-for-profit Scottish Futures Trust that would provide lower-cost borrowing opportunities. Eventually, after much prevarication, which resulted in the infrastructure pipeline virtually drying up, the SNP came forward with NPD. According to Mark Hellowell of the University of Edinburgh, NPD has long-term costs that are “similar” to those of the classic PFI model and “makes PFI a bit more politically acceptable without changing any of the economics”. The other slow-moving delivery vehicle—hubco—applies the design, build, finance and manage model that is used in the majority of PPP projects, where the public sector partner has certainty on costs across the cycle and the private sector partner assumes the risks. What was so novel and so difficult about NPD to make it so delayed? We have heard already that only £20 million of community health projects will be delivered this financial year and that in the next financial year, project delivery is reduced to 40 per cent of what it was before. It was in fact the Scottish Futures Trust that gave us that information, not the Scottish Government, despite the Government’s assertion about transparency. When Gavin Brown questioned the First Minister on that dismal delivery record at First Minister’s questions on 31 January, we were again treated to an assertion—the First Minister reeled off 13 projects and bundles that he claimed were being delivered. I have checked the SFT’s most recent pipeline projections and the earliest that any of those will be delivered is 2014, which rather questions the definition of delivery. If I have a parcel delivered, it comes into my possession when it falls through my letterbox and I pick it up, not when the sender goes off to procure a stamp. The Deputy First Minister mentioned Dumfries and Galloway hospital. That project has not even developed a business case yet, never mind got planning permission. The Deputy First Minister also claimed earlier this month that the Government was going to deliver 67 schools through the NPD programme. However, its pipeline includes a number of school mergers that require consultation under its own Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010. That includes the Crichton 15-plus school in Dumfries, which is still under consultation. That school is controversial and it might not ever happen, but the Deputy First Minister has asserted that it will be delivered despite the fact that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has assured me that public opinion will be seriously considered. Yet again, we hear assertion and bluster when we want delivery, not a load of warm words.

I, too, congratulate Margaret McCulloch on drawing Parliament’s attention to the importance of the retail sector to Scotland’s economy. Like Richard Lyle, I earned my first wage in the retail sector. At the age of 16, which was quite a long time ago, I took a Saturday job with one of the retailers that are featured in “Retail in Scotland: The Nation’s Favourite Job”. I worked full time between leaving school and going to university and I seem to recall that my first wage was a whole £9 a week, although it was surprising how many clothes I managed to purchase with my first wage packet. All three of my children have worked in retail at various times and, as Margaret McCulloch’s motion states, retail continues to provide “flexible employment opportunities” for younger people. As Malcolm Chisholm said, it also develops many useful skills. As well as the customer service skills that he spoke about, things such as the need to be punctual and to turn up for work with a smart appearance are good training for other employment. Retail is a major employer, with around 9 per cent of the workforce in Scotland and with women and young workers well represented. However, as Margaret McCulloch says, the recession and the ever-increasing use of online purchasing have presented the retail sector with a number of challenges, which have affected our high streets and shopping malls, most recently with the collapse of Comet, Jessops and HMV. The situation was particularly tough in 2012, with Scottish retailing consistently underperforming the industry in the UK as a whole, although sales rallied a little in December, with a positive increase in non-food goods for the first time that year. Total sales were 1.5 per cent up on December 2011, although in real terms that is just flatlining. We heard from Malcolm Chisholm about Edinburgh and from John Mason about Glasgow, so I will tell members about Gretna. In contrast to the overall situation, the Gretna Gateway outlet village reported its most successful trading year in its 13-year history in 2012, with sales up 3 per cent on 2011 and with about 2 million visitors. The last five weeks of 2012 were the best weeks ever for the outlet village and ended a year that showed growth in 30 successive weeks. Several new premium brands have moved on to the site in the past year. All that is good news for the local economy and for the 400 people who are employed at the centre. In a rural area such as Dumfries and Galloway, a site where 400 people are employed is a pretty major employer. Gretna is of course world famous for its weddings and for the Gretna Green blacksmith’s shop. However, the outlet centre is proving an additional attraction to the gateway to Dumfries and Galloway. There are probably two main reasons for the success. The first is that the shops sell brand items at a discount and therefore they are competing with online purchases—as we have heard, people can often get things more cheaply by googling. Secondly, the outlet village is well situated, despite being in a rural area, with easy access to the M74, the A75 and the M6. Indeed, there was a long campaign to persuade the former Scottish Executive to amend its signage policy for trunk roads and motorways to enable the outlet village to be signposted from the motorways. As someone who corresponded on that issue with my own ministers over the years, I like to think that that change in policy has contributed to the success of the Gretna outlet village. Despite all the problems that the sector faces as a result of the tough economic times, retail continues to play an important role in the Scottish economy. As we can see from the case of the Gretna Gateway, the sector can provide substantial employment opportunities in rural and urban areas, especially when those areas are well connected to larger population centres. Our high streets probably face the biggest challenge, through competition from out-of-town shopping malls and online retailing. That is where we need creative thinking on the mix of leisure, business and retail opportunities that can make Scotland’s town centres vibrant again.

In the budget debate a year ago, I argued that spend on housing should be a priority, on the basis that it is preventative spend. The arguments for prioritisation have not changed. People who live in inadequate, overcrowded or damp accommodation, or who are worried about losing their home, will suffer from stress. They are more likely to suffer from physical and mental ill health, perform less well at work and experience relationship breakdown. Children who live in poor or temporary accommodation and witness the stress that that causes their parents will not reach their potential at school. Stable, good-quality housing is essential for people’s wellbeing. Further, as we have all said, housing expenditure also helps the economy, creating employment and supporting the construction industry. Despite the importance of housing, the budget for affordable rented housing has continued to reduce. I know that there have been four in-year revisions that placed around £100 million back into the housing budget, and we have just heard about £10 million being returned from a £46 million cut in next year’s budget. However, the SFHA stated in its briefing that the social rented housing sector has been unfairly penalised in this budget. Shelter states that, with 157,000 households in Scotland on local authority waiting lists, the shortage of affordable rented housing is acute and is the most urgent social problem facing us. I know that the cabinet secretary announced that £859 million will be invested in housing across three years, but that is still £531 million less than in the previous spending review. However, the ability to construct social rented homes is not governed only by the total sum of funding that is available. For housing associations in particular, the issue is whether they are able to build affordable homes for rent with the level of subsidy that is available to them. I recently contacted all the housing associations in Scotland regarding their plans for building homes for social rent in the next two years. I asked whether those plans had been affected by the reduction in subsidy and how they anticipate that welfare reform will affect their organisation and their tenants. I will not attribute comments to individual housing associations, but I assure the chamber that the quotes that I will read out are genuine and give a flavour of the replies that I have received in the course of the past few days. Housing associations have said: “because of the association’s tight finances it has ceased to develop for the time being”; “no plans to develop any new housing over the next 2 years due to unsustainable levels of subsidy to develop new housing and the lack of affordable private finance”; “Until the last couple of years we were an active developer … We have had to review our strategic position and will not build any new homes in the immediate future”; “we expect to continue with our programme for the next two years. The position beyond that is uncertain”; “the reduction in HAG for the construction of social housing has resulted in a reduction in our programme by approximately two thirds”; and “we have no immediate plans to build new homes over the next two years due to subsidy cuts”. I will quote from the SFHA’s press release of 21 January, as it is better than anything that I could say. It advised that the SFHA remains concerned about “the level of subsidy that is now available per new home—cut from approximately £70,000 per house to £40,000 per house on average—as this gives housing associations and co-operatives a real dilemma about how to use this money.” It continues: “Many of our members have used sites bought at low prices or given free by local authorities combined with their own cash reserves to carry on building, but these options will run out. The other option is to raise rents for tenants and borrow more private money from banks. However, this hits the poorest in Scottish society at a time when welfare reform is already causing anxiety over issues like reduction in benefits for additional bedrooms and direct payments of benefit to tenants.”

I am sorry, I want to develop the argument. Shelter also told the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee that “we are heading for a cliff edge with regard to new completions in the next few years.”—[Official Report, Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, 24 October 2012; c 973.] My colleague Richard Baker recently raised that concern with Mr Swinney, who did not seem to believe that there was a problem and stated instead that the Government was driving up efficiency. I ask the cabinet secretary to accept the evidence that was presented by the SFHA and individual housing associations that shows that they cannot sustain their social rented housing building programme with the current level of subsidy. Most have used up their reserves of funds and land and the bank account is empty. If Mr Swinney does not believe the housing associations, however, will he examine the figures that were released to me by the Minister for Housing and Transport, to which I referred in my contribution to the debate on 20 December? They showed that housing starts—not completions—for homes for social rent decreased from 7,677 in 2009-10 to only 3,025 in 2011-12. That coincides with the impact of the reduction in subsidy in 2011. Over the same period, the amount of grant funding that was claimed by housing associations fell by 53 per cent, with housing associations in some local authority areas claiming 10 per cent or less of what they had claimed two years earlier. Surely that indicates that a problem is developing. In April this year, tenants and providers of social rented housing will be hit by the bedroom tax. Tenants who are defined as underoccupying will lose housing benefit. Surely this is the worst time for housing associations to be unable to build new homes at an affordable rent. I am therefore using this opportunity to urge the Scottish Government to reconsider the level of subsidy that is offered to housing associations during these hard economic times.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to prevent the spread of squirrel pox in Dumfriesshire and the south of Scotland. (S4O-01744)

I support the policy of red squirrel reserves. However, as we know, it takes the intrusion of only one grey squirrel carrying squirrel pox into a red squirrel area for the disease to spread even before the grey squirrel is culled. I am pleased to note that the minister is aware of the Moredun Research Institute vaccination programme. I understand that the funding has dried up because the charity that funds the programme does not have the funds to keep it going. What discussions have the minister and his officials had about helping that programme to continue for the time being?

I congratulate Joan McAlpine on securing the debate. TV coverage in the south of Scotland has caused a degree of contention over the years. Indeed, prior to the introduction of digital TV, many of us were unable to access BBC Scotland on an analogue signal, which was extremely frustrating. Some of the frustrations have died down a bit, because we are now able to get BBC Scotland in my constituency. I appreciate that this may not have been the case across the former Border TV area, but viewers in Dumfries and Galloway were generally content with the service that Border TV offered. I read with interest Joan McAlpine’s column in yesterday’s Daily Record, in which she compared the situation with that of people in the south of England receiving news from France. That is not the case for people in the east of Dumfries and Galloway. We are interested in Carlisle, as it is the nearest city to most of my constituents. Indeed, in much of eastern Dumfriesshire, Carlisle is at least as accessible as Dumfries, which has sometimes been a disadvantage to Dumfries. East Dumfriesshire residents travel to Carlisle for work, leisure and retail and are probably more interested in what is happening there than in Edinburgh or Glasgow. Colleagues from the south of Scotland may recall that in the early days of the Parliament we were very well served by Border TV. Dedicated staff were based in this building and regularly interviewed us on all manner of issues, including the legislative programme and everything else. It is unfortunate that tough times and competition with new media hit the broadcasting sector and, as Joan McAlpine said, Border TV was subsumed into the larger ITV Tyne Tees region. I think that that is what created most of the dissatisfaction, certainly in Dumfries and Galloway, or the eastern part of it. The research that Ofcom commissioned last year bears out what I have heard from many constituents. The area of coverage is now too large and people are not interested in local news from Sunderland and Newcastle, which they rarely visit. There is a perception that the share of news that is local to our area has been reduced. However, now that we can receive BBC Scotland, the lack of a national Scottish component of ITV news is perhaps of less concern than it was previously, although I am certainly not saying that it is of no concern. Many viewers access the BBC for national news and then hope to go to channel 3 to catch up with local news.

I am sorry. I have only four minutes. Joan McAlpine expressed concern in her column about whether councils are getting enough news coverage. I do not know about coverage in other council areas, but Dumfries and Galloway Council certainly gets some TV coverage in the local news, although maybe not as much as we would like it to get. Despite what we say about ITV Tyne Tees, the news programme “Lookaround” attracts a higher percentage of viewers in the Scottish Border area—just under 50 per cent—than it does in the entire Tyne Tees and Border area, and significantly more viewers than ITV or STV attracts in general across their areas of broadcasting. We complain about “Lookaround”, but we still like it. However, given the responses to the research that Ofcom commissioned, which reflect general opinion, as I said, I am pleased to learn that ITV is planning to introduce an enhanced and more distinct news service for the Border area and that it is taking account of what it described as a political desire for more Scottish content—I am not sure whether that was intended to be offensive. However, ITV argues—and this is where one begins to worry—that expenditure per capita in the Tyne Tees Border area is already higher than it is in any other ITV region and that news enhancements would incur additional expenses that might be disproportionate. I suggest that the higher expenditure is probably due to the sparsity of the population.

It becomes difficult to see how the circle can be squared. Ofcom has been tasked by the secretary of state with finding a way forward that preserves or strengthens the public service broadcasting commitment and addresses the need for a greater proportion of local news and increased Scottish content—

Given that the issues have been correctly identified, I hope that the next step is to agree how we improve the local TV news services in the Border TV area of Scotland.

The table on page 102 of the RPP states that the regulation of private and social housing should start to contribute in 2014, and that it should contribute 152 kilotonnes of CO2 equivalent by 2027. Will the minister confirm that he intends to set minimum energy performance standards for all houses in all sectors? How could that be supported financially?

Does the minister agree with the Energy Saving Trust’s view that, although there is a need for the national retrofit programme, there is also a need for a successor to the energy action programme so that vulnerable people in communities that are not part of the retrofit programme do not have to wait for significantly long periods for their needs to be met?

In his speech, my colleague Richard Baker mentioned that Dr Brenda Boardman had described the Scottish Government’s approach to tackling fuel poverty as “inadequate”. He was being rather polite, because Dr Boardman actually said that the Scottish Government’s approach was “feeble, inadequate and namby-pamby”. She advised that what the public needed to know was how much solutions would cost and who would pay for them. In answer to Dr Boardman, the Scottish Government stated that its budget for tackling fuel poverty in 2012-13 was £65 million, which represented a substantial increase on the previous year’s budget, but as my colleague Anne McTaggart pointed out, it failed to indicate that, in that year, the budget had been cut by a third and that this year’s budget is still almost £6 million less than it was in 2010-11. Although I do not intend to support the amendments of Alex Johnstone and Liam McArthur, I share some of their concerns about the tone and the wording of the Government’s motion, which creates the suspicion that the vital issue of fuel poverty—which should be attracting cross-party attention—is instead being used as an argument in the constitutional debate, and that the Government is more interested in complaining about the powers that it does not have than it is in using the powers that it has. That was completely borne out by Annabelle Ewing’s speech. In the context of today’s debate, I am not that interested in whether the UK Government is cutting spending on tackling fuel poverty in England. That is not germane to this debate in this Parliament. I am interested in what the Scottish Government intends to do to tackle fuel poverty here in Scotland and how it intends to use the powers that it has at the moment.

No, thank you. Many members have referred to the fact that 29 per cent of households are fuel poor, but we should not forget that the Scottish Government has missed its first climate change target—emissions from homes are 3 per cent higher than they were in 1990. Therefore, the retrofit programme is welcome and, indeed, vital. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s report on the draft budget reminded us that, the previous year, stakeholders advised that investment of £200 million would be required if the 2016 target was to be met. They felt that the majority of that sum should come from the public purse. More recently, Norman Kerr of Energy Action Scotland voiced concern to the committee about the level of expected private sector investment. He did not believe that the budgets—

No, I would like to get this finished, please. Sandra White rose—

I will not take an intervention at this point; I want to finish this part of the speech, please. Norman Kerr did not believe that the budgets, as they stood, were secure enough to tackle fuel poverty. He felt that it was “a very big ask” to expect £135 million to come from the energy company obligation every year for the next three or four years. He also said: “If £200 million had been spent every year for the past six years, we would broadly be on track, but we have not spent anything like that in the past six years. Therefore, the £200 million should actually now be £300 million if we are to gain ground and meet the targets.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 24 October 2012; c 2079.] I will now take an intervention from Ms White.

That was a rather feeble intervention. In any wealthy, first-world country, no one should live in fuel poverty—indeed, no one should live in poverty. My point was that, in a Scottish Government debate about fuel poverty in Scotland, it is not adequate to have a motion that includes a phrase castigating the UK Government’s spending in England. I do not think that that is relevant to what we are talking about. I join my colleague Neil Bibby in asking the minister whether the investment of £135 million from the energy companies will be achieved this financial year. How confident is she that that and more will be achieved next year? At the UK level, we have the green deal and the energy company obligation. Labour has been critical of the green deal, which replaces a grant-based scheme with a loan-based scheme. The previous grant-based scheme was not always taken up to the extent expected, and loans are likely to be even less attractive to private individuals, especially at this time. As Margaret McCulloch said, Labour at Westminster has been pressing the UK Government to better regulate the power companies in order to prevent exorbitant energy price rises. However, there are some examples of the UK scheme being used effectively.

No, thank you. Labour-controlled Birmingham City Council—

This is an example of good practice, which I am sure will be anathema to those guys: not only does it involve Labour but it is in England, so they certainly will not want to hear about it. However, I will explain what is being done in Birmingham.

Birmingham City Council, in partnership with Carillion Energy Services, is using the green deal scheme to secure a £600 million deal to retrofit 60,000 homes, schools and other council properties by 2020. That is a council using its powers. It is not sitting on its hands and saying, “If we had the powers of a small, independent nation, we would be able to do something.” It is using the powers that it has, getting the money in and trying to make a difference to the citizens of Birmingham.

There are other examples of good practice with people taking steps to make a difference. Neil Bibby referred to the switch together campaign, which my colleague, Jenny Marra, has spearheaded in Dundee. It is based on Belgian and Dutch schemes that involve collective bargaining, which is a good trade union concept. Energy price switching began in 2008, and five Belgian provinces now use gas and electricity collective purchasing schemes, to which 850,000 people are signed up. That is something that councils, registered social landlords and the Scottish Government could do here under existing powers. Liam McArthur mentioned the problems in rural areas. The fuel poverty evidence review pointed out that 47 per cent of households that are off the gas grid are fuel poor, compared to 27 per cent of those that are on the gas grid. I would like to mention a couple of problems from rural areas in my constituency. One of my constituents, who is 75-years-old and disabled, was accepted into stage 4 of the energy assistance package. Unfortunately, he discovered a—probably inadvertent—form of discrimination against people who are off the gas grid when it became apparent that, because his boiler, which needed to be replaced, was an oil central heating boiler, he would be asked to pay more than £2,000 towards the cost of a new boiler. That was partly because his property was too energy efficient. There are ways in which the current system is working against those in rural areas. I do not have time to talk about my second example. This is an extremely important issue. I am disappointed that so many issues to do with the constitution have been dragged into this debate, as they are into every debate that we have in this Parliament at the moment. We should be tactical and concentrate on what we can do now.

We should be learning from the good examples in Birmingham and Belgium, and we should be doing what we can to tackle fuel poverty.

Will the minister give way?

3. To ask the Scottish Government how policing in Dumfries and Galloway will be accountable to local people once the single police force becomes operational. (S4O-01701)

In Dumfries and Galloway, we were assured that local accountability would be preserved when the single police force took over from Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary. The recent announcement that there is to be one deputy chief constable for the west of Scotland, essentially incorporating Dumfries and Galloway into Strathclyde, has caused concern in the region. Can the cabinet secretary tell me when the detail of the local structure will be released? The local police do not seem to know when that will happen. Can he assure me that, in Dumfries and Galloway in particular, there will be no loss of accountability and no loss of financial accountability with regard to the role of the council?

I am pleased to take part in a debate that gives me the opportunity to be parochial, because Dumfries and Galloway is fortunate in having rich and, in some cases, unique biodiversity, which brings benefits to environmental services, leisure and tourism, landscape, health and wellbeing, and business and agriculture. I am aware that the Scottish Government has undertaken a consultation in light of the national and international failure to meet biodiversity targets and that many organisations have made recommendations. However, preservation of species diversity is not solely the responsibility of national Governments; actions at local authority and individual level play an important part. That was recognised in Dumfries and Galloway back in 1999, when Dumfries and Galloway Council, with partners, published its first local biodiversity action plan. It was one of the first such plans to be published in Scotland and it went on to win a couple of prestigious awards. Since then, more than 80 organisations have joined the biodiversity partnership, and a revised and updated biodiversity action plan was published in 2009. The native red squirrel is perhaps one of the most iconic rare species in my constituency. It is a great privilege to see the animals in their natural environment and this is a particularly good time of year for spotting them, as the foliage is less dense and the animals are more inclined to venture near human populations to look for food. I was therefore disturbed to receive a letter this week from my former colleague John Home Robertson, advising that the population of red squirrels round his home, Paxton, has succumbed to squirrel pox. Members who knew John when he was a member of the Parliament will recall how passionate he is about the red squirrels who regularly come into his garden to feed. Squirrel pox virus appears to be spreading quickly through the south of Scotland and has already been detected in parts of Dumfriesshire. I am worried that the delightful spectacle of a Dumfriesshire red squirrel dashing up the side of a pine tree will become a mere recollection. John Home Robertson is asking us to consider a vaccination programme. He points out that the Moredun Research Institute has undertaken research on a vaccine but requires further funding to make a vaccine a possibility. I hope that the minister, who is a member for South Scotland, will be able to take the suggestion forward. I would be happy to meet him, John Home Robertson and interested members to discuss the matter. Scottish Environment LINK recently asked MSPs to sign its wildlife proclamation and, as Rob Gibson said, SWT asked us to volunteer as species champions. The debate gives me the opportunity to champion my chosen species, the natterjack toad, which I chose because the inner Solway is an important habitat for it. Although as a child I was keen on all the animals that little girls were expected to like, I was also very attracted to animals that had a bad press. Wee girls were not expected to like snakes, rats, frogs and toads. My mum did not fancy having snakes or rats as pets—she did not share my enthusiasm for them—and my frog and toad tadpoles that made it to maturity always hopped off to find another pool once their hind legs had developed. Perhaps in championing the natterjack toad I can do something to help. The natterjack toad, bufo calamita, requires a high density of pools in which to mature and breed. It has a long breeding season but it requires unshaded, shallow pools, which dry out easily. It also requires low vegetation on surrounding land, so that it can hunt, because it runs rather than hops. It needs sand to burrow into, to avoid predators and extreme temperatures—not that extreme temperatures are a problem in the inner Solway. The merse—or upper saltmarsh—pools of the inner Solway provide a habitat in which the natterjack toad can thrive. The salt water is sufficiently dilute to enable the tadpoles to survive and the area is grazed by agricultural animals and the flocks of barnacle geese that overwinter on the Solway. However, a variety of conservation measures must be taken to preserve the correct habitat for the natterjack, including creating new pools, maintaining existing breeding sites, encouraging the maintenance of traditional grazing and, where feasible, introducing spawn to new sites in suitable locations. Those conservation actions are undertaken by a variety of individuals and organisations, including the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust, SNH, RSPB and local landowners. Natterjacks, in common with other amphibians, are particularly prone to mortality on roads. Warm roads are attractive to cold-blooded creatures on cold nights; also, natterjacks attempt to access pools on the other side of a road. The natterjack knows why it crossed the road, and it was not just to get to the other side. Road mortality can be addressed, however, by the creation of new pools on the same side of a road, by deploying temporary fences or traps to collect the animals and by creating wildlife tunnels under roads. Volunteer toad patrols can be deployed during mass migrations in spring and autumn to assist the animals to reach their breeding pools safely. The measures that can be deployed to conserve that one species illustrate how complex conservation measures can be and how reliant they are on partnership working and shared understanding and education. It is, of course, disappointing that targets for halting the loss of biodiversity have not been met. We all need to redouble our efforts nationally, locally and individually to stem the decline. We need to understand and address how the loss of habitat and man-made obstacles stand in the way of the survival of so many precious land and marine-based species.

In lodging all the amendments that I am presenting for Parliament’s consideration today, I have attempted to reflect the Finance Committee’s discussion of amendments that I lodged at stage 2. I have not resubmitted the same amendments, but my stage 3 amendments have the same purpose: to strengthen the amended act; to ensure that its provisions are used; and to ensure that past or future creation of arm’s-length external organisations and the commissioning of large-scale contracts to provide services on behalf of public authorities do not diminish the public’s right to know. At stage 2, I introduced two amendments that dealt with the future creation of arm’s-length bodies and major contracts undertaken on behalf of public bodies to the value of more than £1 million. Those amendments attempted to retain responsibility for freedom of information with the public body where the operation of functions had been given to ALEOs or transferred through major public sector contracts. Although committee members—and, indeed, the cabinet secretary—had sympathy for the intention of those amendments, they felt that the amendments as proposed would not achieve that intention and they were unclear on how the proposed requirements would be enforced and what the terms of such arrangements would be. Amendment 7 seeks to amend the original Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 by inserting into section 3, “Scottish public authorities”, a requirement to make arrangements regarding access to information relating to the exercise of functions that have been transferred out of the direct responsibility of an authority. The amendment would ensure that, when a public authority establishes a body or makes a contract to the value of more than £1 million for the purposes of exercising the authority’s functions or providing services on its behalf, the authority must make arrangements to ensure that it receives information in the possession of the body so established or the contractor if the authority receives a freedom of information request for that information. The requirement would not be retrospective but, after the bill’s enactment, public authorities, ALEOs and major public sector contractors would be required to have arrangements in place by which the authority could access information if requested to do so under freedom of information legislation. At stage 2, the cabinet secretary raised concerns that the information referred to in my amendment on public sector contracts might include more than the performance of the contract and that there could be a conflict with the Public Records (Scotland) Act 2011. In my view, amendment 7 makes it clear that the information relates to the exercise of functions or the provision of services that would have been subject to FOI legislation had they continued to be undertaken directly by the public authority. Section 3(1)(b) of the Public Records (Scotland) Act 2011 provides that “records created by or on behalf of a contractor in carrying out the authority’s functions” are public records of that authority. That means that an authority’s records management plan must set out the arrangements for managing its contractors’ records as well as the records that are created by the authority. I believe that the approach adopted in my amendment 7 is similar, and I believe that the potential conflict between the amended FOI act and the Public Records (Scotland) Act 2011 is therefore resolved. I know that the Scottish Information Commissioner has expressed support for the policy intention of amendment 7 but has questioned whether the value of the contract is inclusive or exclusive of VAT. In my view it clearly would be exclusive of VAT, as the value of a contract is the value to the contractor, not the value to the United Kingdom Treasury. I move amendment 7.

I believe that the cabinet secretary is making the interpretation of the amendment unnecessarily complicated. Public authorities already have mechanisms in place to deal with freedom of information requests and the amendment is not retrospective—it refers to ALEOs and contracts that will be made in the future. The public authorities making those arrangements already have systems in place, and the amendment will ensure that the systems continue once the functions have been transferred. I press amendment 7.

Amendment 7 was intended to deal with arm’s-length organisations that might be created and major public sector contracts that might be entered into by public authorities in the future. Amendment 8 deals with those that have been created since the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 was passed but have not been designated because ministers in successive Governments have not used their power under section 5 of the act. When the 2002 act was passed, the then Minister for Justice, Jim Wallace, indicated that there would be early consultation on extension of the act to cover registered social landlords and major private finance initiative/public-private partnership contracts. Consultation was undertaken in 2006, but it was not followed by designation. A discussion paper was issued in 2008 but, again, there was no action. There was further extensive consultation, including a draft order, in 2010, but to date, the section 5 power has not been used. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will advise us today that it will be used shortly, but even that would not alter the validity of amendment 8. Since the 2002 act was passed, housing stock has been transferred from local authorities to housing associations in Glasgow and in Dumfries and Galloway, to mention only two areas, a plethora of arm’s-length bodies have been established by public authorities to provide services on their behalf, and public authorities have entered into major contracts with private and third sector organisations to provide services on their behalf. In all those cases, the public’s right to information under the act was lost on transfer of the function or service out of the direct control of the public authority. The public’s right to information has therefore diminished since the passing of the act in 2002. Amendment 8 requires the Scottish ministers to give particular regard to the public’s access to information that is held by bodies that have been created by Scottish public authorities to exercise functions on their behalf or contractors that hold a contract with a value greater than £1 million to provide services on behalf of a Scottish public authority when considering how to exercise their section 5 power to designate Scottish public authorities. In other words, the amendment would specifically require ministers to consider designating such bodies or contractors and thereby to address the information deficit that has evolved since the 2002 act was passed. It would not force ministers to do that; it means that they would have to have particular regard to those bodies. The amendment is perfectly reasonable, and I do not understand why it could not be acceptable, as it would not create any problems in the way that amendment 7 might have done. It simply requires the ministers to have particular regard to the bodies that are transferred out of the control of public authorities. In relation to amendment 1, I lodged an amendment at stage 2 to replace the requirement to consult “other persons” whom ministers considered appropriate with a requirement to consult “members of the public and other interested parties”. The cabinet secretary advised that the phrase “such other persons as they consider appropriate” was a standard consultation obligation and that the phrase “other interested parties” was ill defined. There was uncertainty around the meaning of “interested” and the consequences if someone who had not been consulted asserted later that they had an interest and ought to have been consulted. However, at stage 2, the cabinet secretary made no comment on the inclusion of “members of the public”. I hope that that indicates that there was no objection to that part of the amendment. Amendment 1 seeks to avoid those problems by retaining the standard consultation phrase and merely inserting a requirement to consult members of the public in addition to the persons specified in the amendment to section 5 of the 2000 act. As it stands, the amendment bill requires ministers to consult “every person to whom the order relates ... persons” who “represent such persons, and ... such other persons as they consider appropriate.” The addition of “members of the public” makes it clear that persons who are not directly affected by the order but who might have a view on whether the Government should designate an authority using its section 5 power have the right to be consulted. I move amendment 8.

The cabinet secretary said that amendment 8 would focus attention on particular groups—of course it would. The very intention of amendment 8 is to look at those groups where bodies have been transferred out of the control of public authorities and the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 no longer applies to them, and large-scale public contracts. The amendment would not force ministers to designate such groups, but it asks ministers to give them particular consideration. I also believe that, within the terms of the rest of the amended act, it would also require ministers to report to Parliament what consideration they have given and why they have taken the decision to designate or not to do so. Amendment 8 does not exclude lower-value contracts. It would still be perfectly possible for ministers to consider multiple contracts; it just makes particular reference to those that might be of greater public concern and to which the public might not currently have access. Amendment 1 is not the same as the amendment that I lodged at stage 2. At that stage, there was no discussion about the desirability or otherwise of consulting members of the public. I will press amendment 8.

The bill, as lodged, suggests that the first report will be laid on 30 June 2016. At stage 2, I suggested that we bring that forward to 30 June this year, but the cabinet secretary felt that that was not appropriate because it would require the first report to be laid within two months. I understand that. My feeling is that that probably is a little bit too soon, but other members of the committee had some sympathy for the concerns that I expressed at stage 2. Indeed, John Mason suggested that we should perhaps consider a compromise of 2014 or 2015. I have opted for 2014, but that would still be 12 years after the 2002 act was passed. To be honest, given the announcement that the cabinet secretary has just made, I cannot see how that timescale would present any problems. By contrast, the Scottish Government’s amendment 10 moves the reporting period forward only nine months and seems to be overtaken by the announcement that Nicola Sturgeon has just made. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has accepted amendment 3. When we discussed in the committee the frequency of reporting, she said that three years felt about right to her, so I lodged amendment 3. I am pleased that she has altered her position and is now happy to have biannual reporting. At stage 2, I lodged an amendment that was not able to be considered because it exceeded the financial limits and would therefore have required a financial memorandum. Amendments 4 and 5 are a simpler way of achieving the same thing. Amendment 4 would require that, if the section 5 power has not been used by the time the first report on how and why it should, or should not, be exercised is laid before the Parliament, a draft statutory instrument must be laid before the Parliament within three months. Given what the cabinet secretary said, I do not see that that would create any problems for her, because the Government intends to do such a thing anyway. Amendment 4 addresses the concerns that the power has never been used by requiring that it be used within three months of the first report being laid. Amendment 5 is dependent on amendment 4 and will not be moved if amendment 4 falls.

I, too, congratulate Adam Ingram on securing the debate and thank him for giving us the opportunity to debate the coal industry which, as the motion states, is important in my constituency. I must admit that I was uncertain about the motion’s reference to an “adverse and unintended effect of the carbon reduction commitment”, so I thank Mr Ingram for his explanation of that; the reference is to long conveyor belts, one of which operates on the Glenmuckloch site in my constituency. However, I know that on 24 October last year my colleague Sandra Osborne led a debate at Westminster on the effect of the proposed increase in freight track charges on the industry in Scotland. She believes that the proposal could result in a reduction in mining effort and freight transport in Scotland, and could even threaten the future of carbon capture and storage projects. Part of Upper Nithsdale is in Mr Ingram’s constituency and part of it is in my constituency. The communities of Sanquhar and Kirkconnel were in the past sustained by the mining industry. In fact, the village of Kelloholm, which is adjacent to Kirkconnel, was constructed to serve the many coal mines in the area. However, unfortunately, much of that village subsequently had to be destroyed. The destruction of the UK coal mining industry by Margaret Thatcher’s Government in the 1980s also destroyed most of the jobs in the area and left an enduring legacy of unemployment and deprivation, for which that Government has to this day not been forgiven by local people. Some surface mining continues, although unfortunately it is under a cloud of uncertainty. Mr Ingram referred to ATH Resources, which is one of the largest opencast coal mining companies in Scotland and which employs about 300 people, more than 200 of whom live in Dumfries and Galloway and East Ayrshire. Unfortunately, the company went into administration on 5 December last year. That was the latest in a number of worrying developments, which include the decision to put on hold plans to extend the Glenmuckloch site near Kirkconnel only 10 months after the extension was announced, and the announcement in May last year that 60 jobs were in jeopardy, which came hot on the heels of the loss of 11 jobs just a month earlier. Buccleuch Estates, which owns the Glenmuckloch site, was concerned that remedial work to restore former opencast areas on site might also be threatened as a result of the restoration bond issue that Mr Ingram described. I am not always nice to Scottish Government ministers, but in this instance I record my gratitude to the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism for his interest in that difficult situation and for his request to Professor Russel Griggs, who has been working closely with partners to attempt to find a solution that will preserve as many of the jobs as possible, if not all of them. Fortunately, Aardvark TMC Ltd, which is the parent company, is continuing to trade, which means that employee, supplier and customer contracts continue to be honoured. It is to be hoped that the financial restructuring of the group and the purchase of its debt by Better Capital LLP will allow new investment to be secured. In an area of high unemployment and limited alternative opportunities, the jobs are extremely valuable. One of the main factors that has brought ATH to its current position is the fall in the global price of coal. Ironically, one factor in that is the development of shale oil and gas technology in the United States. Given that story, it is perhaps surprising that there is now considerable interest in the coal reserves in another part of my constituency: Canonbie, where the mines closed about 70 years ago, although seams of high-quality coal that stretch out under the Solway remain. Recently, two companies have expressed an interest in opencast and drift mining, although I am not sure that their enthusiasm is shared by everyone who lives in the area. However, I hope that that interest indicates a positive future for the coal industry in Scotland, and that it will continue to be an important part of our energy supply in the coming years.

We hear quite a lot about the links between deprivation and ill health and indeed, just this morning, we heard about the links between deprivation and teenage pregnancy. Despite that, I was shocked by the evidence referenced by the Christie commission that at age 15, the educational gap between the top and bottom 20 per cent of the Scottish population is five years, which is the widest in developed Europe. That should be a statistic of shame for all of us who are involved in policy making in Scotland. Many of the educationally disadvantaged will suffer cyclical periods of unemployment and underemployment and will struggle to lift themselves and their families out of the cycle of deprivation. In addition to the loss of income and opportunity to the individuals and their families, that comprises a loss of potential and productivity to the country as abilities go unrecognised and achievement goes unfulfilled. Recession is hitting young people particularly hard. Almost one in four young people aged between 16 and 25 were registered unemployed in the last recorded quarter for 2012, which is nearly three times as many as in the same period four years ago. Of course, those figures do not include all those young people who are underemployed in part-time jobs, some of which can have zero or very little in the way of guaranteed hours of work. Those arrangements may suit employers but they offer very little financial stability or opportunity for progression for the young people concerned. The Finance Committee inquiry revealed a plethora of initiatives and funding streams that are aimed at tackling youth unemployment in particular. However, there are questions about how successful many of those initiatives have been in practice and whether they address the problems faced by those who are furthest from employment. Of course, there are also issues about if and how the success of the various initiatives is evaluated. According to Who Cares? Scotland and Barnardo’s Scotland, many programmes are too short to sustain personal development and some people require support even to get to the stage at which those programmes might be of assistance to them. Kenneth Gibson referred to Minerva People, which is a very successful company in my constituency. It described its experience whereby its one-to-one work with young people who were hard to place helped them to identify their skills and talents. Minerva told us that “the results have been amazing.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 23 May 2012; c 1211.] Kezia Dugdale brought up the criticism of the SDS internet-based programme, my world of work. The issue is not really one of just having a go at the Government. The problem is that SDS estimates that only about 3,000 to 3,500 young people will require additional assistance. That is only about 3 per cent of the young people in the 16 to 25 age group who require help—who are actually unemployed. Many of those young people will be internet literate, of course, but I question whether more of them might need a bit of personal support as well as initial internet-based support. Dennis Robertson made a very good point about the lack of internet access in some rural areas and more remote parts of Scotland.

Indeed, but there are other young people who require a degree of support. They may not need intensive support, but they may require a degree of guidance and support to get themselves on the correct programme. I want to say a bit about rural communities in which employment is dominated by micro and small businesses. On the positive side, those businesses are often more likely to employ young people with fewer formal qualifications if their personal attributes and motivation suit the business. In its evidence, the FSB pointed out that small businesses represent 93 per cent of the Scottish private sector and that individuals without degree-level qualifications are significantly more likely to gain employment with small businesses than with larger enterprises. However, as the convener of the Finance Committee has already said and Minerva People pointed out, there are particular difficulties in rural areas to do with seasonal work and unusual hours. One of my constituents from Upper Nithsdale was offered a job in Annan, which he could access by train, but with the loss of his benefits and the train fares, he would be only £8 a week better off, so he did not take it. Particular issues were flagged up to us in the Dumfries session around childcare and transport difficulties in rural areas, particularly if people might have to work on weekends or do shift work. Particular issues need to be looked at. I was struck by the difference in perceptions regarding the efficacy of initiatives and joint working in the public, private and third sectors. I think that the private and third sectors did not feel as included as the public sector thought that they were. For example, the committee noted that the needs of small and medium-sized enterprises need to be better accommodated in the programmes if we expect them to provide training and support and employment opportunities. Third sector agencies that attended the Dumfries session also felt that they could contribute more to the design of support packages. That was particularly true of support for people who are very far from the labour market and need specialist support, such as ex-prisoners or people with addiction problems. The major problem for anyone who is particularly disadvantaged with regard to gaining employment must be the level of competition that they currently face. Employers are less likely to take on someone who requires an input of resources to sustain them in employment if they have a large range of other applicants from which to choose. The Finance Committee report flags up a number of issues and suggests a number of actions, but we also have to look at the demand side and how we can stimulate employment, because we need to create more jobs in Scotland as well as help people to get into them.

4. I apologise—my question was lodged before yesterday’s statement on the autumn budget statement had been made. To ask the Scottish Government what proportion of the Barnett consequentials arising from the autumn statement it will allocate to affordable housing. (S4O-01641)

After including what was announced yesterday, the affordable supply budget will still be £78.4 million less than the outturn expenditure figure for 2011-12, when the number of social rented housing starts fell to 3,025, which was a reduction of more than 50 per cent from the previous year. Will the minister lobby the cabinet secretary for a further increase in the funding that is available for housing for social rent?

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on Shelter Scotland’s claim that one in four people believe they are “one pay cheque away” from losing their home. (S4F-01084)

Many families will spend a period of time in temporary accommodation before being able to be housed, and Shelter has also highlighted that 5,300 homeless children will wake up in temporary housing on Christmas day because their family have no home to call their own. What consideration will the Government give to introducing national guaranteed standards for temporary accommodation for homeless families with children?

Yet again, I have the opportunity to speak in the last debate before Christmas on the Finance Committee’s report on the draft budget. As I have actually left the committee to join the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, I thank my former colleagues on the Finance Committee, the clerks and the budget adviser for putting up with me for the past year. Some of us on the Finance Committee felt that we should comment on whether John Swinney had succeeded in the ambitions he announced when he introduced his draft budget: that it would be a budget for economic growth and would boost construction. Three of us felt that we could not see evidence of that, three other members of the committee thought that the budget was wonderful, and one member of the committee disagreed with both camps. Therefore, there was no published judgment on the budget. I would like to say a little about why I think that the evidence is not there. In the past year, the Finance Committee has spent a lot of time taking evidence on preventative spend. As I said in my speech last year—and the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations often makes this point—socially rented housing surely qualifies as preventative spend, as homelessness and temporary and poor-quality housing affect people’s health and wellbeing, educational achievements and their ability to sustain employment. I think that we all agree that construction is also a fast and effective way of stimulating economic growth. It is therefore disappointing that the housing budget continues to be squeezed more tightly than capital spending as a whole. The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee noted that affordable housing spending is being cut by 45 per cent over the spending review period and that capital spend is reducing by a third.

I think that I am going on to talk about what the member was going to say. An additional £50 million for affordable housing next year was announced yesterday. That is of course welcome, but the total housing supply budget, including the amount in yesterday’s announcement, is still only £269 million, which is £46 million less than the revised housing supply budget for this year.

The Scottish Government continues to trumpet its figures for the completion of socially rented housing, but much of that housing was funded under the previous, more generous terms and in the period of accelerated spend. Figures that I obtained from the housing minister in answer to a recent parliamentary question demonstrate a significant fall in the number of housing starts over the past two years. The figure went down from 7,677 in 2009-10 to 3,025 in 2011-12. The figure for 2011-12 is less than 40 per cent of the figure for two years earlier, and that fall coincides with the funding that was available to housing associations for new build being cut by 47 per cent over exactly the same period. In its evidence to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, Shelter Scotland stated: “we are heading for a cliff edge with regard to new completions in the next few years.”—[Official Report, Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, 24 October 2012; c 973.]

I do not know where Mr Gibson gets his figures from. Actually, the Labour-led Executive built more than 38,000 homes for social rent between 2002 and 2007. That is according to Scottish Government figures. Therefore, I simply do not recognise what Mr Gibson said. I refer to another answer that I received to a parliamentary question, on the funding that was provided to housing associations for the construction of new homes for social rent across all local authority areas between 2009-10 and 2011-12. The overall funding that was claimed reduced by 53 per cent over those two years, but some local authority areas had much more significant reductions. For example, housing associations in Aberdeenshire claimed only 1.4 per cent of the sum that they had claimed two years earlier. Housing associations in several areas received only 10 per cent of what they received in 2009-10. I heard the answer that was given to my colleague Richard Baker yesterday, but I sincerely request that the cabinet secretary seriously reconsiders the suggestion from the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee and the SFHA that the Scottish Government should review the grant level. It stands to reason that, as the population ages, the need for adaptations to enable older people to live healthily and independently in their own homes will increase. Therefore, I share Age Scotland’s disappointment that the budget line for supporting transitions has been reduced. The social return on investment report by Bield, Hanover and Trust housing associations states that each adaptation saves Scotland’s health and social care sector more than £10,000, and the associations estimated that their investment of £1.4 million has already saved the Scottish Government £5.3 million. Surely that is a good example of preventative spend that also improves the quality of life for older people. It has been suggested that there should be information in the budget on in-year revisions, and that they should be presented in addition to the agreed budget for the previous year. I know that previous Governments did not do that, but perhaps all Governments have been wrong. I would argue that it is more important to fully understand the funding picture of previous years in times of austerity. If we want committees or Opposition spokespeople to suggest transfers of funding to and from budget lines, we need that information. I commend the Finance Committee’s report on the draft budget for highlighting a number of quite difficult issues. I very much hope that the cabinet secretary will take them into account when he produces his draft budget bill next year.

Does the cabinet secretary accept the evidence from housing associations that the level of subsidy that they currently receive makes it very difficult for them to be able to borrow, to construct houses and to let them at affordable rents?

Is it not the very point that the housing associations have now used up their reserves and do not have the capability to draw on that money any longer?

In his press release, the cabinet secretary identified £800 million of projects throughout Scotland that could get under way now. I presume that those have already been identified. Can he, therefore, advise how much of the £50 million that has been allocated to affordable housing in 2013-14 will be allocated for provision of new housing for social rent?

The debate has been mainly consensual, even though we have been invited to envisage Stewart Stevenson discharging water, and despite the fact that the Conservatives take a different view from other members on the value of retaining Scottish Water in the public sector. It makes sense for Scotland to make the most of a resource that it possesses in abundance. As members have said, at times we have an overabundance. Water shortages are a concern throughout the world, as climate change and increasing global population take effect, while in Scotland we often complain about the amount of water with which we are blessed. The effect of global warming on us is that the resource is likely to increase, as is the severity with which it is deposited on our land. Clearly, we should turn that to the country’s advantage whenever possible. Like other members, I am not sure that the statutory designation of Scotland as the first “Hydro Nation” is absolutely necessary to enable us to do all the things that we want to do. I must say in passing that I have an aversion to the appearance of capital letters in the middle of a sentence when not attached to a proper noun—that annoys me almost as much as the intrusive apostrophe, but I will let it pass. I am not convinced that some of the provisions in the bill are absolutely necessary and that we could not do some things anyway. I think that, technically, I am now a member of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, but I was not a member during stage 1 consideration. I therefore read the policy memorandum and the committee’s report with considerable interest, and I look forward to stage 2. Despite the uncertainty about whether the ministerial duty is necessary, it appears to have received support from witnesses, although Consumer Focus Scotland wanted more clarity on the benefit of the bill to Scottish Water customers. Consumer Focus and the RSPB felt that the bill should not divert effort from improving the water resource and preventing its deterioration. For example, the amount of leakage of water from the system in 2009-10 was 704 million litres a day. Maureen Watt, Margaret McCulloch and Duncan McNeil expressed concern about the meaning of the term “value of water” and that point was also made by witnesses to the committee, many of whom suggested that the bill should be amended to reflect the three pillars of sustainability, rather than simply the economic value. I am therefore sure that they and others will welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement that she intends to lodge an amendment at stage 2 to make that clear. The environmental law sub-committee of the Law Society of Scotland was concerned that the provisions do not take the environmental impact fully into account. I was interested to read in paragraph 49 of the committee’s report that RSPB Scotland, Scottish Environment LINK and the Scottish Wildlife Trust called for a wider range of bodies to be included in the list of designated bodies, in order to promote a partnership approach similar to that which applies to catchment management, legislation on which went through the Parliament in a previous year. Duncan McNeil highlighted areas of existing partnership that it is important not to interfere with. Witnesses referred to the duty in the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009 and said that it is working well. As Adam Ingram pointed out, the RSPB referred in its briefing for the debate to the sustainability duty in the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010. I was a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee during the passage of both those acts, and I can well remember the discussions that we had on the duties that ought to be placed on ministers, responsible bodies and partners. Therefore, I was pleased to read that those acts are now being cited as good practice. I hope that we can learn from them. There might be parallels with the bill, so perhaps we can reflect the good practice that seems to have been brought in through those other pieces of legislation. I will mention an issue that has not so far been raised in the debate, although I am sure that, if Rob Gibson or Claudia Beamish were present, it definitely would have been. The RSPB also urges us to explicitly include peatland habitats—blanket and raised bogs—in the definition of water resources, so that peat bog management and restoration can be pursued under the bill’s purpose of developing Scotland’s water resources. Peatland, like water, is an abundant resource in Scotland, and it can play an extremely valuable role as a carbon reserve. It can help to contribute to our climate change targets, so it is well placed to deliver a better water supply and I hope that we will go along with the RSPB’s suggestion that we should amend the bill to include peatland habitats, as defined as a water resource, so that they can be covered by the provisions in the bill. Margaret McCulloch noted the important role of procurement policy in the future development of Scottish Water, which will obviously overlap with the forthcoming procurement bill. The bill provides for ministers to control large-scale water abstractions, as many members said, and there is some doubt that that is absolutely necessary as the CAR licensing regime could be extended to include that provision. The RSPB, for example, noted that ministers already have the power to call in abstractions. I know that the cabinet secretary disagrees with that point, because she said that CAR is restricted to environmental issues. Mary Scanlon and Gordon MacDonald mentioned the concerns of the Scotch Whisky Association. I should declare an interest, but only as a consumer, although I would not like to see the industry’s future damaged. The Scotch Whisky Association has asked for the industry to be included in the list of exemptions. Finally, many members who spoke in the debate thought that the issue of water shortages was a bit of a fantasy. However, it is only two or three years since Pinneys of Scotland in Annan, which is a big food processing company in my constituency, was beginning to get worried because we were facing water shortages that could have affected its commercial production. We must be concerned about potential water shortages and we need to consider the concerns of the food and drink industry regarding the proposals in the bill. We should also take on board Consumer Focus Scotland’s suggestion about protecting vulnerable people at times of water shortages, because—who knows?—such times might come back.

I congratulate Richard Baker on bringing this important subject to the attention of Parliament. Edwards syndrome is an autosomal trisomy, caused by all or part of an extra 18th chromosome. Problems in cell division either in the egg or sperm cell prior to conception cause the extra chromosome to be present. It is rarer and far less well known than trisomy 21, which is also called Down’s syndrome. Patau syndrome, which is a similar condition, is caused by an additional 13th chromosome, and is very similar to Edwards syndrome in its progression and its prognosis. I, too, was completely ignorant of the condition until I was contacted by Demi Powell, who lives in Dalbeattie, regarding the selection of this motion for debate. I met Demi last summer when she was an Olympic torch bearer in Dumfries. Demi lost her eldest son Connor to Edwards syndrome twelve years ago. She is a trustee of SOFT UK, which is a charity that supports families who are affected by Edwards or Patau syndromes. It was due to Demi’s hard work for SOFT UK and her work supporting hundreds of affected families that she was nominated and selected as an Olympic torch-bearer. SOFT UK is delighted that Parliament is debating the motion, but it wants us to realise that the ways in which families can be affected can be complex, so the support that different families require needs to take account of their different circumstances. The most recent statistics from England and Wales suggest that 9 out of 10 families will opt for termination after prenatal diagnosis of Edwards or Patau syndrome, and they need support through that. However, 13 per cent of babies with Edwards syndrome are not diagnosed before birth and those families are unprepared for what the condition entails and for the fact that their child may die at or shortly after birth. More than 70 per cent of those babies are likely to die within a month. However, increasing numbers of children with Edwards syndrome are now surviving the neonatal period and have a variety of clinical needs. Recent research from Japan suggests that possibly a quarter of those infants are capable of survival for more than a year if they receive the appropriate medical interventions. There are variations of Edwards syndrome, including mosaic and partial forms. Children with those forms can enjoy relatively good health and attend mainstream schools and colleges if their longer-term health needs are properly supported. SOFT UK wants us to understand that each family that is affected by Edwards syndrome is different; that they will need support after diagnosis, perhaps after termination or neonatal death; and that some whose children live longer will require support in caring for their child. Part of the SOFT UK website is dedicated to youngsters who have died of the condition. One of those young people lived to early adulthood and was living in supported accommodation when he died of apnoea. Interventions that prolong life and support sufferers and their families are needed in addition to palliative care and bereavement support in helping each of those families and each of those children through their pathways. The briefing that SOFT UK has provided for me also states that provision of antenatal screening varies across Scotland, and that figures on diagnosis of Edwards syndrome are not routinely collected. Therefore, there is no analysis of why antenatal screening is failing in 13 per cent of cases and those babies are born without their parents realising that they have the condition. SOFT UK has been working actively in Scotland for more than 20 years—maybe longer, given what Dennis Robertson was saying—providing befriending support and collecting a wealth of information and research. It wants to work closely with Caoimhe’s Trust in Aberdeen and I am certain that it would be willing to share its expertise with the Scottish Government to support families and those to come who will have the conditions.

In answer to an oral question from me on 5 September, the minister stated: “the ferry service in the northern isles replicates the best elements of what we had before and will further improve them.”—[Official Report, 5 September 2012; c 11061.] Prior to July 2012—

—there was not an industrial dispute in the ferry services to the northern isles for 30 years. Does the minister agree that good industrial relations are essential to a good service and, if so, does he stand by his statement of 5 September?

I do not record the progress of my life by the number of times that I have spoken in Parliament, but I have spoken once or twice on the issue. It is nearly a year since I left the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, so I was initially reluctant to accept the invitation to speak in this debate, thinking that my experience might be a little out of date. However, when I had a look through the Official Report of the RACCE meeting of 21 November, I had, like Angus MacDonald, a feeling of déjà vu. I was reminded of the saying, “the wheels of the Lord grind exceedingly slow but exceedingly fine.” I am not sure how fine the EU’s considerations are, but its wheels are certainly exceedingly slow, because there seems to have been little progress since the committee’s previous videoconference with MEPs Ian Hudghton and Struan Stevenson, a year earlier. It is disappointing that things seem not to be progressing. Members spoke on behalf of their local fishing communities about how policies affect them. The fish that are important to my constituency and local economy do not come under the CFP; they swim in from the Atlantic Ocean and up the rivers Nith, Annan and Esk, providing opportunities for angling and half-netting, or they are farmed up on the west coast and brought down for processing. I concur with the cabinet secretary’s view that we should eat fishy things at Christmas. At a well-known retailer, members will find a fishy product that is processed in Dumfriesshire—I am not talking about food, which gives members an idea of where to find it. Under the common fisheries policy, we have the ridiculous situation in which, despite the fact that North Sea cod stocks are increasing thanks to technical conservation measures that were predominantly developed here, a 20 per cent reduction is still being required. As members have said, law-abiding mackerel fishers in Scotland and the UK might lose a share of the mackerel quota to compensate for greedy fishers elsewhere, in the Faroes and Iceland. If justice always worked in that way, there would be an outcry. Nobody believes that the common fisheries policy under which the negotiations will take place has worked. It has not produced sustainable fisheries, a sustainable EU market or sustainable livelihoods for our fishermen. As others have said, maximum sustainable yields based on single species do not work in mixed demersal fisheries. The policy has been criticised from all sides, including by environmentalists, fishermen, politicians, scientists and now even the European Commission. Following last week’s statement, I raised concerns about the potential delay in introducing the reformed common fisheries policy, and in response the cabinet secretary described some of the consequences of that and of the dispute between the European Parliament and the Council. The dispute is holding up renewal of the technical regulations and could seriously affect conservation measures because boxes that are currently closed could not remain so. The MEPs who took part in the video conference with the RACCE committee advised that there are about 2,600 controversial compromise amendments. If they are delayed until January or February next year, the plenary vote will probably not take place until April or May. In that case, there will be only limited time to get the second reading through before the end of next year. As European Parliament elections will take place in June 2014 and a new Commission will be appointed after that, there would be no legal basis for rolling over the European maritime fisheries fund. If the reformed CFP has not been implemented by 2014, the European Parliament will, according to Struan Stevenson, “basically be back to square one”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 21 November 2012; c 1349.] I understand that that would mean that the opportunity to reform the crazy process by which fishing quotas are negotiated would be lost. That would be little short of disastrous for Scotland’s fishing communities. Those are points on which we all agree. Maybe we need to talk a little about the points on which we do not agree, and the effect of Scotland leaving the United Kingdom. I believe that there is an extremely strong case for Scotland to lead the negotiations because the Scottish industry is particularly important and most of the fish are in our waters. My colleagues at Westminster might not agree, but I believe that there is a strong case to be made for the Scottish cabinet secretary to lead the negotiations. However, he would be in a stronger position if he was leading a delegation representing 78 MEPs and a population of 63 million people rather than seven MEPs and a population of 5.3 million people. I honestly believe that giving Scotland the correct place in the negotiations would mean that we had a stronger voice. I strongly believe that, as long as Scotland is given the appropriate position and the one that it is right for us to have, given the importance of our industry, we are definitely better together on the fishing industry and in a better position than we would be in if Scotland was apart from the UK.

I am in my final minute. Having said that—I know that the cabinet secretary and the SNP members will not agree with me on that point—I wish the cabinet secretary and his team the very best of luck next week in getting those very important negotiations under way, because they are so important to our vital, much valued and much loved Scottish industry.

I wonder why Mr Findlay did not include in that list Mary Fairfax Somerville, after whom committee room 2 is named. She was a well-known female Scottish scientist.

The Scottish Government clearly has an able team of scientific advisers in the four individuals to whom the cabinet secretary referred. Three of those—Professors Calder, Morris and Heathwaite—are relatively new additions who have been appointed this year. It is a good time to offer our congratulations to Professor Anne Glover, our former chief scientific adviser, who has gone on to become the chief scientific adviser to the European Union where—I am sure—she continues to play an important role. Iain Gray referred to the previous arrangements for the Scottish science advisory council, whereby the chief adviser was appointed by the Royal Society of Edinburgh. The council continues to sit, but a paper that was produced by the RSE in September 2011 noted that the SSAC’s level of access to ministers and the opportunity that it has to influence policy are not as strong in Scotland as is the case in Whitehall, where there is a more comprehensive system of chief scientific advisers across all departments. Does the Scottish Government intend to increase the provision of advice by scientific advisers across all its departments? The crucial question is whether the Scottish Government will take its advisers’ advice if that advice runs contrary to its policy. The RSE paper to which I referred recognises that there can be tensions between scientific knowledge and public values—that is the point that Richard Simpson made in his intervention on the cabinet secretary—and that there will be occasions on which, because of societal pressures, which are often fuelled by the media, as has been mentioned, elected Governments will choose not to accept the advice of their chief scientific advisers. In that context, I would like to draw the Parliament’s attention to what Professor John Kay—professor of “the dismal arts”, as my colleague Iain Gray would say—said to the Finance Committee when he gave evidence on the draft budget on earlier this year. He said: “I have spent my life believing in and advocating evidence-based policy. I have actually seen more and more of what I call policy-based evidence, where people think up a policy and tell people to go away and find the evidence to support it. Discussion on evidence-based policy has unfortunately led to more and more of that” and “largely spurious calculations are generated to support the alleged benefits of policies. A lot of the work that is currently done on providing impact assessments and so on would be better not done, because they are superficial exercises that fall into the policy-based evidence category. We have persuaded ourselves that that is a process of rational decision making, when in reality it is the opposite.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 24 October 2012; c 1717-8.] Professor Kay was not talking specifically about the Scottish Government; he was making a more general criticism of policy makers. However, his comments apply in the Scottish Parliament as much as they do in other legislatures. The Parliament and the Scottish Government need to pay heed to his criticism; science will not necessarily tell politicians what they want to hear. Science most often makes progress when theories are proved wrong and when the received wisdom is unable to explain newly observed phenomena. On the other hand, we politicians are, unfortunately, often loth to admit that we are wrong. In science, there is no value in seeking out only evidence that suggests that we are right; we must also seek out the evidence that could prove that our theories are incorrect. Evidence, not assertion, is what matters. Therefore, if the Scottish Government—or any Government—wishes to develop policy using evidence that the scientific community provides, it must accept that that evidence and the advice of CSAs could run contrary to current policy and might suggest that policies are not working. I move on to women in science. The Presiding Officer was keen that I mention Mary Fairfax Somerville—a famous female scientist from Jedburgh. She was a mathematician, an astronomer and a science writer. Committee room 2 is named after her, and it was the Presiding Officer and I who pressed that she be remembered in that way. I am also pleased to note how many eminent female scientists have been appointed to the chief scientific adviser positions. Prominent female role models are important in encouraging young women to consider STEM subjects as careers. I should mention that the first female president of the Royal Society of Chemistry is Professor Lesley Yellowlees of the University of Edinburgh. She was in the year above me at university.

I do. Indeed, Mrs Thatcher and I were in the same line of scientific research at one point, although not at the same time. Members can imagine that I used to get a lot of ragging from some of my colleagues. The Labour amendment refers to the loss of women who are trained in science, technology, engineering and maths. It is not only about getting women into those subjects but about the fact that many women who start off in them drop out later on—I am part of that 73 per cent. That loss was the subject of an excellent report that was published by the Royal Society of Edinburgh and produced by a working group chaired by the distinguished astrophysicist Professor Jocelyn Bell Burnell. I was honoured to chair a meeting of the cross-party group on science and technology at which she gave an extremely inspiring and thought-provoking presentation on the working group’s findings. She is a great inspiration to aspiring women scientists. I refer to our amendment and to the point that Professor Hugh Pennington made. I find it difficult that Scottish National Party members are unable to appreciate that it is because we are so good in Scotland that proportionally we get so much more funding than our population would suggest we should get. If our funding was based on population, we would have something like £370 million less in research funding in Scotland. That is the point for many of us. We are confident in the union because we know that Scotland is good. We know that we can hold our heads up high, that we can achieve and that we can bang the drum for Scotland. We do that in science as we do in so many other areas.

First, I thank the minister for the opportunity to have early sight of his statement. However, it is disappointing that, once again, members of the Scottish Parliament have learned of the Government’s intentions for the rail service in Scotland through the columns of a national newspaper and tweets rather than in the chamber. The 10-year ScotRail franchise will have a break point at five years. Will the minister commit—this time—to genuine consultation with stakeholders on whether the contract should be broken at that point? I note the announcement of the approval of the advanced works for the Stirling-Alloa-Dunblane electrification, in which I am sure the minister has a keen interest. Does that signify a reinstatement of a part of the Edinburgh Glasgow improvement programme, which was dropped from the programme in his July statement? If so, are other EGIP reinstatements under consideration? Many of us would hope that they are. Finally, in drawing up the franchise, will the minister and Transport Scotland ensure that there is sufficient flexibility to allow additional services and routes to be included, such as—and here I am being parochial—an early-morning service between Carlisle and Edinburgh, via Lockerbie?

The cabinet secretary referred to the crazy process of annual negotiation and the logjam of amendments to the European legislation that would introduce a reformed policy. Does he share concerns that delaying the second reading of the legislation beyond the end of next year would compromise the introduction of the new CFP and condemn our fishermen to further years of the current failed policy?

I congratulate Claudia Beamish on securing the debate on an issue of considerable importance to Dumfries and Galloway and I also express my support for Alex Fergusson’s amendment. Shambellie is not in my constituency, but I was surprised that the first I learned of plans to close the national museum of costume at the end of the season on 31 October was when I received an email earlier that month from one of the nine members of staff there who is to be made redundant. I was shocked to learn of the imminent closure of this important visitor attraction in Dumfries and Galloway in that way and with so little notice. Other members of the community—Claudia Beamish has mentioned many—including the Dumfries and Galloway Chamber of Commerce, were equally taken aback by the short notice and the lack of consultation with anyone outside the board of NMS. NMS has provided a list of reasons for taking that decision. However, neither the board nor the director has seen fit to ask local people what the museum means to them or for their views on how visitor numbers might be increased. My colleague Councillor Tom McAughtrie is one of the representatives of the Abbey ward on Dumfries and Galloway Council, in which Shambellie resides. He has suggested, for example, that introducing a day ticket that gives admission to three attractions in the area—Shambellie, the Corn mill and Sweetheart abbey—could boost visitor numbers to all three attractions. However, it seems that there has been no attempt to seek innovative solutions. Claudia Beamish has demonstrated that the cost per visitor to Shambellie is not very different from other NMS facilities as a whole. Indeed, Shambellie costs less than 1 per cent of the total NMS budget, so why pick on Dumfries and Galloway? The importance of tourism to Scotland has been demonstrated this very week by two Government-led debates on tourism, and tourism is especially important to rural areas such as ours. We have a terrific tourism offering in Dumfries and Galloway—landscape, food, culture and heritage. Why close the part of the NMS collection that is situated in our area? Instead of applying a creative approach to identify how the facility might be promoted and expanded—we have heard a number of excellent suggestions in the debate and I am sure that there are more to come—the approach of NMS has simply been to cut. It has cut without consultation with staff, and without consultation with the local community or local tourism operators and businesses. Would NMS have done that if Shambellie was situated in the central belt or even in the Highlands rather than in Dumfries and Galloway? We in Dumfries and Galloway suspect not. Ministers say—and it is true—that this is an operational matter for NMS and that they cannot intervene. However, NMS will receive almost £21 million in revenue and capital support from the Scottish Government this year. Recently, we have seen the chairman of a further education college resign under pressure from a Scottish Government minister. I am not asking the culture secretary to exert any pressure of that nature, but I wonder whether she could perhaps exert a little pressure to try to persuade the NMS board to think again and to preserve Shambellie—at least for the next 12 months, as suggested by Dumfries and Galloway Council—to preserve the jobs that it supports, and to work to canvass fresh and innovative ideas for a sustainable future.

The debate was stimulated by the publication at the end of last month of the York Aviation report on the impact of air passenger duty on Scotland. There has been disagreement about the robustness of some of the figures in the report. Like other members, I have doubts about some of them. However, some aspects of the report are clearly correct. It is correct to say that the UK is out of step with much of the rest of Europe and that that has a negative impact on the parts of the economy that rely on access to air services. Long-haul travel, in particular, has been penalised. Hanzala Malik talked about the 8 per cent increase in APD on the route between Glasgow and Lahore. Rates on long-haul flights have increased by 225 to 360 per cent since 2007. It is unfortunate that that differential encourages short-haul flights to hubs in places where APD is lower or non-existent, to connect with long-haul flights. That has a negative impact on carbon emissions reduction, because shorter flights generate proportionately greater emissions, as members have said. Edinburgh and Glasgow rely on air services to connect with the finance and business sectors, and Aberdeen relies on air services to connect with the energy sector. I have been present for the entire debate and I heard a number of members, including Hanzala Malik, Mary Fee, Helen Eadie, Stewart Stevenson and Kevin Stewart, talk about environmental considerations. Indeed, Kevin Stewart made a good point about the possibility of passengers taking short-haul flights to Northern Ireland to access long-haul flights, which will have a negative impact on emissions, given the effect of landing and taking off on short runways. That was an important point. There is evidence that passengers are not flying, but the idea that a person would take a train from London to Aberdeen to do business is not realistic. People will not do that; they will either pay the extra duty and fly or find somewhere less expensive to do their business—and they might still fly there. That is a problem. As Brian Adam said, the UK Government has more or less admitted that APD is a revenue-raising tax rather than a carbon-reducing tax. APD raises a lot of money. As Helen Eadie pointed out, it is a good tax, in the sense that it is an exported tax, because people in other countries pay much of it. A tax is always more popular if other people are paying it. Tourism will be affected, because passengers who fly into and out of the UK will be affected. It has been argued that higher duties might encourage UK residents to holiday at home. However, the issue is not just the cost of the flight but the cost of the holiday. Holidaying in the United Kingdom tends to be more expensive, which encourages people to go elsewhere. APD was restructured in 2009 and went from two to four bands, with two charges in each band: a full rate for premium-class passengers and a reduced rate for economy-class passengers. There have been a variety of increases across the four bands since then, which demonstrates that there is the opportunity for flexibility in the application of APD. We could take advantage of such opportunities if the tax were devolved. There needs to be further discussion about how we would deal with APD. Richard Baker reminded us of the double whammy whereby a passenger who travels from a regional airport to one of the London airports and then changes airlines has to pay APD twice. That is unfair. I think that it was Colin Keir who made the point that APD was reduced in Northern Ireland about a year ago, with all long-haul flights now taxed in band A, which has helped to retain the direct flight to New York. The power to change APD rates has therefore benefited one part of the United Kingdom. We do not want to have every tax power, but we would like to have flexibility in Scotland to make such decisions. The Silk commission on devolution in Wales, whose report was published yesterday, recommended that APD be devolved to the National Assembly for Wales “for direct long haul flights initially”, and that consideration be given to the devolution of all rates for APD.

We have established the case for APD to be devolved but it is important to look at devolution in the round. We are undertaking a devolution commission that will look at all forms of taxation. I have suggestions about other taxes that could be devolved to the Scottish Parliament, but they are not currently part of the Labour policy and that is what we are refining in advance of the independence revolution—devolution—[Laughter.] Sorry, I mean in advance of the independence referendum. That will allow us to present alternatives to people in Scotland. The Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats are right that we need to look at the financial consequences. If the York Aviation report is correct, revenue from APD in Scotland would be something like £433 million in 2016-17. That implies that APD currently raises about £322 million—I do not know whether that is correct. The Silk commission suggests that in Wales there would be a fixed reduction to the block grant, to be agreed between the Welsh and UK Governments. Presumably, a similar arrangement would be reached for the devolution of APD to the Scottish Government. Therefore, if we wish to reduce APD or if we want to make changes to it, we need to consider how that would be funded—we cannot run away from that. Clearly, if there was such an arrangement with the UK Government, there would be an immediate reduction in the block grant and we would have to consider that.

There is an argument that reducing APD would eventually benefit the economy but it is a bit like the arguments around decreasing corporation tax. If the money was taken off the block grant, we would immediately have to deal with that reduction, and there would be an immediate impact on public spending. Eventually, we might get the money back if the economy grows but we would have to make that reduction in spending straight away—that is what we have to face. It is a difficult issue.

The Scottish Government would not necessarily get it straight away—it would have to grow the economy first. The Scottish Government is not going to grow the economy in an instant, but it would have to find cuts to make to public services in an instant. We also probably dispute the contention in the motion that the devolution of APD is the only solution. Richard Baker and others spoke about the late lamented route development fund and others have spoken about other interventions such as marketing initiatives—Hanzala Malik told us about the Glasgow initiatives. Mary Fee made an important point about the need to take a balanced approach. We need to look at the impact on carbon emissions and we need to look at how we would manage the reduction in spending—

We need to treat the proposal with caution. Stewart Stevenson made a lot of good suggestions, which I thought concurred a lot with the part of our amendment that deals with the need to work with airlines in order to reduce carbon emissions.

5. To ask the Scottish Government when the budget lines will be identified in relation to the transfer of £250 million from DEL resource to DEL capital as announced in the 2013-14 draft budget. (S4O-01400) I apologise for the similarity of the wording of my question to that of the first question.

I note what the cabinet secretary said in response to my colleague, Margaret McCulloch. When will the committees become aware of the identification of those budget lines? As the cabinet secretary is aware, committees are currently scrutinising the budget and, unless committee members are aware of where resource might be transferred from, they will be less able to make a judgment regarding the effect on public services or on public sector employment.

I am not particularly familiar with the Vivarium Trust, although I know that it had an exhibition in Parliament earlier this year, and we have just heard a very interesting speech that gave us many more examples of its work. Co-housing, which was developed in Scandinavia, is one model, but there are similar types of community development that accommodate people with shared interests in specific or mixed age groups. I want to reflect on some of the benefits of those developments and of the more familiar varieties that we know. I will use them to highlight why that type of development, of which co-housing is one example, is particularly helpful for people. My sister lives in similar accommodation, but it is not a co-housing project. It is in Tunbridge Wells, but I do not think that she ever signs her name as “Disgusted”. There are several owner-occupiers in individual flats in her large house, but as everybody is a member of the committee they make decisions about how the house and gardens will be maintained and various other things. From what she has said, that can have its frustrations as well as its benefits. Many of us are, of course, familiar with accommodation for older people, such as retirement housing, sheltered housing and very sheltered housing. Such housing may be owner occupied or socially rented, but it has many of the benefits that Rod Campbell has described in talking about the Vivarium Trust. I have been around most of the accommodation for older people in my constituency over the years, and I have always been particularly taken by the extreme liveliness of the residents. Many residents in such accommodation are in their 90s and may have physical disabilities. There is always a contrast between meeting people in that type of accommodation and going into a residential care home—there are contrasting outlooks on life. I know that many accommodation complexes have their own committees that organise outings and social events. Residents do those things for themselves. Earlier in the year, I went to a Scottish evening at half past 6 in one of the retirement housing complexes in my constituency. I thought that older people—some of them were in their 90s—might not want to be up all night or have folk hanging around. I left at half past 9 and was told later that the event went on until 3 o’clock in the morning. I heard that the same happened at Hogmanay. I might try to get an invitation to the complex at the end of this year, as the people there seemed to have a heck of a lot more fun at Hogmanay last year than I had. At the Finance Committee meeting this morning, we heard that housing spend is a cornerstone of preventative spend and that investment in housing adaptations can save the health service much greater sums of money through preventing older people’s emergency admissions to hospital or admissions to residential care. There are interesting statistics. It may seem that I am going slightly away from what we should be talking about, but the approach of people designing things according to needs is relevant to the co-housing debate. The all-party parliamentary group on housing and care for older people at Westminster has said that the average cost to the state of a fractured hip as a result of someone falling is nearly five times the cost of a major housing adaptation and 100 times the cost of fitting grab rails or rails of that sort. When I went to one of the Hanover (Scotland) Housing Association sheltered housing developments in my constituency, I got a copy of the research that it had carried out. It was found that, for an average cost of £2,800 for adaptations, the Scottish health and social care system could save an average of more than £10,000 or the equivalent to 483 hours of home care, 19 weeks of care with nursing staff or two orthopaedic operations. When we look at that level of savings, we can see how appropriate housing, of which co-housing is one model, can make a huge difference not only to the lives of older people but to the interventions that they require from the health and social care services in the future. Therefore, all such developments are very much to be welcomed.

The role of authorised undertaker is being transferred from Transport Scotland to Network Rail, which is also providing finance to the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme. Is there any connection between Network Rail taking on that role for Borders rail and the £350 million reduction in funding for EGIP between 2014 and 2019?

Perhaps the First Minister and Mr Keir might have read the transcript of the article or even just the article itself. Surely, First Minister, no fair-minded person would consider that there was any suggestion that the project should be scrapped—or even that it could be, now that his lot has signed the contracts for the Chinese steel and the European contract. Is the First Minister not aware that many commentators, including Professor John Kay at the Finance Committee yesterday, are questioning the cost— Members: Where is the question?

This is the question: is the First Minister aware that people are questioning the cost of the project and its value to the Scottish economy, particularly considering his party’s procurement policies?

I, too, congratulate Willie Coffey on bringing this motion celebrating the life of Neil Armstrong to the chamber, not least because I submitted a motion along very similar lines. Like Willie Coffey and Iain Gray, I am one of the members of this Parliament who is old enough to remember the excitement of the first moon landings. I am not saying how old I was at the time because I am slightly older than them. We had 10 days of BBC and ITV coverage, starting on 16 July with the launch of the Apollo 11, and we had the first-ever all-night broadcast on British television, recording Neil Armstrong stepping on to the surface of the moon at 3.56 am British time, followed 20 minutes later by Buzz Aldrin. I think that the first images were upside down and had to be rotated so that we could see what was going on. Looking back—as Stewart Stevenson and Iain Gray have said—from this time of the mobile phone and the iPad to the technology that was available in 1969 makes the achievement of the moon landing seem even more remarkable. Mr Stevenson has quoted some figures around the computing strength at the time—quite remarkable. The moon landings inspired people of every generation. My grandparents were born at the turn of the previous century when people hardly even saw a motor car and a lot of people believed that the moon was made out of green cheese. My grandparents were absolutely astonished that in their lifetime a man managed to walk on the moon. In the 40 or so years since, technology has advanced at an even greater pace—partly, as has been said, due to the developments associated with space travel, such as the internet. Iain Gray rightly pointed out the motivation behind the space programme but, through that expenditure, there was a huge improvement in technology. One of the things that inspires me and surprises me a bit now is the fact that technology now looks at very tiny horizons. Our technology is letting us look right inside the atom, to the sub-atomic particles, through the large hadron collider. When we think of the advances over 100 years, including a man on the moon and finding the Higgs boson, we see the remarkable achievements of science. As MSP for Dumfriesshire, I want to mention the Langholm connection. The Armstrongs are one of the Borders clans—they originated in Cumbria but later relocated to Liddesdale, Annandale and Eskdale. The town clerk for Langholm at the time of the moon landings was one Eddie Armstrong, and he hit upon the idea of inviting his famous distant relative to become a freeman of the muckle toon. He was ably assisted in this endeavour by his deputy town clerk, Grace Brown, who—I am happy to say—is still an active member of the Langholm community more than 40 years later. Indeed, she organises the wonderful Langholm common riding breakfast every year. Although Neil Armstrong was born in Ohio and had not lived in Scotland, like many citizens of the United States he was proud of his Scottish ancestry and, much to the surprise of the town, he accepted the invitation and the honour was conferred in Langholm parish church on 11 March 1972, when he visited the town as part of his world tour. At the time, he stated that he considered Langholm to be his home town. Neil Armstrong, as Joan McAlpine said, was the first freeman of the burgh of Langholm. For a long time he was the only one until just this month, when he was joined by a very worthy fellow freeman in David Stevenson. Mr Stevenson’s honour was announced shortly before Neil Armstrong’s death, when he was not very well at all. Despite Neil Armstrong’s ill health, he took the trouble to send Mr Stevenson a fulsome message of congratulation, saying that he could think of no one who deserved the honour more. That says an awful lot about the sort of person that Neil Armstrong was.

To ask the Scottish Government what impact its recent announcement regarding the schools for the future programme will have on Dumfries and Galloway Council’s learning town initiative consultation. (S4O-01371) I am no relation to Chic Murray, Presiding Officer.

On 26 September, a Scottish Government press release announced that the Crichton 15-plus school “will be built” using non-profit distributing model revenue, despite Dumfries and Galloway Council’s consultation on three options being in its early stages. Shortly afterwards, it was reported that the First Minister would pay a visit to the site. Is the cabinet secretary aware that those announcements by Scottish ministers have caused in the local community serious concern that the decision on the 15-plus school has already been taken, irrespective of the results of the consultation. As appeals under the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010 are to Scottish ministers, can he assure staff, parents and pupils that any appeal against the council’s consultation process will be considered without prejudice?

As the minister said, long-range weather forecasting is notoriously unreliable because weather patterns are influenced by many factors, including variations in sea currents. For example, the unusually southerly position of the jet stream earlier this year brought cold, wet weather to Scotland during a period in which we would usually hope to have at least a glimmer of sunshine, and the oscillations of El Niño and La Niña in the Pacific Ocean are creating unpredictable weather patterns across many parts of the globe. Indeed, we were told that this summer was due to be a barbecue summer to rival the summer of 2003, but I had only three barbecues this summer—which was still two more than the previous year—and for two of them we had to eat indoors. Despite the unreliability of long-range weather forecasting, however, it is always better to be prepared, particularly in view of the predictions by Adrian Crocker of British Weather Services, who suggests that the coming winter will be colder than average and will follow a similar pattern to that of 2010. I hope that that prediction will be proved wrong, but we must be prepared. We have to be ready when the weather does its worst. We experienced very cold winter weather conditions in 2009-10 and 2010-11 and, as the minister said, flooding events are becoming ever more common and more serious. We have also endured extreme high winds such as hurricane bawbag last year. The two extreme winters prompted both the Scottish and United Kingdom Governments to assess whether resilience measures needed to be improved. The UK Government reviewed transport-related provision, including rail, while the Scottish winter review group took a wider perspective that included local authority services, pressures on the national health service and the business community, and the contribution of the voluntary sector. Government—both local and national—plays an important role in planning for problematic weather events, but responsibility also rests with communities and individuals to be prepared for the worst. I have logged on to the ready Scotland website, which has a number of useful suggestions for individuals and businesses. I registered for the draw for a home emergency pack and trust that, if I win it, it will come signed by the minister. The website is a good initiative, but not everybody is computer savvy or even has access to information technology. Some of our citizens who are most vulnerable to inclement weather are unlikely to be able to access information by that medium, which is why a hotline for older people, for example, could be vital in times of emergency. When severe weather strikes, the first challenge is to keep transport routes open. HGVs often present problems when there is snow and ice on roads with even quite shallow gradients. Indeed, the M74 in my constituency is prone to closure under icy conditions due to the problems that HGVs encounter. Getting up-to-date information to travellers is vital to prevent continual build-up of stationary traffic. We know that there were major problems with information during the first day of severe weather in December 2010. Indeed, I had personal experience of that because my daughter was stuck on the M73 in heavy snow. I found it difficult to find out what was happening or to get any information to her. Since that time, improvements to the Traffic Scotland information service have been made and, as the minister said, improvements in the provision of information to mobile devices have helped with some of the issues, too. Resilience involves keeping public services functioning when possible and keeping the public informed when that is not possible. For example, schools may be closed at short notice because it is not safe for pupils and teachers to travel to school or because low temperatures have caused heating systems to fail. However, last-minute school closures create difficulties for working parents—and their employees—especially those in occupations that come under greater pressure during severe weather, such as the NHS. In addition to local authorities organising methods to ensure that parents get information quickly by using texts, for example, parents should be encouraged to make plans with relatives, friends, and other parents about how they will cope with a sudden school closure and about which of them may be able to take time off work perhaps to look after several children on a rota. I also encourage workplaces to make arrangements to allow homeworking, where possible. That clearly assists people to cope with transport issues and sudden childcare problems. Periods of prolonged low temperatures present problems for other services. During the 2010-11 Christmas and new year period, my constituency experienced less snowfall than other parts of the region but, because the ground was not insulated by heavy snow, there were a lot of problems with frozen pipes and tobies—in many cases, the latter had not been laid sufficiently far under the road surface—so many of my constituents ended up without water services for several days. There were situations in which, for example, one elderly gentleman took snow out of the garden to put in his kettle in order to have something to drink. One problem was that Scottish Water’s call centre could not cope with the volume of calls that were coming in, and that needs to be looked at. I must say that Scottish Water’s senior management did a sterling job—they dealt with phone calls and texts right into the night during a public holiday. That was an excellent service so I have never criticised them for how they responded at that time. People who are able to contribute to individual and community resilience should be encouraged to do so. During the previous severe winter, there was unfortunately a fair amount of disinformation around, such as the idea that, if someone cleared the snow on the footpath outside their home and somebody else then slipped and fell, the snow clearer might be held responsible and could be sued. That was a load of nonsense, but people need to be confident that if they make efforts to help themselves and their communities those efforts will not lead to unexpected prosecution. More plentiful provision of community salt and grit bins increases community resilience so long as the contents are stored in such a way that they do not solidify. Access to the bins can be difficult, and sometimes when a person looks into the bins they can see that the salt is totally solid. It appears that lessons have been learned from the two recent harsh winters and that additional equipment has been purchased. I saw in the Daily Mail a nice little picture showing the minister wearing a rather natty set of gloves and scarf and holding an umbrella. However, my concerns about that page are not about the sartorial elegance of the minister but about the article next to his picture. The article indicates that, due to financial pressures, a number of local authorities are looking to cut their winter resilience programmes. The Scottish Borders Council is reportedly hoping to save £170,000 by reducing the gritting priority for 100 miles of its road network. Last year, the Western Isles Council reduced the time interval during which gritting takes place by four hours a day. Six of our councils are cutting their gritting programme and three have reduced their salt reserves, although in some cases that is because councils believe that they can access additional salt more quickly if that is required.

I thank the minister for that clarification of the issues in the article. However, councils are implementing cuts not because they do not take winter resilience seriously—I know that they do—but because they are under extreme financial pressures, which is worrying. I believe that Margo MacDonald and Alex Johnstone will mention potholes. In Dumfries and Galloway, we still have miles of potholes from two years ago, when the ice got into the road surface and it cracked, which it has not yet been possible to repair. There is still a huge backlog of repair work that needs to be done but which councils do not have the finances to do, despite the extra £4 million that has been provided. If we experience further severe winters, the incidence of potholes will probably increase and councils will not be able to tackle the problem. We are talking about a serious issue that is a consequence of decisions that were taken on the funding of local authorities. We cannot just say that it is down to the local authorities to do something. If they face serious pressures, they will not be able to address some of the problems. They are experiencing serious difficulties in doing so.

Capital budgets are under huge pressure as well—it is not just revenue budgets that are under pressure. I did not mention revenue budgets specifically and, while some repairs might be done using the revenue budget, some might be done through the capital budget. It does not matter which budget the money comes from; the important issue is the fact that funding is being constrained. If the pessimistic forecasts turn out to be correct, there will be an effect on rail services, too. I have had a look at the temporary timetable that would have been implemented if there had been severe weather last year. It involved substantial reductions in network coverage, with no trains at all north and west of Inverness or on the west highland line, no service between Aberdeen and Inverness or south of Girvan, and none to commuter destinations such as Milngavie, Wemyss Bay and Shotts. That is not entirely the responsibility of Government but, if similar restrictions are planned in the event of severe weather this year, the public need to know about them, because we cannot have a situation in which people turn up at stations expecting trains to be running when, in fact, they have been cut back significantly.

That information needs to be put in the public domain in advance of any prolonged period of severe winter weather. I move amendment S4M-04518.1, to insert at end: “, but notes with concern reports that some councils are considering cutting back on winter resilience measures such as road gritting due to financial pressures caused by the Scottish Government’s poor financial settlement for local authorities”.

If Mark McDonald believes that it is appropriate for councils to take decisions themselves, does he not think that, in future, it would be appropriate for councils to decide whether to freeze the council tax, rather than have that imposed on them by the Scottish Government?

I thank the minister for an early copy of his statement. This is a fiasco of jaw-dropping proportions and begs the question how much David Cameron knew before he reshuffled most of his transport ministers out of their brief. The west coast main line is a vital artery that transports passengers into Scotland, but enables people who live in places such as Lockerbie in my constituency to access work and leisure opportunities in Glasgow, too. I hope that the minister will represent all passengers, including those who travel within Scotland, in his discussions with the UK Government. The minister said that he wrote to Theresa Villiers last January about the east coast main line service. Given the concerns about the franchising of the west coast main line and its importance to Scotland, when did he first try to contact UK ministers about that? Did he just wait for UK ministers to get in touch with him? Will the minister join UK Labour in supporting a Government takeover of the west coast main line, at least while the contract is being retendered? Does he agree that the debacle strengthens the case for our public rail service to be run on a not-for-profit basis?

The timing of this debate is fortunate as the Finance Committee had local workshops just last week as part of our employability inquiry. One of the workshops took place in Dumfries, and I was therefore able to listen to the views of the public, private and third sectors in Dumfries and Galloway and, very importantly, the views of local people regarding their own experiences of the obstacles in getting into employment. One participant, who I think was from the private sector, referred to what they called the employability industry. There is a suspicion that there may be too many people creating work for themselves and sitting on committees talking about employability rather than creating work for people who are unemployed. If we have a look at the Scottish Government’s publication “Working for Growth: a Refresh of the Employability Framework for Scotland”, we will find mention of BASES—better alignment of Scotland’s employability services—skills investment plans, the strategic forum, the economy board, the Scottish employability forum, the national delivery group, the third sector employability forum, local employability partnerships and so on. It makes the reader wonder how all those organisations interact with each other and whether they avoid duplication. Last Friday in Dumfries we heard about the Dumfries and Galloway local employability partnership’s action plan.

I will ignore that intervention, because I have an argument to make and the member has made a spurious point. The local experience that we heard about was that public sector partners had set themselves targets and launched an employer offer, tailoring services in recruitment, training and staff retention to organisations’ needs. I was impressed when I heard that, but in the next session, which we held with the private sector, we heard that unfortunately the private sector did not seem to have been involved in the discussions. In fact, the businesses felt quite threatened by the employer offer initiative, which they felt was treading somewhat on their toes. I felt that the public sector organisations may be working better together, but our impression is that they are sometimes not working quite so well with the private and third sectors, which they need to be able to do. An issue that was raised in all four sessions was the number of training schemes and funding streams, which causes confusion. People said that it can be difficult to keep track of all the announcements of pockets of funding, and that sometimes it is unclear whether what has been announced is new or a refresh of previously announced funding. I commend the intention in “Working for Scotland” to develop a single employability fund, which I understand is intended to make more effective use of public sector resources. I give credit where it is due. People who are unemployed, particularly those who are experiencing long-term employment or who are young and have never experienced employment, might require employability support to develop the skills that employers expect. However, the focus should not be only on the supply side. Friday’s session in Dumfries with people who are experiencing unemployment highlighted the barriers that are faced by people who seek to work in rural areas. A constituent of mine from Kelloholm said that he had succeeded in being offered a job in Annan, some 45 miles away. He could get there in 50 minutes by train, but it would cost him £12.30 per day, which meant that, given the loss of benefits, he would have been working for £8 a week. It is understandable that he did not take the job. Another participant, who works in a hotel in Dumfries but lives in Dalbeattie, explained that when she works shifts she has to hang around until 11 o’clock at night to get her bus home, whatever time her shift ends. Other participants reported difficulties in accessing and travelling to work. Childcare is also a barrier, particularly if a job requires shift or weekend working. It appears that some employers are still asking women about their childcare arrangements, which I thought was illegal. On the Labour amendment, of course we will support initiatives to improve employability. We recognise the importance to the local economy of getting people into employment, but we need to look at the issue in the round. I am particularly concerned about housing. During yesterday’s debate, I tried to intervene on the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, but he took an intervention from Gavin Brown instead. We talk a lot about completions, and the statistics on completions of social rented homes look reasonably good. However, I have had a look at housing starts in the social rented sector, which fell from 6,997 in 2009-10 to 6,099 in 2010-11 and then to 2,948 in 2011-12. It worries me that houses are not coming through the pipeline. At the same time, there is a real-terms decrease of about 47 per cent in the housing supply budget, which I do not think is a coincidence. The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations has submitted evidence that it does not think that it will be able to meet targets. SNP members say that we are always asking for more money but, if the Government cannot give SFHA more money, will it discuss with SFHA the possibility of increasing the subsidy? There is not much point in having a pocket of money if housing associations can no longer access it because they cannot get the rest of the financing package as a result of banks putting up interest rates and concerns about welfare reform. I ask ministers to discuss the issue, because housing is so important. The issue is not just the construction industry’s importance to the economy but the fact that it is the people who live in poor housing and deprived areas who find it most difficult to secure employment. If we help to solve the housing crisis, we will help to solve employability issues, too—that is an example of preventative spend. I ask ministers to consider how such issues might be tackled.

I am sorry that the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities is not here, as I wanted to welcome her formally to her new post. That pleasure will have to wait for another time. In early 2010, more than 900 workers at Scotland’s only bus manufacturer, Alexander Dennis Ltd in Falkirk, were on a three-day week. Their unions had met with members of the Scottish Parliament and there were grave concerns about the future of the company. In March 2010, by which time ADL had, fortunately, returned to five-day working, my colleague and predecessor in the role of Labour’s transport spokesperson, Charlie Gordon, brought a motion to the Parliament in Labour debating time that drew the Parliament’s attention to the efficiency and flexibility of the five ALX300 buses that were built by Alexander Dennis and that operated in the Strathclyde partnership for transport area. Charlie Gordon also emphasised the environmental and economic case for increasing production of the new hybrid buses and called on the Scottish Government to fund grants for the acquisition of ADL buses as a matter of urgency. Charlie Gordon’s motion, with some amendments, was agreed to. I think that only the Conservatives abstained, which they did because they had objections to a Liberal Democrat amendment, rather than to the original premise. Although John Swinney did not commit in that debate to establishing a green bus fund, later in 2010, the Scottish Government announced the allocation of £4.4 million to a green bus fund, which, as we have heard, assisted in the purchase of 48 buses. Therefore, I believe that Charlie Gordon might take some credit for the establishment of the fund. There was United Kingdom precedent. Following a review of support for the bus industry, the Labour UK Government launched its new green bus fund in 2009, through which it invested more than £30 million to enable the purchase of 349 green buses in the first tranche of grants. The UK and Scottish Governments have since supported grants for green buses. In 2010, the UK Government allocated a further £15 million, which assisted with the purchase of 169 buses. In 2011, the coalition Government provided a third allocation of more than £30 million, which enabled 434 additional green buses to be purchased by operators. For a change, all of us across the chamber agree with Westminster that a green bus fund is a good idea. Although the Scottish Government was a little slower off the mark than the Labour UK Government, there has been welcome investment here, too, with another £1.8 million in a second phase at the beginning of this year. I understood that that had purchased a further 26 buses, in which case Mr Brown is underselling himself in his motion by three buses. Perhaps my figure is wrong, as it is highly unusual for this Government to undersell itself. Last month, a further £3 million was announced, which is expected to fund 40 more buses. So far, the Scottish Government has invested 12 per cent of the funds that the UK Government put into its green bus fund, and that has purchased about 12 per cent of the number of buses—which seems just about right in terms of the Barnett formula. I do not know whether there are any Barnett consequentials for the green bus fund or whether that is how it has been funded, but it seems that we are in line with the rest of the UK. I see from Mr Brown’s motion and, indeed, from John Swinney’s announcement last week, that the draft budget proposes an additional £2.5 million funding for next year. That is welcome, too. As the minister said, Alexander Dennis is a world leader in green bus technology, and I am certain that the workers there will be pleased to learn that the Government will continue to make funding available to support low-carbon vehicles. As we have heard, the process is competitive and there are other suppliers of green buses. Lothian Buses is supplied by Volvo. In the first two funding rounds, Lothian Buses secured funding for 25 buses to the value of £1.75 million. I vouch that I travelled along Princes Street on the number 10 bus a couple of months ago—it certainly is a fine bus and I am sure that Lothian Buses is proud of it. MacEwans Coach Services, Deveron Coaches and Henderson Travel were granted subsidy for six buses in total in the second round, and those will be supplied by the Optare Group. Obviously, in Scotland, we hope that Alexander Dennis gets as much business as possible, but there are a number of other competitors in the area, too. Although the 80 per cent subsidy is attractive to operators that are running busy, popular routes—this touches on Patrick Harvie’s point—I have been advised by the south west of Scotland transport partnership that the significantly higher purchase cost of green buses has deterred operators on rural routes from applying, even at that level of subsidy. In the south of Scotland, we have seen only MacEwans Coach Services—it runs the Abington to Dumfries to Edinburgh route—and Henderson Travel being successful in obtaining an 80 per cent grant. I am advised that few other operators in my area have come forward to apply for the money. MacEwans Coach Services is, of course, tendered by Strathclyde passenger transport but, unfortunately, that ran into problems this summer when the tender increased by 52 per cent above the previous contract—I think that the problems were more to do with the Disability Discrimination Act compliance requirements of the new buses—so that route is now being run on a temporary contract, although I hope that that issue will be resolved in a few months’ time. In welcoming the progress in providing funds to assist with the purchase of hybrid buses, I do not intend to deceive members into believing that I have completely suspended my critical faculties. Our amendment refers to the wider issues of promoting bus transport. The amendment is competent—it would not have been accepted by the Presiding Officer if it was not—and the Minister for Transport and Veteran Affairs talked about the need for a modal shift from cars to buses in order to improve our carbon footprint. That must be done in the context of a wider sustainable transport policy, which is why we must look in the round to see what is happening to promote bus travel. The Minister for Transport and Veteran Affairs is pleased to come to the Parliament with a 140 minute debate, congratulating himself on a proposed investment of up to £11.7 million, including what is in the draft budget for green buses. If he wanted to talk to the Parliament, why was he not prepared to come to the chamber to announce the reduction in the budget for the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme by a sum of £350 million, some thirty times the investment in the green bus project? It took Opposition Labour debating time for that saving to be aired in the chamber. Moreover, the minister did not come to the Parliament to advise it of the privatisation of the NorthLink Ferries route. Again, Labour had to request a statement on that. Although the draft budget allocates £2.5 million to the green bus fund, the bus service operators grant, which last year was cut by 17 per cent, remains static, which is a real terms cut of 2.5 per cent if the Treasury’s gross domestic product inflator is applied.

We rehearsed the EGIP issue last week and I said at the time that it was about Network Rail borrowing and not part of the capital budget. I will not make up policy on the hoof about the bus service operators grant but, as my leader says, we must have an honest debate about our priorities and how we fund them, whether it be by funding, restriction, charging or increased taxation. It is unfortunate that the Scottish National Party is unable to engage in that type of honest debate. Members: Oh! It is true. I will move on to concessionary bus fares and again I will tell you about the fears of bus service operators. They are concerned because, last year, the cap on that particular fund meant that there was no money left at the end of the year and they had to run buses without being able to reclaim the concessionary fares. They are also worried that the review that is being undertaken will result in a further reduction from 67 pence in the pound to 54 pence in the pound. If that is just a rumour, it would be helpful for the minister to dispel it.

As I said, we are asking for an honest debate about how we fund what we see as desirable priorities. That is the whole issue, and you have consistently run away from it since you came into office. We welcome the investment in green buses. We will support the Tory amendment, unless Mr Johnstone says something totally outrageous during the debate and, although the Government will undoubtedly turn down our amendment, we are even prepared to support your motion because it is valid to say that green buses are a valuable investment. We should not be self-congratulatory and say how wonderful everything is in the garden. We need to appreciate that there are difficult choices to be made and we need to be grown up enough to have an honest debate about them.

I move amendment S4M-04247.2, to insert at end: “; notes the concerns expressed by bus service operators, passengers and trade unions regarding the Scottish Government’s decision to cut the Bus Service Operators Grant (BSOG) and the consequential impact on fares and services; notes that the draft budget proposes a real-terms decrease in the BSOG for 2013-14, and, while recognising the importance of investing in green buses, believes that this must be part of a broader sustainable transport policy to encourage more people to travel by bus.”

Will the member give way?

Ms Dugdale made it quite clear this morning that her comments were her personal views. Mr Hepburn also misrepresents Ms Lamont. She was contrasting the increase in one budget with the decrease in another budget, both in policy areas where it would be desirable to encourage funding. This is about the necessary tensions that arise when we are having an honest debate about such issues.

I think that my colleague Neil Findlay was probably referring to page 117 of the budget document, which shows that the concessionary fares budget for 2012-13 is £192 million and the budget for the next year is also £192 million, so if the gross domestic product deflator is applied, that is a cut of 2.5 per cent.

Is the minister unable to accept that Labour members are capable of thinking for themselves and are not simply sheep?

The £40 million of additional investment in housing is welcome, but the affordable housing supply budget fell by £86 million between last year and this year. The table on page 116 of the draft budget shows that spending on housing and regeneration is reducing in real terms, and the official housing statistics for Scotland show that the rented social housing figure fell from 6,099 in 2010-11 to 2,948 in 2011-12. How much of the £40 million will be made available for social rented housing? Will the Scottish Government rethink the level of housing association grant subsidy that is made available to councils and registered social landlords?

The Scottish Government often repeats its assertion that it must hold the independence referendum in the second half of this parliamentary session because it made a commitment in that regard to the Scottish people before the election. I am therefore interested in what the Scottish National Party said in its manifesto—the manifesto on which it was so substantially elected in May last year—about the Edinburgh to Glasgow improvement programme: “And through Network Rail’s Regulated Asset Base (RAB) we will also take forward the important Edinburgh-Glasgow Improvement programme which will see the electrification of much of the central Scotland rail network and more-frequent and faster journeys between Edinburgh and Glasgow, including services of just over half an hour.” EGIP was a £1 billion investment in electrifying 200 miles of track. It was an infrastructure programme of major economic significance. Now its budget has been slashed by more than a third and only half the track that was planned for electrification will be electrified between 2014 and 2019. On 21 June the Minister for Transport and Veteran Affairs made a statement to Parliament on the rail 2014 franchise, in which he announced investment of £5 billion in rail infrastructure and said: “We will announce further progress on EGIP shortly.”—[Official Report, 21 June 2012; c 10419.] Surely a significant change to a major infrastructure project should have been announced to Parliament. It was not. Instead, the announcement was made on 4 July, six days into the summer recess, via a press release from Transport Scotland entitled, “Full steam ahead for Rail Project”, which boasted of cutting 10 minutes off the journey time between Edinburgh and Glasgow but made no mention of the parts of the project that were being delayed without time limit.

It is not quite the fantastic news that we were promised in the SNP manifesto, is it? In the press release from Transport Scotland, the minister was quoted as saying: “I am very excited to be announcing the details of the Edinburgh Glasgow Improvement Programme, which will take train journeys on Scotland’s busiest commuter route into the next generation.” He was not so excited that he felt the need to share the details with the Scottish Parliament, perhaps because the programme was a shadow of its former self. For some time after the announcement, Transport Scotland’s website displayed the original scheme. The website has now been amended and mentions only Cumbernauld, Springburn, Haymarket, Edinburgh gateway, and route clearance. It includes the helpful information that the Cumbernauld electrification is “Coming Soon”—that sounds like some of our trains—despite the minister’s assurances to Patricia Ferguson that the electrification of the Cumbernauld line will be completed in time for the Commonwealth games. Transform Scotland has analysed what has been left out. In addition to the electrification of the Stirling-Dunblane-Alloa line, more than a dozen elements of the original scheme are missing. Plans for six electric trains per hour between Edinburgh and Glasgow have been downgraded to four diesel trains, apparently as a result of a review by engineering consultants Jacobs Consulting, which so far is unavailable for public scrutiny. The manifesto commitment was to more frequent and faster services between Edinburgh and Glasgow, including journeys of just half an hour. The current service offers four trains an hour and journey times of between 50 and 55 minutes. Ten minutes off the fastest of those journeys is still 33 per cent more than half an hour. Therefore, there are two commitments not delivered. The Minister for Transport and Veteran Affairs and Transport Scotland have both stated that nothing has been cut from EGIP, but that elements are being phased in. If that is the case, why is there reluctance in answering parliamentary questions from me and my colleague Margaret McCulloch to indicate when those parts of the programme might be implemented? It is somewhat worrying that the fate of the projects that are not included in phase 1 of EGIP now seems to be linked to the development of high-speed rail. On 21 June, Mr Brown said: “Organisations across Scotland have come together to make the case for high-speed rail. We will continue to drive forward work on that while ensuring that EGIP and the other network improvements are compatible with our approach.” He also said: “On EGIP, it is right for us to take into account the possible implications of high-speed rail. We have to ensure that we have a credible and worked-out proposal to make to the UK Government” and that he would “take some time and come back with a fuller explanation of what we are doing with EGIP.”—[Official Report, 21 June 2012; c 10419, 10426.] “Some time” turned out to be 13 days, and the fuller explanation of what the Government was doing was that it was cutting EGIP. The minister also advised my colleague Mark Griffin in an answer to a written question that “Further elements of EGIP including the Croy turnback, the electrification of Stirling, Dunblane and Alloa services ... can be delivered in future phases.” The phrase that was used was “can be”, not “will be”. He also said: “The timing and specification of future phases will be dependent on other considerations including High Speed Rail”.—[Official Report, Written Answers, 20 August 2012; S4W-08927.] The United Kingdom Government’s plan for high-speed rail is for the connection to the west midlands to be opened by 2026 and the lines to Manchester and Leeds to be opened by 2032-33. That is hardly an optimistic timetable for the rest of EGIP if it is connected to high-speed rail. Incidentally, if Scotland became an independent country, I do not think that the rest of the UK would be particularly interested in investing up to Glasgow and Edinburgh.

The rails will still continue to exist, but why would the UK Government invest in a rail service that benefits another country? According to a written answer that was supplied to me, senior officers in both Network Rail and ScotRail were aware that Transport Scotland was undertaking a review, but there seems to have been no consultation with other partners, such as Stirling Council, which had already invested significantly in planning for the necessary infrastructure. Officers from Stirling Council had met Network Rail only the day before the announcement of the reduced programme. It is clear that neither organisation was advised that it was wasting its time. If the chief executive of Network Rail, Dave Higgins, had been, as was said, “aware” of Transport Scotland’s review and had been involved in reviewing its findings, he did not seem to have passed that information on to others in the organisation. The Jacobs report has not yet been published, but I have been informed that it will be “published in due course”. Damien Henderson, a journalist for The Herald, was told in answer to a freedom of information request that the report is still in draft form. An important decision was apparently made on the basis of a draft report that cannot yet be published. Questions that I have asked about how the savings were calculated have not been answered on the basis that the information is commercially sensitive. Therefore, we cannot even know why cutting the programme in half has saved only one third of the budget. I wonder whether the revised programme has been subject to a Scottish transport appraisal guidance—STAG—appraisal. The Scottish Government will doubtless blame Westminster cuts, but the financing of EGIP was to have been via a 30-year low-interest-rate loan from Network Rail against its asset base. If the schemes that are not included in the phase in question are to go ahead later, I presume that another loan will have to be negotiated at a higher price. Iain McMillan of the Confederation of British Industry stated to Rail magazine that, as the original project would have improved journey times and environmental performance, he would have expected the CBI to be consulted if major changes were planned, but it was not. Liz Cameron of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce expressed her concern that EGIP’s potential to be transformational may fail to be realised, and the SCC has added its voice to those of Transform Scotland and the regional transport partnerships for a rethink.

I checked with my council colleagues, who provided statements, but nobody had shown them the entire press release or explained to them that half of the project was being cut. Some questions need to be answered. Transport Scotland published the Scottish ministers’ high-level output specification on 21 June. At that time, ministers had a statement of funds available. Did they know that EGIP was going to be cut and, if so, why was no statement made to Parliament in advance of recess? What is the Government’s current timescale for the Stirling-Alloa-Dunblane electrification programme and the extension northwards to Perth and Aberdeenshire? Is there any connection between the Office of Rail Regulation turning down a request for a delay in loan repayment and the cuts to the EGIP programme? Did the Government overpromise on the EGIP programme? Perhaps the minister will enlighten us in his contribution to this debate. I move, That the Parliament notes the announcement on 4 July 2012 by the Minister for Transport and Veterans of a revised Edinburgh Glasgow Improvement Programme (EGIP); believes that this announcement should have been made first to the Parliament rather than via a press release during the summer recess; believes that this reflects the lack of consultation and information available on the revised EGIP; understands that, among the changes, vital elements have been lost, including the cancellation or reduction of the planned electrification of various sections of railway lines, which would have improved journey times and lessened the environmental impact, as part of an overall cut of £350 million; calls on the Scottish Government to confirm who took the final decision to reduce EGIP’s budget and explain the rationale behind the changes to the original plans; recognises the concerns that have been expressed by trade unions and the business community regarding the cuts to EGIP and believes that this decision runs counter to the Scottish Government’s stated aim of investing in infrastructure to stimulate the economy and to the SNP’s 2011 manifesto commitment on EGIP, and expresses concern that, as a result of these changes, businesses, passengers and areas will lose out.

The SNP’s manifesto set out where the money was coming from for the whole programme—a low-interest-rate loan from Network Rail against its asset base. That is what was going to fund it and what still could.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. How long have I got?

I always have something good to say, Presiding Officer. I welcome Margaret Burgess to her new role. I look forward to working with her and shadowing part of her responsibilities, as I do part of Mr Brown’s responsibilities. At the outset, I had—and I still have—considerable sympathy for the policy intention behind the bill. Many of the towns and villages in my constituency are plagued with properties that have lain empty for years. The former shops that are up from my office in the Friars Vennel, in Dumfries, the former Co-op store in Kirkconnel, which is descending into disrepair, and the former Chinese restaurant and associated flats outside Lockerbie station are just a few examples. I have seen how sympathetic restoration can transform a townscape. The investment by David Smith in restoring the grade A-listed townhouse, Bridge House, in Annan, to its former glory, has vastly improved the entrance to Annan’s main street. Therefore, I came to the bill feeling very well disposed towards it, not least because it mirrored legislation that the Labour Party had introduced in the UK Parliament in 2008. However, the evidence that I heard in the Finance Committee on the proposals, particularly in relation to commercial properties, gave me cause for concern. I began to worry that the policy is not the right one at the right time. I agree with the policy’s aims, but I am not convinced that the bill will achieve them.

One way in which the bill could be improved would be by requiring a BRIA to be undertaken, as a number of members said. The minister said that he is considering a number of amendments; we need to see details of his proposals, as Sarah Boyack and other members said. I am hearing for the first time that information has been made available to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee that was not available to the Finance Committee. Has the financial memorandum been updated? At stage 1 we are still discussing the original bill and financial memorandum. Those pieces of work were rather sloppy, as Margaret Mitchell said, and the sloppiness needs to be tidied up. The minister said in an intervention during John Pentland’s speech that he will issue a response early next week. That is not early enough, I am afraid. The approach is sloppy and borders on being disrespectful to the Parliament, because we should have had information on the Government’s intentions before this debate. That would have enabled us to have a more informed debate about the Government’s proposals. The Finance Committee took evidence from David Melhuish, from the Scottish Property Federation, and Tom Stokes, from the Business Centre Association. They talked about how business centres can encourage the development of small businesses, so their criticisms remain relevant despite what Mark McDonald said about how the bill will improve on what happened in England, because industrial and listed buildings are excluded from its scope.

I am particularly concerned about the evidence from the Business Centre Association. John Mason said that the evidence was weak, but I do not think that it was. Tom Stokes told us that when the legislation was introduced—by Labour—in England, “the creation of new premises almost came to a standstill.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 25 April 2012; c 990.] The UK Government was subsequently persuaded to introduce a threshold of £15,000, and later £18,000. Then the market picked up and the coalition Government reduced the threshold to £2,600. We witnessed a virtual standstill in new centres outside of London, with the economy in London being rather different. An effect of the recession has been the cessation of building new business centres, because the cost of building is greater than the end value. Older properties that are no longer economic in their current use or are unlettable are therefore more likely to be attractive propositions where growth is likely. However, it was pointed out to the Finance Committee that the development of such properties will not result in immediate 100 per cent occupation. That relates to the points made by Nigel Don—in his extremely reasonable and well-reasoned speech—that a business centre may typically have 50 per cent occupation in its first year, perhaps 75 per cent in its second year and around 90 per cent thereafter, as businesses grow and turnover happens. Additional taxation on the unoccupied units makes such an investment less attractive, yet we need such investment to encourage the small business sector. A number of members mentioned the lack of a BRIA. As I said, we want the requirement for a BRIA to be introduced at stage 2. The Government says that the bill is an enabling bill—quite rightly, many bills that go through the Parliament are enabling bills. However, we want the bill to include a requirement that a BRIA be undertaken before any secondary legislation is introduced. After all, secondary legislation does not attract the same level of consultation or parliamentary scrutiny and we need to have that. As was said, the scale of the BRIA can be proportionate to the task; a small amount of money is involved in comparison with the total take. That does not mean that a BRIA is not important for the individual business sectors and businesses, for example for those that might want to use the developments that the Business Centre Association is talking about. Sarah Boyack, Jim Hume and other members made reference to the claims about bomb-site Britain. Some of that is anecdotal—it came out of the property press in England—but the press seems to be implying that, in some cases, owners were demolishing properties that were hard to let in order to avoid empty property rates. As Anne McTaggart said, long-term unoccupied property is in the ownership of not only the private sector, but the public sector. The information that has gone to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee subsequently has included information that the public sector has a fair amount of unoccupied property. Indeed, a freedom of information request on a survey of local authorities in England and Wales that was performed by the Business Centre Association suggested that the English legislation costs the public sector around £400 million annually. We need to look at that and learn the lessons. Local authorities expressed other concerns about the proposals. North Lanarkshire Council believes that the focus of the proposals is—as John Pentland mentioned—tax raising, rather than determining the need for funding to bring empty properties into use. I realise that that is a difficult task in the current climate, but it is a tax-raising measure first and foremost. Ann Bain of Angus Council said: “The issue that we have is that a significant number of properties are probably not up to a marketable standard and the individuals concerned do not have the funding to bring them up to that standard.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 2 May 2012; c 1023.] She pointed that there are around 1,000 unoccupied properties in Angus—I am sure that Dumfries and Galloway Council has a similar problem—with properties spread around rural areas. That is a resource issue for local authorities with regard to their inspection duty on such buildings. Jim Hume mentioned housing support grant, the abolition of which affects only Shetland Islands Council. I have sympathy for that council—even though it has huge reserves, it has a history of housing debt as a consequence of the need to develop housing to connect with the development of the oil fields at Sullom Voe. At that time, the population of the islands rose by about 40 per cent, which resulted in the council having to borrow around £50 million. I know that the local authority has made money out of that but, equally, it was not Shetland Islands Council’s fault that Margaret Thatcher brought in the right to buy, with the result that a lot of those houses were sold off for less than they cost to build. I think that the council has a point. I had not known and was interested to learn from Kevin Stewart that the council borrowed from a harbour support trust rather than from the Public Works Loan Board—that sounds like quite a canny move.

It might just be the case that Shetland Islands Council has been canny with regard to that allocation. The present situation definitely cannot continue for good. Transitional relief should perhaps be looked at, albeit that the sort of sums that the council is demanding could not be agreed to. The evidence that was presented to the lead committee was generally supportive of the proposal to give councils a discretionary power, although Ann Bain of Angus Council mentioned that it could give rise to some problems. She thought that it could lead to owners being incentivised to evade payment. She also made the good point that the owners of unoccupied properties sometimes live outwith Scotland—for example, they may live in England, where the court system is different. To be anecdotal, for years a home has been lying empty in Kirkconnel Main Street in my local authority area. We sort of know who owns it, but we cannot get to them. We keep trying to write to them, but they live in Wales or somewhere. I have tried to contact them, as did my predecessor, but we have not been able to track them down, to get them to upkeep the home. It is difficult to pursue such people, particularly when they live outside the country in a place with a different court system. Some witnesses felt that the interplay with other forms of tax relief had not been properly considered. I understand from what the minister said that some of those issues have been addressed. I invite the minister to say whether he intends to produce an updated financial memorandum that takes account of some of those matters. If those sums have now been done, can we see them in a new financial memorandum? That would enable us to find out how some of the concerns have been addressed. We have concerns about parts of the bill, but we are prepared to support it as it moves forward to the amendment stage. We will look at what happens at that stage. It is with a degree of disappointment that I must say that I am not as enthusiastic about the bill at the end of stage 1 as I was when I first started looking at it. However, we have an opportunity to improve it, and I look forward to people working together to do that. At the moment, we will support the bill, but with significant reservations.

Is the minister telling us that CalMac, which is a subsidiary of a company that is wholly owned by the Scottish Government, submitted an incompetent bid for the NorthLink contract? Was that the reason for the resignation last week of Archie Robertson, the chief executive of David MacBrayne?

The minister said that the criteria will be discussed over coming months. Can he say what the criteria are likely to be, so that stations and communities can prepare bids for the fund? As the minister will know, there will be a lot more than 12, as I can think of two in my own constituency that would be interested.

I hope that you will allow me some preamble, Presiding Officer, because when a cabinet secretary does what we have been asking for, the obvious response is to say, “Thank you very much.” May I, on behalf of my constituents, welcome Mr Swinney’s announcement regarding the A75 Hardgrove to Kinmount upgrade scheme. In my members’ business debate of Thursday 31 May—

—I suggested that this might be a mechanism for funding the scheme, and I am delighted that the cabinet secretary has taken it up. Can he tell us the probable timeline for completion of the scheme and its estimated cost?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive whether consultation with owner-occupiers is mandatory prior to a registered social landlord introducing factoring arrangements in blocks of flats in mixed tenure. (S4O-01119)

The cabinet secretary’s answer will be of interest to my constituents. If a ballot has been undertaken of householders in a block—involving both owner-occupiers and tenants—regarding future factoring arrangements, will all householders be bound by the result of that ballot to comply with the terms of the factoring agreement?

Many people in my constituency work on one side of the border and live on the other. HMRC will write to people to ask them where they live, but there is no obligation for people to inform it of their residential address. Has the cabinet secretary discussed that with HMRC? Has he considered how the burdens on businesses that employ individuals who live on either side of the border can be minimised?

I also welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement of the introduction of a national retrofit programme and note that it will be focused on areas of fuel poverty and related deprivation. I am also reassured by his answer to Alex Johnstone that the focus will include rural areas. As the cabinet secretary will be aware, rural homes are frequently older single-wall properties that can be difficult and expensive to insulate. Will the national retrofit programme have a strand to tackle specifically that rather difficult problem?

I thank the members who signed my motion, enabling it to be debated tonight. I also thank the 1,000-plus readers of the Dumfries and Galloway Standard who signed a petition urging the completion of the Hardgrove to Kinmount improvement scheme in the aftermath of the tragic death of three-week-old Oliver Hewson, who was killed in a three-vehicle crash on that stretch of the road in March. I want to address two issues in my speech, the first of which is the need to complete the planned upgrade of the A75, and the second of which is the need to consider how drivers can be better alerted to the dangers of inappropriate driving, as the catalogue of fatal and serious accidents on the A75 is, sadly, replicated on many of Scotland’s trunk roads. The A75 runs from Stranraer, in the west, to the junction with the M74/M6 at Gretna and forms part of the European Union’s trans-European road network. It is heavily used by both freight and private vehicles, and improvement has been demanded since the mid-1990s for reasons of safety and journey times. In March 2000, I lodged a motion urging the Labour-Liberal Democrat Scottish Executive to review the trunk road spending programme to include the upgrading of the A75. The motion was supported by both Alex Neil and Alex Fergusson, among others. Since 1999, members have lodged 143 questions and motions involving the A75 at least in part, and constituency and regional members representing Dumfries and Galloway have set aside party differences to campaign for improvement. The 2000 to 2004 spending review included an increase in expenditure on transport of £500 million, and six improvement schemes along the length of the A75 were identified to be completed over a period of 10 years. Those were at Cairntop to Barlae, Newton Stewart, Barfil to Bettyknowes, Planting End to Drumflower, Dunragit, and Hardgrove to Kinmount. Those could not all progress at the same time without serious disruption to traffic, and the Hardgrove and Dunragit schemes were planned to commence after the other schemes had been completed. Nearly 10 years ago, in November 2002, Lewis Macdonald, the transport minister at the time, advised that construction of the Hardgrove to Kinmount stretch was expected to commence in autumn 2006. Mr Macdonald also confirmed that the cost of the improvement schemes had been included in the Scottish budget settlement and that, subject to a satisfactory conclusion of the statutory procedures, the schemes would be able to proceed to construction. The proposed improvements scheme was reviewed in 2005, when it was recognised that there would be merit in considering modifications to the original scheme involving reconfiguration of the entire carriageway section, which would have favoured overtaking only in one direction. A new scheme involving an offline section to accommodate a wide single carriageway with three lanes was developed, which allowed a safer route for local traffic using the U81a to pass under the A75. It also involved fewer environmental constraints. Undoubtedly, the review and the production of an improved scheme delayed the project’s implementation. In September 2006, I sought information regarding when the Hardgrove scheme might commence and was advised by Tavish Scott, who was the transport minister at the time, that the scheme was now expected to commence in quarter 4 of 2008-09 at an estimated cost of £8.42 million. Some nine months later, Stewart Stevenson advised me that the earliest possible start date was summer 2009 and that the cost was £10.2 million. The timescale slipped again, however, and the advice offered by Mr Stevenson in May 2010 was that the expected date of completion was 2010-11. No progress was made during 2010, and in January 2011 I was advised by Mr Brown, in answer to a written question, that “difficult choices” had to be made in light of the unprecedented £1.3 billion cut to the capital budget and that existing projects were being prioritised over new ones. Given that the scheme had been included in the budget for 2003 to 2006 and that all the preparatory work was complete, it was far from being a new scheme and I do not believe that it should have been suspended. Moreover, in 2010, Mr Swinney announced that he had been implementing an accelerated programme of vital infrastructure projects over the past 18 months. He also announced that he had United Kingdom Treasury agreement that the £332 million cut in capital expenditure made by George Osborne shortly after the election of the Conservative-Liberal Democrat UK Government could be deferred until the following year. Unfortunately, the Hardgrove improvement scheme was not considered by the Scottish Government to be a vital infrastructure project. I am aware that the Scottish Government has submitted a list of so-called shovel-ready projects to the UK Government that includes £10 million for the Hardgrove scheme. I was surprised, therefore, when Alex Neil answered a recent oral question from me on the project and stated that it would cost £15 million. Perhaps the minister can clarify where the additional funding would come from in the unfortunately unlikely event of Mr Osborne being converted to the cause of investing in economic growth. My constituents and I do not much care who provides the funds—whether it is the UK Government or whether the funds come through slippage or savings made on other projects. Tonight, we are asking for the minister’s assurance that construction of the Hardgrove to Kinmount scheme is a top priority and that construction will start soon. If the minister does not care to listen to me, I ask him to listen to an e-mail that I received this morning from Ian Currie, Oliver Hewson’s grandfather. He says: “May I wish you every good fortune in making the Scottish Government listen to our case for improvements and hopefully prevent any more families having to go through what we have suffered.” Several constituents have pointed out to me that drivers often take risks, and that problem is exacerbated by driver frustration due to the lack of overtaking opportunities. All of us who drive frequently on the A75 observe drivers taking risks. Constituents have suggested a variety of ways in which to alert drivers to the number of accidents that have happened on dangerous sections of the road. For example, it has been suggested that there should be signs that show the number of serious accidents and fatalities that have occurred or signs to indicate that a fatal accident has occurred at that point. I ask the minister to say when he sums up what consideration he has given or is giving to ways in which we can ensure that drivers are more aware of the need to drive cautiously on dangerous sections of the trunk road network. There are far too many fatal accidents and far too many lives are lost. We should take any action that we can take to alert people to the need to drive safely, because that is also important.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member accept that a lot of money was spent on the process of bringing the schemes to completion? Much of that work was done by the Labour and Liberal Executives. Although the schemes may have been completed after 2007, they were started prior to that.

Last year, the Parliament took the unprecedented step of deciding that it was not prepared to let the UK Government legislate for us on the devolved issues covered in its welfare reforms. For that reason, I regret that the First Minister has not attended today’s meeting of the joint ministerial committee on welfare reform. His presence at that meeting would have indicated the strength of the Scottish Parliament’s opposition to the UK Government’s reforms, and I am sure that Mr Swinney or Mr Ewing could have attended the energy event in Aberdeen in his place.

I am a bit surprised that Mr Stewart does not think that Mr Swinney would have been well able to do that had he attended the conference. We need to pass the bill to enable work to be carried out on introducing the legislation that will cover the areas of devolved competence, principally with regard to passported benefits. Parliament has debated aspects of the UK act, including the impact of housing benefit reforms, but it was not until the Finance Committee examined the bill’s financial memorandum on 18 April that I really became aware of how little consideration the UK Government appears to have given to the impact of the reforms. Few people would oppose reforms that made the benefits system fairer, easier to implement and more efficient or ensured that benefits were received by the people who needed them rather than those who might be defrauding the system. However, not only are the UK Government’s reforms driven by ideology and the desire to cut public expenditure, they are being introduced on a very tight timescale, especially in view of the complexity of unravelling their consequences. It almost seems as if Iain Duncan Smith and his colleagues had not thought through the impact on passported benefits and public sector agencies such as local authorities and the national health service. Perhaps they did not much care. When the bill team gave evidence to the Finance Committee, I told them that everyone was struggling in the dark because they did not have enough information. Of course, that is not the bill team’s fault. The problem of addressing the changes to passported benefits is not unique to Scotland; the same process will have to be undertaken in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. The other devolved Administrations have taken action to model the impacts of tax and benefit reforms with a view to protecting their residents where possible. Like Siobhan McMahon, I am sorry that vulnerable people in England do not have the same protection. To understand the implications, we need sight of the UK secondary legislation, which will set out the practical details of the operation of the reforms. However, less than 11 months before the reforms are due to take effect, information on the criteria for universal credit or personal independence payments, for example, has still not been made available. Because of that uncertainty, the bill’s financial memorandum is able to set out only the current costs of passported benefits, not the potential cost implications of any reformed system. As a result, the bodies that responded to the Finance Committee’s call for evidence found it very difficult to judge what the financial impact might be on them. In fact, because of the sparsity of information, the Finance Committee did not submit a formal response but instead agreed that the committee convener write to the convener of the Welfare Reform Committee, who also happens to be a member of the Finance Committee, enclosing the evidence that we received and asking for clarification from the cabinet secretary on the timing, the nature and the level of detail of the financial information that the Scottish Government will provide with its subordinate legislation. We look forward to receiving that clarification. I am sure that I am not speaking out of turn when I say that the members of the Finance Committee are keen to play their part in scrutinising the secondary legislation. The Subordinate Legislation Committee recommended the use of the affirmative procedure, but some stakeholders have asked for a higher level of scrutiny. For example, Children 1st suggested that the superaffirmative procedure be used for the first regulations produced after the bill is passed and that regulations be published in draft form to enable full consultation with stakeholders. Citizens Advice Scotland believes that “regulations” and “policy on passported benefits” must “be scrutinised by the Welfare Reform Committee” and CPAG urges us “to ensure that ... urgency, attention and scrutiny is given to the detailed regulations that will follow on from the Bill”. Although the SCVO only notes the dissent of my colleagues Michael McMahon and Jackie Baillie on the need to scrutinise the regulation, its briefing highlights “a positive opportunity for partners and stakeholders ... to work together to develop these powers for positive effect”.

No. I have given way once already. I appreciate that the UK Government is imposing a tight timescale, but that must not exclude the pressing need to ensure that we get this complex process right. It is those public and third sector organisations that work most closely with people who are in receipt of passported benefits that will be best able to advise on and contribute to regulation. We need to be able to properly examine the financial implications of its implementation. As CPAG states, “Whichever approach is taken it is absolutely vital that draft regulations are made available and adequate opportunity given to scrutinise and suggest amendments before they are laid.” Citizens Advice Scotland also provided a briefing on the welfare changes that have already been introduced, including the changes to working and child tax credits and ESA that were introduced last month. More than 73,000 families in Scotland have already lost child tax credits worth £545 a year, and more than 11,000 have lost working tax credits worth up to £3,870 a year. People are already struggling to cope and, frighteningly, the IFS has advised that 88 per cent of the cuts are still to come. They are certain to impact on other services, and poverty and the requirement for support and advice will increase. The impact of the changes needs to be thoroughly modelled and scrutinised. I urge Scottish ministers to concentrate on those issues, and work with stakeholders and Parliament rather than yield to the temptation to use the situation to make constitutional points, as some SNP members have done today.

I congratulate Alex Fergusson on securing the debate, which highlights an important piece of research that was conducted by nine volunteers working on behalf of the Dumfries and Galloway third sector forum. The topic spans transport and health, and the Labour Party has spokespeople from both teams present. I congratulate the members of the third sector forum on their excellent report. In last week’s Finance Committee debate on fiscal sustainability, I referred to the evidence from Dr James McCormick of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation that the cost of emergency admissions to hospital among the over-70s in Scotland is around four times the entire budget for personal care for older people. Therefore, interventions that help to keep older people well and reduce emergency hospital admissions are to be welcomed. The research, which looked at travel to healthcare and travel that promotes the wellbeing of older people, is significant in the debate on preventative spend. Those of us who live in and represent rural communities know that there are problems with travel for both purposes. Outside the main towns, bus travel can be sporadic. The entitlement to concessionary bus transport is meaningless if there is no bus to travel on. Many older people can no longer afford to run a car or might not be medically fit enough to drive. Even for those of us who think that we are aware of the problems, the case studies that are referred to in the publication, which was produced under the community partnerships project, are startling. For example, an 82-year-old man from Kirkconnel was taken to Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary via Stranraer. Going directly from Kirkconnel to DGRI takes around an hour, but going via Stranraer would add three to four hours to the journey time. The report does not state why that happened or who picked up the patient to be transported, but I presume that another patient had to be picked up in Stranraer. I do not imagine that the situation was similar to that of the probationary teacher from Glasgow whom I heard of who was rather late on his first day at Stranraer academy having travelled down to Dumfries and turned right. I hope that it was not a mistake of that type. However, such an extended journey can hardly have helped the elderly patient who was involved. That is perhaps an extreme example but, as Alex Fergusson said, almost one in three of those who responded to the survey described travel to and from their medical appointments as stressful or very stressful. The forum is keen to stress that the issue is not just about travel to healthcare; it is also about the ability to get out and about to leisure facilities and shops and about what we now term wellbeing. Again, Alex Fergusson gave statistics on that. If people are to remain healthy as they get older, they need to be able to retain their independence as far as possible and to get out to enjoy a variety of experiences, meet friends, have a social life and do all the things that we take for granted. One respondent said: “We should be doing things we’re able to do and treated as equal citizens”. One of the things that is striking about the report is that the forum is not just demanding money; it wants to see resources that agencies already possess being used more effectively and efficiently. The forum has already met officers from Dumfries and Galloway Council who are working on the rural transport solutions initiative, which Alex Fergusson mentioned. One example is that a number of agencies have vehicles—school buses, or vehicles at transport resource centres—that spend much of their time not being used. Better partnership working between public sector agencies such as the Scottish Ambulance Service, the national health service, councils and the third sector can result in more effective use of the transport resources that are already available and in a truly joined-up approach being taken to help older people maintain good health. Of course, there will be examples of good practice across the country, which need to be shared. As Alex Fergusson said, and as Aileen McLeod said in her speech in Jim Hume’s recent debate, good practice is not necessarily transferable, but when resources are tight, learning from each other can be particularly useful.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to reform the legal aid system. (S4O-00984)

The Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill was introduced the day after my question was lodged. I understand that one of its purposes is to ensure parity in the payment of charges in criminal, civil and children’s legal aid cases. Constituents of mine who have been involved in civil cases, such as divorce cases, have raised concerns with me that some applicants for legal aid may be able to conceal sources of income or capital assets. What procedures are used to prevent fraud? Will the bill that the cabinet secretary introduced last week tighten them up?

The cabinet secretary referred to the excellent work that is being done through the LEADER programme. I hear what he is saying about synergies and integration, but can he reassure rural communities that that will not be to the disadvantage of community-led programmes and that at least a similar level of support will be available in the next tranche of structural funding as is available in the current tranche to address local development in rural areas?

I joined the Finance Committee just as its evidence taking on fiscal sustainability was starting, so I am not congratulating myself in saying that the sessions were very worth while and that they produced some extremely thought-provoking evidence. As others have said, the four main themes—demographic change, inequality and deprivation, universal services and additional methods of finance—are all worthy of more detailed consideration, and indeed they will receive it, than was possible in the four evidence-taking sessions that led to today’s debate. I hope that members who speak in the debate will be able to refer to the evidence that witnesses presented to us without ridiculous accusations being made that that evidence is the policy of the party to which the member belongs. Unfortunately, such accusations were made in one of our debates earlier this year. Members of Opposition parties should be able to listen to and refer to evidence that is presented to committees without ministers making inferences about the policies of those parties either in the Parliament or on television programmes. However, I am hopeful that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth is less likely to do that than some of his colleagues are. The issues that were flagged up to us are serious and we ought to be able to discuss them properly. As we all know, constitutional change is under way. The UK Parliament has now passed the Scotland Bill and there is much discussion about the degree of future change. Many of us would like to go further and some of us would like to go in a different direction, but we all know that there will be change. That means that there needs to be a debate about what the change is for. Given that the Parliament will have more control over its budget, how do we want to use that power? That discussion needs to take place more widely than simply here in this Parliament. The committee’s budget adviser, Professor David Bell, provided us with a preparatory paper that included information on tax take as a percentage of gross domestic product. In Scotland and the rest of the UK it is about 35 per cent, in the United States it is about 25 per cent, and in Scandinavian countries it is around 45 per cent, or up to 48 per cent in Denmark. Any changes that we decide to make regarding personal or business taxation will affect the way in which we can sustainably provide services and the degree to which free universal services can be provided. It is a difficult choice, but we have to accept that. Audit Scotland advised us that the cost of the universal free services that the Scottish Government provides is £875 million and rising. Both Professor Bell and Professor Jeremy Peat expressed the view—I make it clear that this is their view and not my view—that those services should be reviewed periodically, including consideration of the other options to which those funds could be applied, although Professor Peat also reminded us of a point that Paul Wheelhouse made, namely that the administrative cost of applying criteria to eligibility for services must also be taken into account. One of the themes that came from the evidence was the need for better data on which to base decisions, and the need for data to be available at the appropriately local level. For example, we know—others have referred to this—that over the past 60 years, life expectancy has risen by 18 per cent for males and by 17 per cent for females. Unfortunately, healthy life expectancy is lower in Scotland than it is for the rest of the UK; therefore, people will be living longer in poor health, requiring medical intervention. That is not uniform throughout Scotland, though—it is more likely in some areas of the country than in others. Other members have referred to the advice to the committee that the cost of emergency admissions to hospital for the over-70s is four times the budget for personal care of older people. That is an astonishing statistic. However, although interventions that prevent emergency admissions could have significant benefits to the NHS, we were advised by Professor Bell that, for example, the evaluation on telecare interventions was insufficient. Other interventions that enable older people to live a healthier life at home, such as aids and adaptations, and sheltered accommodation, are provided by other agencies that do not benefit from the health service savings. Gavin Brown referred to that.

That is one example where there is insufficient data. The point was also made about single outcome agreements being at council-wide level, when councils sometimes need to have the data at a much more granular level to be able to make specific interventions, particularly in areas of deprivation. The committee took evidence on payment by results and social impact bonds as alternative methods of funding, particularly of preventative spend. That was interesting, although they sounded a bit like private finance initiative for services, which might make people feel a bit cautious about them. There are also issues about how they are evaluated and over what timescale, how the payments are made, and how long the investor will be prepared to wait for results. Finally, as others have said, the evidence could be a starter for totally new inquiries. Some of the ideas presented to us were controversial and some challenged accepted ways of doing things. However, we need to give them consideration, even if, in the end, the solutions offered are not accepted. There is a lot of material that is worthy of consideration in this inquiry.

17. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government about the financial implications of the proposals in the Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill on the public sector. (S4O-00965)

As the cabinet secretary knows, the bill process must be completed by April 2013, yet many of the details, such as those relating to entitlement to universal credit, remain to be set out by the UK Government in secondary legislation. Have Scottish ministers made UK ministers aware of their concerns about the consequences of welfare reform for passported benefits? How and when were those concerns relayed? What response did UK ministers give on the timetable for the bill?

5. To ask the First Minister what information the Scottish Government was given following the abduction of Khalil Dale. (S4F-00642)

I thank the First Minister for his reply and associate myself with his comments about my former constituent. I appreciated the need for discretion about the information that was made publicly available while the Red Cross attempted to secure Mr Dale’s release and I appreciate the continuing need not to allow publicity to interfere with solving this brutal crime. However, can the First Minister provide any comfort to Mr Dale’s family and friends about the actions that were taken after 26 January? Does he have any information about who might have been responsible for Mr Dale’s abduction? How can we in Scotland assist in solving the crime? For example, has consideration been given to providing a reward for information that leads to the successful prosecution of the perpetrators?

I, too, congratulate the committee on its report on the important issue of progress towards the 2012 homelessness target. As others have said, Parliament set national and local government a challenging target when the Housing (Scotland) Act 2003 was passed, and it is encouraging to learn that local authorities are making such good progress towards the elimination of consideration of priority need and, indeed, that nine councils have already achieved 100 per cent assessments without consideration of priority need. As others have said, too, at the heart of the issue is an affordable housing supply. Since the passing of the 2003 act, the supply of social rented housing has not increased in the way that it probably needed to for the implementation of the homelessness target to be meaningful. For example, the Scottish Government’s statistics show that the number of social rented homes in Scotland fell by 2 per cent between 2007 and 2011. As has been mentioned, the Government has committed itself to the construction of 6,000 affordable homes annually, with 4,000 of those being social rented homes. That commitment was in place when the draft budget and spending review were published last autumn. I would be interested to learn how many more affordable homes ministers expect to be constructed, given the addition of £10 million for affordable housing in the spring revision of the 2011-12 budget and the additional £87 million for the period of the spending review. I hope that those will mean that even more properties can be constructed. Due to the housing shortage, many families who become homeless have to rely on temporary accommodation as there is no suitable property available for them in their time of need. That is clearly less than satisfactory, especially for families with children. I recently visited the Shelter offices in Dumfries, where I saw the results of a project that works with children affected by homelessness, which included drawings that they had done to try to express what losing their home meant to them. The impact on homeless children can include separation from the family pet, because the family cannot take the cat or dog with them when they go into other accommodation. That might seem unimportant to some adults—although it would seem important to me—but it can be extremely traumatic for children, on top of having to change school, leave friends behind and know about the stigma that applies to their situation. Shelter reckoned that almost 6,000 children in Scotland spent last Christmas in temporary flats or bed-and-breakfast accommodation, although thankfully the incidence of children being in B and Bs has diminished to around a fifth of its 2004 level since the adoption of the Unsuitable Accommodation (Scotland) Order 2004. Shelter and the Chartered Institute of Housing believe that there ought to be a temporary accommodation standard, particularly where children are involved, which would include physical, location and service standards and which could be applied by the regulator when assessing local authorities’ performance on homelessness. Shelter also points out that the Welsh Assembly Government has had a temporary accommodation standard in legislation for over three years. I invite ministers to consider whether similar provision would be appropriate in Scotland. As others have said, meeting the homelessness target in any meaningful way will require the involvement of the private sector. I know that that is accepted by Shelter and the Chartered Institute of Housing as well as by the Scottish Government. Local authorities are permitted to discharge their duties through private sector lets so long as those are assured tenancies of at least 12 months. The committee report notes that that power has not been used to the extent that had been expected. That solution is perhaps less appropriate for families with children, where permanence of residence is important to maintain attendance at the same school for example, but the private sector could be an avenue for single homeless people. It would be useful to understand why that avenue has not been used to the extent that had been anticipated. I know that there is a consultation at the moment on a number of aspects of private sector rentals. It will be interesting to see what lessons can be learned through that. The committee heard positive evidence about the use of common housing registers and about their importance to allocation policies and to fostering partnership working. It is therefore disappointing that eight local authorities still do not operate common housing registers and have not even set a launch date for them, particularly as the previous Scottish Executive made £3 million available across Scotland for that purpose between 2004 and 2006. I am sorry to say that the offenders include my council, Dumfries and Galloway Council, but I understand that additional funding from the council and RSLs has now been allocated to appoint a responsible officer and to look at information technology issues, which seem to be one of the major barriers. If half of Scotland’s local authorities have implemented common housing registers, surely examples of good practice are out there, which other councils could take on board and which could help to bring them forward. I commend the committee’s focus on preventing homelessness, as prevention is always better than cure. I look forward to hearing more about what can be learned from the committee’s report as we go forward towards the end of 2012.

Scottish Labour selected the topic of bus services for a debate on 26 January. We bring it back for discussion today because, in the intervening 12 weeks, the situation has worsened considerably and events have shown the concerns that we expressed during the debate in January to be well founded. Indeed, recent developments in the Lothians have exceeded our worst fears of three months ago. Opposition debates are our opportunity to raise with ministers the issues that our communities raise with us. That is not being negative; it is representing the people whom we were elected to represent. Throughout Scotland, bus service users are experiencing inflation-busting fare rises, and many are witnessing services being cut or withdrawn altogether. During the debate in January, the Minister for Housing and Transport told the chamber that he was reducing the bus service operators grant to £50 million but that he was adding £3 million for bus infrastructure, which, in this financial year only, would be used to make transitional payments to the operators that were most affected. He said that the reduction in the BSOG would justify bus fare increases—if there were any—of 1 per cent. What has the reality been? Here are a few examples. First bus fares in Aberdeen have gone up by 13.5 per cent; Stagecoach fares in the same city have gone up by nearly 8 per cent; Stagecoach fares in Dundee have gone up by 6.5 per cent this week; there has been a 7.5 per cent increase in the cost of a single adult fare in Edinburgh on Lothian Buses; and First in Glasgow has raised the cost of its shortest journeys by 27 per cent. Two weeks ago, we also had the announcement of the potential loss of up to 200 jobs at First Scotland East, as a number of services in East Lothian and all of that operator’s services in Midlothian are to be lost. Its depot in Dalkeith is also threatened with closure, and the one in Musselburgh will be reduced significantly. The cut of 17 per cent in the BSOG was not the whole story. The Confederation of Passenger Transport Scotland points out that, this year, the BSOG is some 20 per cent less than the level that was agreed with the Scottish Government in 2010 and that it received only four months’ notice of the impending cut. Furthermore, the change in the mechanism, from a fuel consumption component to a distance-only subsidy, has also reduced the BSOG that is available to some city operators by as much as 40 per cent. Although I understand the aim behind the mechanism change—to encourage fuel efficiency—the combined effect on urban services has been disastrous and, according to the operators, has been compounded by a shortfall of £7 million in the funding of the concessionary travel scheme last year. I listened to Alex Neil speaking about the concessionary travel scheme on “Sunday Politics Scotland” this week. As usual, he was a little economical with the truth. I am extremely flattered that Mr Neil felt obliged to misquote me on national television, but I will put him right on the matter. I have never suggested that pensioners should be robbed to subsidise bus companies. In the debate in January, I drew attention to the evidence that Robert Black gave to the Finance Committee on working people over the age of 60 being eligible for free bus travel. He said: “if you take the census data and look at the 60-pluses who are still working, you can do a fairly crude but nevertheless reasonably okay calculation that the cost of providing free transport to people who are over 60 and still in employment is £34 million”.—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 25 January 2012; c 587.] I merely suggested that the Minister for Housing and Transport should give consideration to the evidence that had been presented to the Finance Committee.

For the purpose of considering what is said in evidence to the Finance Committee. It is necessary to assess all the evidence. Mr Neil misquoted me—anyone can see that on the BBC iPlayer.

Mr Baker answered the cabinet secretary’s question; indeed, Mr Rennie answered it, too, but the cabinet secretary was too busy shouting over them to listen to what they said. I am not surprised to hear the ministerial team talking spin on concessionary fares. Mr Brown issued a press release that said that “£187m funding has been set aside for concessionary travel for the coming year, up around 4% from last year.” However, according to the Government’s budget documents, the estimated concessionary travel budget in 2010-11 was £192 million and was capped at £185 million last year. That is the underfunding by £7 million that CPT Scotland said had contributed to the recent fare rises.

No—I will get on. The budget has returned to £192 million this year, where it will remain for the rest of the spending review period, according to the spending review documents. In cash terms, the budget will rise by 3.7 per cent between 2011-12 and 2012-13. However, if the Treasury deflator is applied to the £192 million, it is worth only £187 million at last year’s prices. The real-terms increase is more like 1 per cent and it will decrease over the spending review period. In real terms, this year’s concessionary fares budget is worth almost £10 million less than the budget of two years ago. If members do not believe me, they can listen to others. David Stewart, the managing director of First Aberdeen, has explained that “the cuts introduced by the Scottish Government have a big impact on our business”. CPT Scotland says that the combination of higher fuel prices—which now play no part in the BSOG mechanism—with the BSOG cut and the underfunding of the concessionary travel scheme forces operators “to meet these additional costs by increasing fares ... or reducing service levels”. A former chair of CPT Scotland and the managing director of McGill’s Bus Service, Ralph Roberts—who is, incidentally, a Scottish National Party candidate in Inverclyde—said in a letter to The Herald on the 4th of this month that the Scottish Government was being “pig-headed and obstinate” on the matter. He said: “What has really caused a ... problem is that the method of payment changed at the same time” as the cut of which operators had only four months’ notice was made, “and this has hit town and city operators ... worse.”

I do not even know whether that quote is about the BSOG. If it is about the BSOG, I disagree with it, so that is fine. Paul Thomas, the managing director of First Scotland East, courteously phoned me to advise me of the sad announcement of potential job losses in Midlothian and East Lothian. He told me that those services had been struggling for some time but that the cuts were the final straw. He told me that he had 40 years’ experience in the bus industry and that this was the first time ever that he might have to make drivers redundant. His career has spanned the Transport Act 1985 and the years of rule by a Tory Westminster Government that had no interest in public transport unless it was privately owned and made a profit, but it is under the SNP Government—under the watch of Mr Brown, Mr Neil and Mr Salmond—that Mr Thomas is, for the first time, contemplating sacking bus drivers. After learning of the problems that FirstGroup faces, I contacted Stagecoach in my area to obtain a local perspective. Edward Hodgson, the managing director of Stagecoach west Scotland, advised me by e-mail that “Those in rural areas such as Stagecoach West Scotland, are not as badly affected as more urban operators, but as a result of these changes and the forthcoming increase in duty we have been forced to increase fares by a greater amount than would otherwise be the case. Even for an operator such as ourselves, the changes to BSOG will directly affect marginal urban bus services and we are planning to reduce or withdraw a number of such routes in the near future.” In e-mail correspondence with me, Paul White of CPT Scotland commented that “this is a time for government to be identifying ways in which to help operators grow their services, not cutting BSOG or underfunding the concessions scheme”.

If the minister bothered to read our motion, he would see that we identify any number of factors, of which the BSOG is one. I am giving him the evidence on the matter. What is the Scottish Government saying? It is, of course, blaming Westminster, but Transform Scotland makes the succinct comment in its briefing for the debate that “That is complete rubbish. The overall transport budget is due to increase not fall, between 2011-12 and 2012-13”. However often Scottish ministers blame membership of the United Kingdom for every decision that they make, they cannot shirk responsibility for how they spend their devolved budget of more than £30 billion and for the decisions that they make about their priorities. The First Minister claims that “safeguarding bus routes is a priority for this Government”. Who does he think he is kidding? He is certainly not deceiving the bus users campaigning throughout the country to preserve the services on which they rely. How does he answer the petitioners in Dalkeith and Danderhall who are campaigning against the withdrawal of their service? How does he answer the worried commuters in Pencaitland, who face not being able to travel to work by public transport? What about the concerned residents of Stewartfield in East Kilbride, who may lose their number 31 bus service, which is the only regular service in that area? What does he say to the residents of Clackmannan villages who are raising a petition against the loss of their service? What about the bus passengers in Coatbridge who are campaigning to retain their number 17 service from Townhead? What does he say to the employees of First Scotland East facing redundancy, who are represented by Unite the Union and some of the drivers who are in the public gallery? We reiterate our call for regulation. We do so in the full knowledge that other parties, other than possibly the Greens, will oppose that. However, regulation is the other side of the coin: it is the guarantee that value is obtained in return for public subsidy. It is used in service provision in other modes of public transport, such as rail and ferry. The voluntary approach to quality bus contracts has resulted in only one being formed—last year in Renfrewshire, as George Adam informed us in the previous debate on buses. Local authorities must be empowered to develop integrated public transport systems in their areas. I was interested to hear the minister for Housing and Transport argue on Radio Scotland’s “Call Kaye” programme on Tuesday that he did not have the power to reverse deregulation. He said: “unfortunately, this is not one of the powers the Scottish Government has”. I replayed the minister’s statement several times on the iPlayer, and that is what he said. If he does not have those powers, it is slightly strange that that option seemed to be discussed in the context of East Lothian. I admit that some of the provisions of the Transport Act 1985 are reserved, but there are actions that we can take under our current powers. The member’s bill that Charlie Gordon proposed in the previous session of Parliament fell not because it would not have been competent but because other parties would not support it. If members of other parties now regret not having supported Charlie Gordon’s bill to regulate bus services, they need not be too dismayed: unlike buses in many parts of Scotland, there will be another bill along shortly, courtesy of my colleague Patricia Ferguson. Bus passenger numbers have been falling over the past three years due to the recession but, even so, 438 million journeys were made by bus last year, which is more than were made by any other form of public transport in Scotland. If people are to be enticed out of private cars, bus services need to be affordable, reliable and integrated with other forms of public transport. We are going in the wrong direction and we believe that the measures proposed in our motion would allow the fortunes of the industry to be reversed. Mr Hume’s amendment leaves out regulation, as I suspected that it would; Mr Harvie’s says a plague on both your houses; and Mr Brown’s says that he is doing a brilliant job. He is a bit like a schoolboy who failed his maths exam but says that it does not matter because he got a good mark for his English essay. We will not accept any of the amendments. I move, That the Parliament notes the concerns expressed by bus service operators, passengers and the trade unions that represent bus workers regarding the impact of the Scottish Government’s changes to the Bus Service Operators Grant; notes that the Scottish Government’s decision to cut the grant by 17% in 2012-13 and to revise the formula has, along with the underfunding of the concessionary travel scheme and high fuel costs, resulted in fare increases and service reductions across the country; recognises that this has also contributed to the decision by First Scotland East to reduce dramatically its services in Lothian and Midlothian, with the potential loss of around 200 jobs; believes that the Scottish Government has failed to listen to the concerns of operators, bus service workers and passengers; urges ministers to take action to address the immediate problems of the industry, including urgently revisiting the 17% cut in the Bus Service Operators Grant, and instead begin proper negotiations with operators to ensure that the scheme is sustained at a level that does not threaten services, jobs and high fare increases, and believes that new legislation is required to enable the regulation of bus services in Scotland to ensure sustainable and reliable bus services throughout the country.

Will the member give way?

Can the minister give me the source of the quote that he read out about Wales?

It is actually the Confederation of Passenger Transport Scotland, not us, that says that the concessionary fares scheme was underfunded by £7 million last year.

I refer Mr Hepburn to his Government’s budget documents, which show that the budget the previous year was £192 million and fell to £185 million. That is a reduction of £7 million.

Will the member take an intervention?

Can we return to price tags? Will Ms Grahame advise us what the price tag for independence might be?

Will the member give way?

On a slightly different topic, the cabinet secretary will recall that the United Kingdom Government allocated to the Scottish Government £50 million for sleeper services and that, with the agreement of the UK Government, that was—

It does, Presiding Officer.

With the agreement of the UK Government, that money was loaned to Scottish Water. Has the cabinet secretary had any indication from Scottish Water of what projects have been brought forward through the loan of that £50 million?

I, too, congratulate Christine Grahame on securing a debate on a topic that I cannot remember ever having been raised in the Parliament. Unfortunately, I was unable to attend the reception that Ms Grahame referred to. Like her, I was not particularly familiar with community radio until a few years ago. Most people are of course familiar with local radio and the role that it plays in providing local news, information, and, in some cases, advertising to listeners in a particular region or locality. Most local radio is commercial, although in some instances it is provided by public service broadcasting. Community radio, as Christine Grahame described, is smaller and a bit different. I also thought that it was newer, but community radio does not seem to be quite as new as I understood it to be. In 2002, the Radio Authority—the regulator—piloted 15 stations, initially for a year, to test what was, at the time, called access radio. The licences were extended in 2003 and 2004 and Ofcom issued a consultation on creating community radio. As Christine Grahame said, the service remains not for profit. In Dumfries, Alive Christian Radio was formed in 2004. It was the brainchild of pastor Mark Smith, of the Church of Life, and fellow Christian David Currie. Their aim, as the name suggests, was to have a Christian radio station broadcasting on the FM bandwidth in the Dumfries area. The group initially had restricted service licences, but in May 2007 it applied for a community radio licence. I supported the application and I was pleased to say that it was confirmed by Ofcom. Broadcasting on the new frequency of 107.3 FM began on 1 September 2009 and Alive’s focus changed from serving Christians in the Dumfries area to serving the community as a whole. Alive Radio still relies on volunteers, and young people who might want to work in radio can volunteer and get experience, which they can include on their CVs should they want to go on to study or apply for jobs. The station’s website says: “We’re run by a bunch of enthusiastic people from in and around Dumfries, seeking to build community spirit and help people feel good about living here.” What an excellent sentiment. Alive Radio normally broadcasts from 7 am until 9 pm. In addition to the FM broadcast in Dumfries, it is available in Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary on hospital radio and online on its website to anyone who wants to listen. The station’s content is mostly music, but it also transmits local news, views and information. I have been on “Alive Drivetime”, but I must say that no one invited any indiscretions—perhaps that is because the station still has a Christian ethos. In addition to live broadcasting, the station’s website has a lot of local information about what is going on. For example, this week there is a warning from the police about the high incidence of bogus callers. There is all sorts of useful information for residents. When I stay over in Edinburgh I stay in Leith, whose community radio station used to be called Leith FM. The station was renamed, apparently because it had a bad reputation—I do not know whether Ms Grahame was ever on it, saying something—

Perhaps she was. I will end with an anecdote that illustrates the value of community radio. On Monday night, my daughter found a lost dog outside the flat—I know that Christine Grahame has had a similar experience. The story about how we eventually reunited the dog with its anxious owners is beyond the scope of this debate, but the owners told us that among other things that they had done to try to locate the dog, they had gone to Leith FM and asked the station to broadcast the fact that the dog was missing. In addition to all the other good things that community radio does, it can provide an individual service to help to reunite lost dogs with their owners. What a heartwarming tale.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to discuss cycling. We have had debates on buses, ferries and railways in the past few weeks, so it is about time we discussed active low-carbon transport as well. It is sad that there have recently been four fatalities within a month in Edinburgh. However, it is worth recording that accident levels have fallen since 2000, as the motion says. In a recent briefing, Cyclists Touring Club said that the risks of not cycling outweigh the risks of cycling by 77 to 1. I am not quite sure how that statistic was calculated, but it is fairly impressive. We need to be clear that active travel should not be confused with sustainable or low-carbon travel. The minister referred to the budget for sustainable and active travel, which I understand will increase its budget share from 1 per cent to 1.4 per cent over the three-year spending review period. We need a separate budget line for active travel so that we can see whether the spending commitments on active travel are being fulfilled. Much of Labour’s amendment is about 20mph zones. I understand from a press release from the transport minister on 21 March that such zones were among the initiatives that were discussed at the recent meeting of the road safety operational partnership group that focused on cyclist safety. The motion also refers to 20mph zones and traffic regulation orders. I have recently been in contact with a campaign called 20’s plenty for us, which has been active around a constituency issue in Langholm. Rod King, the founder and national director, made me aware of the difference between 20mph zones and mandatory 20mph limits. Reduced traffic speeds in residential areas benefit pedestrians and other road users. The conventional way of doing that is to use self-policing measures, such as road humps, accompanied by advisory signage. However, speed bumps can present a hazard to cyclists. Cars weave around the bumps, stationary cars are sometimes parked on the bumps and cars and lorries that weave around them create potholes, which can be hazardous to cyclists. Meanwhile, 20mph limits are mandatory and are advertised and policed in the same way as any other speed limit. They do not require physical speed deterrents, but they require policing. Although there are 20mph limits in parts of Scotland, including here in Edinburgh, some local authorities and police forces are reluctant to introduce them. According to 20’s plenty for us, part of the problem is the guidance that we use here in Scotland, which differs from that which has been issued by the Department for Transport in England and Wales. The Scottish guidance was developed in 2001, but the DFT guidance was further developed in 2006. It states that “the needs of vulnerable road users must be fully taken into account in order to encourage these modes of travel and improve their safety”. It goes on to mention the importance of setting appropriate speed limits and states that “speed limits should seek to encourage walking and cycling and to protect community life”. The DFT guidance also crucially differs from our 2001 guidance by stating that “mean speeds should be used to determine local speed limits as this reflects what the majority of drivers perceive as an appropriate speed”. That is a change from the previous use of the 85th percentile speed, which I understand still applies in Scotland. For example, the DFT guidance recommends use of a 20mph limit in appropriate urban areas where the mean speed is 24mph Changes-to-signage requirements are UK wide, as are the speed limits, but their use is determined by what is considered to constitute a traffic-calming device. Down south, the signage counts towards being a traffic calming device.

That comes back to policing, which is where some resistance comes in from local authorities and police forces. They do not want to have to police the 20mph limit, but we police 30mph, 40mph and 60mph limits, so we should also police 20mph limits. The final part of my amendment encourages us all—ministers and the rest of us—to participate in active travel. I speak as somebody who took their bicycle home before the elections in 2007 and has not yet brought it back. That is something that all of us in Parliament can do to set a good example and to encourage other people to get involved in active travel such as walking and cycling. I move amendment S4M-02522, to insert at end: “; urges the Scottish Government to examine the guidance issued regarding the implementation of mandatory 20 mph limits to ensure that its policy meets the needs of vulnerable road users such as pedestrians and cyclists and actively encourages walking and cycling, and further believes that the Scottish Ministers should set a good example by using active methods of travel whenever possible.”

I, too, congratulate Jim Hume on securing the debate. As he said, community transport is particularly important in rural areas such as Dumfries and Galloway and the Scottish Borders, where public transport is at best infrequent and sometimes non-existent. Community transport services such as those that are provided by the Annandale Transport Initiative are very important in my constituency. The organisation was established in 1999 and provides essential services, including vehicle hire, transport for individuals, day trips and opportunities for volunteering. The initiative provides minibuses, accessible people carriers, registered bus services on routes to Peebles and Carlisle, and a programme of weekly day trips across the south of Scotland and up to Glasgow and Edinburgh that are open to anyone to book. In fact, the last time that I had a look at the programme I was very tempted to book a trip. The initiative provides individual transport that prioritises people with mobility problems, but it is open to anyone who has difficulty in using public transport, including those whose needs cannot be met by the existing public transport network—for example, people can use the transport to attend general practice or hospital appointments, or to go to day centres. The minibuses are available for hire to voluntary groups and community organisations serving the Annandale area. Community organisations can also hire them to provide shopping trips, outings, transport to meetings and even United Kingdom short-break holidays. Indeed, the village primary school from Annandale has taken advantage of that provision to take pupils up to visit the Scottish Parliament, and at least one of the local day centres books a minibus for its annual members’ holiday. The Annandale Transport Initiative has been successful in attracting funding from a variety of agencies, including the former Scottish Executive rural community transport initiative, which was one of the very first supporters. Many years ago, Sarah Boyack came to Moffat as transport minister to launch the initiative’s first bus. That was more years ago than either of us would possibly care to remember. The initiative has also had support from the Lloyds TSB Foundation, Dumfries and Galloway Council, Age Concern, the Big Lottery Fund, Rotary clubs and the People’s Postcode Trust. Dumfries and Galloway Council honoured the commitment to continue to fund the ATI until March 2010. Since then, funding has been provided by the Annandale and Eskdale area committee. However, the continuation of that funding is uncertain and a bit of emergency funding had to be provided last year. There is a long-standing request, which I have raised with a number of ministers over the years, to allow the holders of concessionary bus passes to use their passes on community transport services. Demand-led transport was a component of the Labour debate on buses that was held in Parliament on 26 January this year. During the debate, Mr Brown, the Minister for Housing and Transport, informed us that as of 1 April—the beginning of next week—he intended to allow demand-led transport services that are available to the general public to be registered as local bus services and to qualify for the bus service operators grant and concessionary travel. That announcement was very welcome, but I wonder, as Jim Hume did, whether the minister will clarify it. Does it refer only to community transport that is covered by section 22 permits, or will it be extended to some of the eligible, appropriate services that hold a section 19 permit, for which individuals pay a fee? I understand from the Community Transport Association’s state of the sector report, which was launched at the event that Alison Johnstone hosted yesterday, that 70 per cent of community transport organisations hold a section 19 permit, whereas 20 per cent hold a section 22 permit. Therefore, extension of section 19 permit services would benefit a much greater number of older people and the services on which they rely. Community transport provides an essential service in many rural areas. I hope that we will find imaginative and innovative ways of providing sustainable support for such services over the coming years.

The island of South Uist in the Western Isles has a population of 1,950 people, with Lochboisdale being the main settlement. The port is served by CalMac ferries from Oban and Castlebay on the Isle of Barra. A ferry service calling at Mallaig, Lochboisdale and Castlebay operated from 1967 to 1974, from 1988 to 1990, and again from 1994 to 2001. The intermittency of the route seems to have been due to a combination of factors, including the upgrading of harbours, the development of new routes and ferries being withdrawn from service due to age and safety regulations. There has been no vehicular service on the route for over 10 years. The current journey time for the vehicular ferry between Oban and Lochboisdale is approximately five hours and 10 minutes, which extends to six hours and 40 minutes if the journey is via Castlebay. I could drive from Dumfries to the south coast of England in a similar time. In addition, the timing of the Sunday service is such that it is impossible for people from South Uist who work or study on the mainland to get home for a weekend to attend a family occasion, for example. The length of the vehicular crossing also restricts opportunities to expand tourism on the island. A direct crossing from Mallaig to Lochboisdale, which is the request, would take about three hours and 20 minutes. Western Isles Council had discussions back in 2006 with Tavish Scott regarding the introduction of such a service, in which the previous member of the Scottish Parliament, Alasdair Morrison, was also involved. I understand that the discussions were extremely encouraging, but elections intervened the following spring and Tavish Scott was no longer in a position to take things forward. In 2008, transport minister Stewart Stevenson also seemed positive about the idea. He invited Stòras Uibhist to submit a proposal for the introduction of a service and, at that time, an offer of £1 million seemed to be on the table to support such a service. Stòras Uibhist submitted a proposal, but unfortunately it was disappointed: the proposal was rejected because the proposed vessel, the Claymore, which belonged to Pentland Ferries but was surplus to its requirements, was considered unsuitable as it was 30 years old. Arguably, it could have been suitable, at least for piloting the reintroduction of a service on the route and finding out what demand existed. Also in 2008, the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee undertook an inquiry into ferry services in Scotland. Two members, Charlie Gordon and Alison McInnes, visited Mallaig on behalf of the committee for two days in March that year. The notes of their visit state: “All attendees expressed a desire to see an increase in the use of Mallaig Harbour” and that there was a “strong desire to see a reinstatement of the route from Mallaig to Lochboisdale”, although the committee did not make any specific recommendation in its report about that or indeed any other route. On 5 December 2008, Scottish Government officials wrote to Stòras Uibhist stating that a standalone ferry service between Mallaig and Lochboisdale would be considered “in the context of the ferries review”. However, the campaign did not stop with that assurance. In July last year, Huw Francis, the chief executive of Stòras Uibhist, lodged petition PE1394 in the Scottish Parliament, which was duly considered by the Public Petitions Committee and the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee. By that time, the Fionnlagan had been introduced on the Islay to Kennacraig route, relieving the Isle of Arran on that service. That offered another opportunity at least to pilot a Mallaig to Lochboisdale service. However, Transport Scotland set its face against the suggestion, arguing that the Isle of Arran was required as a relief vessel and that, at 27, it was too old to undertake the proposed service. Graham Laidlaw of Transport Scotland did, however, provide an assurance in his letter to the Public Petitions Committee of 4 October last year that a Mallaig to Lochboisdale ferry service was “being actively considered as part of the Scottish Ferries Review”. That was reiterated in a further letter dated 15 December, which refused to consider trialling a service. Only a few days later, on 21 December last year, the document “Scottish Ferry Services: Draft Plan for Consultation” was published. We can imagine the anticipation of the people of South Uist as they turned to chapter 4 to find out what the Scottish Government was saying about consideration of the vital Mallaig to Lochboisdale service link. Paragraphs 38 and 39 discuss the routes between Uist and Benbecula, but the ferry campaigners were to be sadly disappointed. Paragraph 149 states: “we have no specific proposals for the Uists and Benbecula” and paragraph 150 says: “We have considered whether a Mallaig to Lochboisdale service could become the principal route for the Uists and Benbecula”. However, that was rejected in favour of the status quo. The document goes on to assert: “Our household survey showed that while 42 per cent of residents in South Uist were not satisfied with Oban as their mainland port, 52 per cent were satisfied and 6 per cent” do not care. The review was published only six days after assurances were contained in the letter from Transport Scotland to the Public Petitions Committee. Huw Francis wrote again to David Stewart MSP, convener of that committee, advising that statistics in the review document were, at the very least, misleading. In the previous March, 200 people attended a meeting arranged by Western Isles Council and only one person preferred Oban to Mallaig as a destination. Moreover, further analysis of the ferries review household survey painted a very different picture and showed that 83 per cent of the population wanted a shorter crossing time, 51 per cent wanted different harbour locations, and 72 per cent wanted an increase in the number of days that the ferry runs. Last year, a staggering 1,500 people signed Stòras Uibhist’s petition—the population of South Uist is only 1,950—calling on the services to be reintroduced. That support replicated a petition that was organised during the previous parliamentary session by my colleagues Rhoda Grant, David Stewart and Peter Peacock, which achieved 1,260 signatures. Such a massive response begs the question: why does the draft ferries plan not seek the views of the community on the route? Perhaps it is because the answer would not be the one that the Government wants. I am aware that concerns have been expressed about the introduction of the service having a deleterious effect on the Barra to Oban service. However, Stòras Uibhist’s proposal is for an additional service that need not affect the service to Barra. Indeed, it has been put to me that a direct service from Lochboisdale to Mallaig could provide an opportunity to improve the timetabling of the Barra service thus benefiting that community. I understand that visitors to Barra have to return to the mainland on a Saturday, with the return sailing the next day, meaning that income from the Saturday night is lost to tourism businesses. So the proposal could assist the economy of Barra as well as that of South Uist. The failure to include consideration of the service in the ferries review has added impetus to the campaign. Four community councils—Benbecula, Bornish, Lochboisdale and Eriskay—have joined Stòras Uibhist to form the Lochboisdale-Mallaig Ferry Group, describing the non-existent service as the “missing link”. Members of the group were outside Parliament this morning trying to lobby MSPs on their way in. A public meeting held on 24 February and attended by the constituency and regional MSPs attracted more than 200 local residents. There did appear to be strong support for the campaign from local SNP politicians. Last July, the local MP, Angus Brendan MacNeil, stated: “The need and case for a Mallaig to Lochboisdale ferry gets stronger each year”, and as recently as 27 February, Angus Brendan MacNeil and constituency MSP Alasdair Allan issued a joint press release calling for a trial run to test out a new ferry route, suggesting that it could be funded from within CalMac’s marketing budget. When the missing link campaign took its case to the SNP conference earlier this month, it reported on its website that most of those that it had spoken to, including the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Michael Russell, said that they fully supported the campaign. Consequently, I was hopeful that SNP members would agree with their conference delegates, and with Mr Russell, and fully support our motion today. Therefore, I am disappointed—but nothing like as disappointed as the missing link campaigners in the gallery must be—by the anodyne and rather self-congratulatory amendment in Mr Neil’s name. At least 12 proposals for service improvements are up for consultation in the ferries plan, but they do not include the Lochboisdale to Mallaig route. That route is being treated differently from other routes. It is not even being considered for the next tender, while other routes are. I know that Stòras Uibhist wants to meet Mr Brown, or possibly Mr Neil, and I hope that one of the ministers will accept the meeting and be prepared to discuss the proposed route in future. It would have many benefits, not just the benefit of cost to the traveller, which is significant, but benefits for carbon emissions, because journeys would be shorter and people coming south would have to drive less. The proposal would also free up about 31 hours of ferry time, which could be used to improve other island services. I am disappointed that the proposal does not seem to be under consideration, although perhaps we will see a change when the final ferries plan comes out. In the meantime, I beg members of the other parties to consider supporting our motion on allowing the ferry service to go forward. I move, That the Parliament is disappointed that the draft ferries plan does not include a new Lochboisdale to Mallaig ferry service; recognises the social and economic need for such a service; notes the overwhelming support in the Western Isles and Mallaig for such a service, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure its inclusion in the ferries plan and to commence the new service as soon as practically possible.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

The Scottish Government is consulting on 12 different routes for upgrading, including the Ardrossan to Brodick service to Arran, as part of the new tender. Why is the route between Lochboisdale and Mallaig not being considered in the same way as those 12 routes?

Will Kenneth Gibson give way?

How will the Government pay for upgrading the Ardrossan to Brodick service?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will Mr Hume confirm that in 2006 Tavish Scott, the then Minister for Transport in the Labour-Liberal Scottish Executive, discussed with Alasdair Morrison proposals to introduce the service in question?

5. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to prioritise the completion of the A75 Hardgrove to Kinmount improvement scheme. (S4O-00823)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his reply, although I point out that the improvement scheme was shovel-ready when his Government abandoned it a couple of years ago. However, I am pleased that it is Alex Neil who is answering this question, because, back in March 2000, he signed my motion calling for improvements to the A75. This is the last of the series of improvements, and it has not yet been commenced. Now that Mr Neil is in a position to make it happen, I ask him how high the £10 million Hardgrove to Kinmount project is on his list of priorities. Is it number 1 of the 36 that he submitted to the UK Government, or is it number 36? When will the project be done?

The Welfare Reform Act 2012 received royal assent on 8 March. I, too, believe that aspects of benefit reform are necessary, but not these ones. Not only does the act contain proposals for changes to housing benefit that seriously affect the recipients, but the provisions will seriously affect the providers of rented accommodation: registered social landlords, local authorities, and private sector landlords. In April 2013, restrictions on size criteria—otherwise known as the bedroom tax—will be introduced. As a result, many council tenants and housing association tenants will find themselves underoccupying their homes. The UK Government has decreed that, for the purposes of claiming housing benefit, young people of the same sex are expected to share a bedroom until one of them reaches the age of 16 and, if they are of different sexes, they should share until the age of 10. That does not correlate with social landlords’ allocation policies. For example, Dumfries and Galloway Housing Partnership allocates an additional bedroom at the age of eight for children who are of different sexes and at 12 for children of the same sex. For the City of Edinburgh Council, the ages are seven and 14. Tenants who have been allocated houses fairly, in accordance with the allocation policies of their social landlords, will find themselves underoccupying their homes. The National Housing Federation estimates that, across the UK, 670,000 tenants in the rented sector will be affected immediately and that the figure will rise to 750,000 when the pension credit age rises in 2020. Seventy-eight per cent of those tenants will be considered to have one bedroom too many and will lose an average of £12 a week. The remainder will lose an average of £22 a week. About a third of tenants in the social rented sector will be affected and some may well have to find more than £1,000 a year additional rent from a restricted budget. Councils and RSLs do not have the housing stock to reallocate smaller properties to those tenants, so what happens if the tenant cannot pay? Is the landlord supposed to evict the tenant, in which case they will go back into the system as homeless and come round again, at which point they will be entitled to a smaller property that is not available?

I agree. Given the restricted time available, I cannot go through all the horrors of this particular reform. As the minister said, if landlords evict tenants, that will seriously undermine the Scottish Parliament’s targets on homelessness, which we all agreed should be implemented this year. Alternatively, will the landlord just have to bear the loss of income? They need that income in order to borrow and build new homes. The UK Government’s solution, of course, is that the families should move the kids back into a shared bedroom and let out the other bedroom to a lodger. Single people between the ages of 25 and 35 are already being hit by the reduction in the shared accommodation rate. Another proposal that will cause landlords’ difficulty is the introduction in 2013 of the universal credit and the phasing in by 2017 of payment of the housing benefit element directly to the tenant, monthly and in arrears, other than for pensioners and vulnerable tenants whose housing costs will continue to be paid directly to landlords. That is not what landlords or tenants want. In a poll last year, 93 per cent of social housing tenants said that they believed that it was better for housing benefit to be paid to landlords. A tenant does not need to be vulnerable to have problems managing money if they are on a low income and unexpected financial burdens come along, especially if they receive their income monthly in arrears. Again, what does the landlord do when the tenant cannot or will not pass on the housing element of the universal credit? The minister mentioned the benefits cap. Although it might not affect many families in Scotland, in places such as inner London where rents are very high, families with as few as two children will be affected and will face large increases in rent or having to relocate. Scottish Labour shares the Scottish Government’s serious concerns about the reforms to housing benefit, but we have concerns about the wording of the Government’s motion. My amendment does not seek to delete and insert, because we wanted to express consensus on the principle of opposition to the reforms. My first gripe is that the motion could be perceived to imply that the arguments and evidence against the reforms came only from Scottish stakeholders and, by implication, the Scottish Government. That is simply not true: the reforms have been opposed by individuals and organisations the length and breadth of the UK, including members of the House of Commons and the House of Lords. Our amendment recognises that there is strong opposition to the changes elsewhere, too. It would be entirely wrong to depict the argument as progressive Scotland versus reactionary UK. The changes have been introduced by a right-wing Government that panders to a press agenda that peddles the perception that all recipients of benefits are scroungers. The reforms have been thought up by a Cabinet of millionaires—who, today, have again rewarded themselves—who believe that poverty is somehow a lifestyle choice. They should be, and are, opposed by fair-minded people throughout the UK. Although we share serious concerns about how the changes will affect some of the poorest people in Scotland and the organisations that supply their accommodation, we are not prepared to concede to the issue being used as another Trojan horse in the constitutional debate. Moreover, I object to injustice regardless of which side of the Solway it occurs on.

It would depend on the Administration that we had here. We do not know. I have concerns about the use in the motion of the phrase “compromising the Scottish Government’s capacity to deliver on its housing ambitions for Scotland”, which sounds a bit like a get-out clause in the event that the Government does not meet its affordable housing targets. Cutting the affordable housing supply budget by 30 per cent and reducing the subsidy to RSLs will not help, either. I was sympathetic towards some of the statements in the Liberal Democrat amendment, but I think that it is a diversion from the topic of the debate, which is housing benefit reform. We are not debating the Government’s housing policy. If the Liberal Democrats feel so strongly about the Scottish National Party’s housing policy, why did they vote for the SNP’s budget earlier in the year? The Tory amendment is as I would have expected it to be and, as the Tories would expect, we will not support it. Our amendment asks the Government to come back to Parliament with its proposals on how to mitigate the effects of the reforms. We want to know what it intends to do, not just who it intends to blame, however justified that blame may be. I move amendment S4M-02407.3, to insert at end: “; recognises that opposition to these changes will continue in both the Scottish and the UK Parliament, and believes that the Scottish Government should bring before the Parliament a clear strategy to mitigate the impact on those individuals and families who will be affected.”

When Claudia Beamish asked me to take part in this debate, I did not realise that it would be the first time that the issue has been discussed in a Parliament anywhere in the world. I am pleased that I acceded to her request. I cannot disagree with any of the statements in the Government’s motion or the sentiments that have been expressed by speakers in the debate so far. It is indeed the poor and vulnerable in the poorest countries of the world who will be, and already are, worst affected by climate change. In the previous debate on climate change, before the minister went to Durban, I expressed the hope that he would bring back good news. I am pleased to hear that he had some good news to bring back to us, although perhaps not the progress that we would all wish. Drought, famine and flooding devastate entire communities, wiping out agricultural production and displacing people who lived in the affected areas. As others have said, it is often women who are worst affected. The grossest injustice is that 90 per cent of the effect of climate change is felt in developing countries while the poorest 50 countries contribute less than 1 per cent of the emissions that are the cause. I do not know whether other members have had this experience, but in speaking to constituents I sometimes hear people express the view that, in a time of economic hardship when we are suffering from cuts, we should not send money overseas. We should remember that we pollute and people overseas suffer. If we needed just one reason to justify expenditure on international aid and development, it would be that such expenditure is in recompense for the damage that the profligacy of the industrial countries has inflicted on the poor in the rest of the world. However, we will not be judged by the high-minded sentiments of our motions and amendments in the Parliament, by the radical Climate Change (Scotland) Bill that we all passed in 2009 or by the awards that are given out to our politicians; we will be judged by what we do and what we achieve. Without that, it will all be empty rhetoric and any claim that Scotland champions the tackling of climate change to protect human rights will be seen to be hollow. Claudia Beamish referred to the cuts in the active travel budget. Active travel is an important way in which we can make a contribution. As the Minister for Housing and Transport said in his new year message, short journeys can often be made on foot, and walking is a great way in which to stay active, clear one’s head and reduce one’s carbon footprint all at once. So it was disappointing that the active travel budget was reduced significantly in the budget this year, although some changes were made later. We must all look at the balance between new road building and active travel and other carbon-reducing measures. We face that choice and must make a decision. I recently met WWF, which raised with me a particular concern about traffic volumes. In the 2006 publication, “Scotland’s National Transport Strategy”, our aspiration was to stabilise the volumes of vehicle traffic at 2001 levels by 2021. However, on page 44 of the “Infrastructure Investment Plan 2011”, which was published in December, we are told to expect an increase of 15 to 20 per cent in vehicle kilometres by 2020. It may be envisaged that the bulk of those vehicles will be electric; however, WWF has estimated that there would need to be something like 1.5 million electric vehicles travelling on Scotland’s roads by 2020 in order for us to meet our 2020 emissions targets, and the increase in the necessary infrastructure, such as charging points, might be difficult to achieve by then. As other members have said, it is the poorest countries across the globe that suffer the most from the effects of climate change. However, we have the same inequality, even in this country. As Rob Gibson said, although we have had a fairly mild winter this year, we are seeing the effects of climate change. Climate change for Scotland means, ultimately, a diversion of the jet stream that keeps our climate mild, meaning that we will have worse storms and colder winters as climate change takes effect. We also know that energy costs have increased and that around 35 per cent of Scottish households now live in fuel poverty—that has been highlighted in BBC programmes fairly recently. Energy Action Scotland has estimated that meeting our 2016 target to eradicate fuel poverty will require investment of £200 million per annum. I am not arguing that all of that must be public sector funding, as that would not be possible, but it is a lot of money at a time of recession and there are particular difficulties—as was shown in the case of the family in East Lothian that was highlighted over the weekend—with some of the older buildings in Scotland for which cavity wall insulation is not an option. This is, nevertheless, a potential win situation because it offers a big opportunity, given the scale of the necessary investment, to create jobs and employment in what are often referred to as the green industries. It is also an opportunity to increase the standard of living of some of Scotland’s poorest households as well as to tackle an important source of our greenhouse gas emissions, which is what we should be concentrating on. I support the Labour and Green amendments. I also support the Government’s motion. We must all take the necessary actions, as individuals, agencies, businesses and Government, to achieve the outcomes that we all talk about.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The standing orders of this Parliament indicate that members should treat each other with respect. Will you rule that, if members wish to have a chat and a laugh together, perhaps they should do so in the coffee room or the bar, not in the chamber when other members are speaking?

Will the minister say how much of the affordable housing target will be met through the national housing trust? Is he aware that concern has been expressed in rural areas, such as Dumfries and Galloway, that the return on mid-market rent will not be sufficient to enable the necessary loan commitments to be paid off? Has the issue been explored with housing associations?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive who has the right to dispose of historic buildings that have been gifted to communities. (S4O-00755)

I will clarify the question a little more. I am thinking of an area where there might be a conflict between members of a community, such as community council members, and a local authority about a building that is held in the common good. In the cabinet secretary’s view, who has the right to determine whether such a building should be disposed of or used in an alternative manner?

On behalf of my constituents in Lockerbie and all the friends and relatives of the people who died on the ground and in the air, I ask the cabinet secretary to give his assurance and his word that neither he nor anyone connected with the Scottish Government or the Scottish Court Service at any time put pressure on Mr al-Megrahi, his legal team or the Libyan delegation with regard to the withdrawal of his second appeal.

I congratulate Iain Gray on securing this debate. I am experiencing déjà vu in relation to Annan court. On 5 May 2009, the justice secretary brought the Justice of the Peace (Sheriffdom of South Strathclyde, Dumfries and Galloway) Order 2009 before the Justice Committee. The order was made under the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007 and it proposed to establish justice of the peace courts in nine locations, including Dumfries, and to repeal the provisions of the District Courts (Scotland) Act 1975 in relation to a number of district courts, including Annan court. The plan to close Annan district court met widespread opposition from the local press; from Labour, Conservative and Liberal members of the Scottish Parliament and councillors; and from local solicitors and a senior justice of the peace from Annan, who spoke on behalf of the vast majority of JPs in the south-west of Scotland. I am sorry to say that, at that time, no SNP politician was prepared to speak out in favour of the court although, having listened to Joan McAlpine’s speech, I hope that she might be more sympathetic this time round. My colleague Cathy Jamieson, formerly of this chamber, attended that meeting of the Justice Committee with me to oppose the closure of the Cumnock and Girvan courts, which was included in the statutory instrument. Cathy Jamieson did not speak only as the local member representing Cumnock and Girvan, as she was the Minister for Justice who introduced the bill that became the primary legislation, the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Bill, to the Scottish Parliament in 2006. In speaking of her role at that time, Cathy Jamieson told the Justice Committee: “The decision to retain lay justice was very much based on ensuring that communities could see justice being done and that crimes and offences that had been committed in communities and which were particularly relevant locally could be dealt with there.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 5 May 2009; c 1754.] I moved a motion to annul the statutory instrument, which the Justice Committee, in its wisdom, agreed to by five votes to three.

Yes. It was in 2009—I think that I made that clear. I will not repeat the speech that I made to the committee that morning, but the arguments are as relevant now as they were then. I am therefore disappointed that the proposal to close Annan court has come back again. Like Haddington court, the court in Annan has centuries of history and is now a justice of the peace court. It is disappointing that the proposal is back again. I will not be the only person who is disappointed by the list that has come out. When I looked back at the Official Report of that meeting of the former Justice Committee, I saw that my colleague Cathie Craigie, the then MSP for Cumbernauld, sought assurances and was given them by Gerard Bonnar of the Scottish Government criminal justice directorate that the Scottish Court Service had no proposals to reconsider the establishment of a JP court in Cumbernauld in the near future. That seems to have gone. I remain opposed to the closure of Annan JP court and to the centralisation of justice services in a rural area. I understand the pressures that budget cuts place on the Scottish Court Service and I know that there are issues about the accommodation of the Annan justice of the peace court, which is in the town hall. However, the way in which some things are done is capable of being changed. I believe that the proposals will disadvantage witnesses and victims as well as perpetrators. As Iain Gray said, the proposals will be to the detriment of the important principle of justice being seen to be done. Moreover, I object to the way in which the proposals have been sneaked out through a leaked document. Doubtless, the Scottish Government could get its way, although the fact that Christine Grahame is the convener of the current Justice Committee gives me a bit of encouragement. Christine Grahame rose— Sorry, but I am winding up. The Government has the ability to get its way this time because it has a majority on the Justice Committee. However, the method by which the ideas have been put out is a pretty shabby way of treating the communities that are involved.

I refer the minister to paragraph 7.11, which states: “We would welcome views on what locations may be more appropriate for stations and which current stations are no longer required.” Is it surprising that people think that some of the stations are under threat?

Let us get back to why people are worried and what was said in the consultation document, which started off those worries. This issue was not invented by the Labour Party or the Conservative Party; it was set out in that document. Paragraph 7.8 says: “from time to time, closures and network modifications need to be considered in the light of changing operational needs and passenger travel patterns.” Two paragraphs later, the document mentions stations on the rail network that are located in close proximity to one another and specifically refers to the 11 stations in Glasgow, pointing out that they cost a total of £208,000. In paragraph 7.11, the document talks about reconfiguring the network “by reviewing the location of stations.” It is impossible to relocate a station without closing the one that is already there.

Mr Dornan wishes to make an intervention, but he himself expressed concern about the possibility of closures, and was quoted in a newspaper as saying that he was going to write to his constituents to seek their views on the effect of those closures on their communities. In the debate on 26 January, which Patricia Ferguson secured, the minister stated that he had “no intentions to close stations” and that the list of stations in Glasgow “was asked for by someone at a station in Glasgow during the consultation exercise”. Now Mr Dornan says that it was someone who apparently could not see their own downfall who asked for the list. When John Pentland asked for a list of stations that are within 1 mile of another station, the minister provided him with a list of 60 stations, but the person at the station got a list of the 11 such stations in Glasgow. The minister said: “That person gave the criteria for what they wanted, which was information on stations close to each other and on the patronage numbers.”—[Official Report, 26 January 2012; c 5884, 5885.] The list of the 11 stations in the Glasgow commuter area and, indeed, three others outwith that area that are within 1 mile of another station is in a document entitled “Rail 2014 Consultation – FACT SHEET - 1”, which was published on 16 December 2011 and which can be found in a link from the publications and consultations section of the Transport Scotland website. It does not sound like a list handed out to somebody at a station.

They were mentioned in the minister’s document; they were specifically mentioned in the consultation document. That makes people think that they may be at risk. The fact sheet to which I referred has links to other publications relating to station usage and so on. The fact sheet appears to be an official accompanying document and there is no indication that it was produced in response to somebody in a Glasgow station. Interestingly, the “Rail 2014—Public Consultation” web page also has a link to fact sheet 2, which contains information about cross-border services. I can only surmise that somebody at Gretna Green station asked for that information, but it was not me. Perhaps I am not somebody who did not foresee their “own downfall”, to use Mr Dornan’s words. The answer to John Pentland’s written question S4W-04884, which was lodged on 9 January and answered on 19 January, indicated that there are some 60 stations in Scotland that are within 1 mile of another station, so why was reference made to the 11 within the Glasgow commuter area in paragraph 7.10 of the consultation document, along with the cost of operation? I wonder what question that person in the Glasgow station actually asked that caused him or her to be provided with a list of the 11 Glasgow stations and three others outwith the Glasgow area. What could Invershin station in Sutherland, Ardrossan Town station in North Ayrshire and Golf Street station in Angus possibly have in common with each other and 11 Glasgow stations that they do not have in common with the other 44 stations on the list that was provided in answer to John Pentland’s question other than that they might have been considered for closure, because they are not even all within the Glasgow area? Eleven of the stations are in Glasgow and three are elsewhere. I draw members’ attention to Transform Scotland’s response on Monday to the consultation in which it referred to “Recent station re-openings at communities such as Laurencekirk and Alloa”. Incidentally, some of the lines that the minister is boasting about were initiated by the Labour-Liberal Scottish Executive and not by the Scottish National Party, but the SNP is taking the credit for our plans—it is nice to open things that we planned. Transform Scotland has made the point that separation distance is not a valid tool and that, in fact, there is a good case for a metro-type service in the Glasgow area. Indeed, I think that some of the back-bench members who have spoken in the debate from various sides of the chamber made the case quite well for that. However, I was quite interested by Bob Doris mentioning the stations and enhancements that he would like but not speaking out about the campaign that he and his party’s candidates for Glasgow City Council have been running to save their local stations. They, too, must have been rather concerned that their stations might be closed. That is not just scaremongering. The way in which the consultation document was put together has caused concern generally.

That is factually incorrect, because it was the Glasgow Evening Times that raised the concerns and started the campaign, not the Labour Party. Clearly, Patricia Ferguson’s and Ruth Davidson’s constituents still have concerns, because they are still writing to their MSPs expressing their worries. They are not reassured by the Government’s claims that it has no intention of closing stations, because closures have not been ruled out. People in Glasgow know that the SNP got rid of GARL after saying that it had no plans to do so. Frankly, they will not trust the Government unless it is a bit more clear. In my last minute, I will refer to other issues in the consultation about which there is concern. Those include the ownership of stations, the dual-focus franchise and the fact that having profitable and non-profitable services on two different franchises could lead to the introduction of different levels of specification and, possibly, the deterioration of services in rural areas. The cross-border services and the hub approach also cause me a lot of concern. I hope that, in the future, we will get the opportunity not just to debate this but, in a longer debate that I hope the Government might be prepared to bring to the chamber, to go through a number of the proposals in the consultation. There are a lot of issues in that document that need to be discussed, which are causing concern in local communities. I, too, believe in the opening of stations. I recently wrote to the Minister for Housing and Transport, requesting new stations for Eastriggs and Thornhill. Sadly, the minister, he say no.

I feel a bit like the filling in a sandwich—I apologise if some members find it rather unsavoury. The Scottish Government introduced a road equivalent tariff pilot in the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree in October 2008. In 2010, the pilot was extended until April this year. The Government also commissioned Halcrow to undertake an evaluation of the pilot, which was published in July last year. Halcrow found that around 30,000 additional visits were made by ferry to the pilot area in each year of the pilot and that three quarters of the accommodation providers had experienced increased levels of occupancy. The decision to continue the RET scheme—indeed, to extend it to other islands over time—will be welcomed by tourism businesses in the islands that are to be included in the scheme. Some are to be included from October this year, Arran is to be included two years later and others have a more distant promise. Halcrow also concluded that the RET scheme had made a positive impact on haulage businesses by lowering their total costs by around 10 per cent. Although Halcrow could not identify the total savings that were being passed on to the supply chain, in the document that it published in July it deduced that those savings may have offset other cost increases and enabled prices to be kept down. In addition, Halcrow found evidence suggesting that the difference in the price of fuel between the Western Isles and the central belt had reduced subsequent to the introduction of the RET scheme. Indeed, the Western Isles was no longer the most expensive place in Scotland to buy diesel, as it had been when the RET scheme was introduced in 2008. Transport Scotland’s draft ferries plan, which was published in December last year, proposed replacing RET for commercial vehicles with an enhanced version of the discount scheme that had been in operation prior to the introduction of RET. It argued: “In 93 per cent of cases, the reduction in ferry fares arising through the RET Pilot have been wholly or partially absorbed at some stage in the supply chain”. Basically, it wanted the savings to be passed on in total. Of course, that means that the ferry savings may have helped to offset price rises in other parts of the supply chain—for example, in fuel costs. In October 2008, when the RET pilot was introduced, the average price of a litre of petrol was 117.1p. By March 2011, when the original pilot would have ceased, the price was 139p per litre, reflecting a rise of almost 19 per cent, and by November last year the price had increased by a further 2p per litre. The RET savings may indeed have been partially or even wholly absorbed by increasing fuel prices but, overall, they helped to keep prices lower than they would otherwise have been. Those of us who represent rural areas know well that the prices of many items, including fuel, are higher in more remote towns and villages than they are in the central belt. We are told that transportation costs contribute to those higher prices. Therefore, it must be perfectly feasible that anything that reduces the cost of transportation will help to reduce prices. The reduction in the difference in fuel prices between the Western Isles and the central belt is very likely to be a case in point. The draft plan argues that the increase in freight traffic in the first two years of the Western Isles pilot was only 8 per cent—the Government’s amendment says that it was 7 per cent—whereas the increase in car traffic was around 30 per cent. However, the figures varied greatly between routes. Freight traffic on the Ullapool to Stornoway route, which accounts for 57 per cent of all commercial traffic, increased by 7 per cent whereas on the Oban-Castlebay-Lochboisdale route it increased by 30 per cent. The draft plan refers to the fares discount scheme of up to 15 per cent dependent on volume of business—which existed prior to the introduction of RET—and proposes that, for the Western Isles, Coll and Tiree, the maximum discount would be increased to 25 per cent. Those proposals provoked consternation and even dismay among many businesses on the Western Isles and, indeed, even among their political representatives. The Scottish National Party MP for the Western Isles, Angus MacNeil, is reported in Hebrides News Today of 29 November as saying: “I believe it is a major mistake to remove RET from the haulage industry … The whole point of RET is to help the economy of the islands, increasing transport costs for the haulage industry at a time of crippling fuel costs is disappointing. As recessions go, the Hebrides have fared reasonably well, this was I am sure helped by RET.” On 6 December, Mr MacNeil declared himself to be “fully supportive of the hauliers in the Outer Hebrides” and stated that: “The removal of RET will ultimately lead to an increase in prices for customers in our islands … If this is not sorted freight costs and prices will go up which could ultimately impact on jobs.” Donald Joseph Maclean of Barratlantic Ltd joined him in that press release, stating: “Since RET came into effect four years ago, we have been on the same working level as our mainland competitors and our turnover has increased by 20%, which made us competitive. The removal of RET is unimaginable.”

Our position is stated in the motion. We want a proper socioeconomic impact assessment. Where and when in 2007 did anybody in the Labour Party say that we were against RET? I have looked for that and cannot find it other than in statements from the SNP saying that we were opposed to RET. Mr MacNeil has commented many times on how essential it is that RET be retained. Indeed, I understand that his Scottish Parliament colleague Dr Alasdair Allan was originally supportive of the campaigns by his constituents and facilitated a meeting between hauliers and the Minister for Housing and Transport on 7 February. Prior to that, he expressed the view that “businesses will make … a robust case for the retention of RET”. The meeting duly took place, although invitations were extended only to a select few and some were offended that they were not allowed to come and make their point. Indeed, the Outer Hebrides transport group, which was recently formed to support the hauliers’ case, was disappointed to be offered only a 45-minute meeting with the minister on an issue of such importance to its members after travelling such a long way for the meeting. I will be fair: the meeting was productive to the extent that the limit for eligibility to receive RET was extended from 5m to 6m, although I do not know whether that is intended to apply to all routes or only the Western Isles routes. The following day, the Outer Hebrides transport group met Western Isles Council to call for a review of the proposals—something similar to what we are calling for. The council leader, Angus Campbell, commented that there had been an “overwhelming response from the local business community condemning the proposals to remove RET on commercials as having a serious economic detriment in terms of job losses across a range of sectors.” To be fair to the minister and Transport Scotland, there was further movement on 13 February, when Transport Scotland announced a transitional relief scheme under which the Scottish Government would subsidise 50 per cent of the increase in year 1 and cap any increase to a maximum of 50 per cent of the RET fare. A similar formula would be applied in years 2 and 3. That would mean that, for example, if the non-RET fare was twice the RET fare, the haulier would pay 50 per cent the increase in year 1, 75 per cent in year 2 and 87.5 per cent in year 3. However, increases on some routes would still be significant. As of April this year, under the transitional scheme, the fare for a 17m vehicle on the Ullapool to Stornoway route would increase by £95.48 and on the Oban-Coll-Tiree route by £98.72. Western Isles Council was not convinced. On 15 February, it unanimously passed the following resolution: “The Comhairle is of the view that the current proposals by Scottish Government in regard to the withdrawal of RET for commercial vehicles will be detrimental to the economy and community of the Outer Hebrides; The Comhairle requests that Scottish Government withdraw its proposals as regards the withdrawal of RET for commercial vehicles until the evaluation, referred to in the announcement by Transport Scotland on 13 February 2012, has been completed”. Given that the motion was passed unanimously, I presume that the council’s half-dozen SNP councillors supported it or at any rate did not turn up to vote against it. After the motion was passed, the OHTG wrote to its MSP, Dr Allan, expressing its satisfaction at the council’s position and asking for his “clear, and equally unambiguous support in conveying this message to Transport Minister Keith Brown.” I understand that, on Tuesday, the group received a reply from Dr Allan, advising that he had made its views clear to the transport minister. I also believe that the OHTG wrote directly to Mr Brown observing that “the Comhairle requests that Scottish Government re-instate RET for commercial vehicles until the evaluation ... has been completed. It is unusual for a study and evaluation to take place during a time of transitional arrangements, and the Comhairle would suggest that it is in all parties’ interests—Scottish Government, the Comhairle, the Outer Hebrides community and commercial operators—that the study is allowed to evaluate the full operation of RET on the basis of objective evidence.” Our motion seeks the same—that a moratorium is declared on the RET changes “until a full and proper socioeconomic study has been carried out”. As for the Government’s amendment, the OHTG says: “It is riddled with nonsense”. That is a bit cruel but I think that, as usual, it is self-congratulatory and complacent. I move, That the Parliament notes that the road equivalent tariff (RET) scheme has brought significant benefit to the Outer Hebrides, Coll and Tiree; is of the view that the current proposals to withdraw RET from larger commercial vehicles will be detrimental to the social and economic wellbeing of these islands and communities, and calls on the Scottish Government to enforce a moratorium on the fare increases until a full and proper socioeconomic study has been carried out to assess the impact that increased transportation costs will have on households, local employers and island hauliers.

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister not accept the contention that the reason that the savings could not be passed on in their entirety was because of things such as fuel costs? In fact, RET was helping to keep prices down, which is one of the arguments from businesses throughout the Western Isles.

We are asking in our motion for a moratorium on the changes to RET, until that socioeconomic study is completed.

5. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to improve confidence in the construction sector. (S4F-00473)

That was the same old record. It is clear that, unlike the Scottish construction sector, the First Minister’s confidence level is not at -28. Is he complacent about the fact that two thirds of the industry expect public sector construction activity to reduce in the next year and that only one tenth expect an increase? Is he complacent about the fact that 30,000 jobs have been lost in the sector in the past year? Is he complacent about the fact that the annual rate of new house building in Scotland is at its lowest level since records began? Does he not think that it is time to consider whether reducing the affordable housing supply budget by 30 per cent in the current year is the correct policy when the construction sector is so depressed, or does he believe that the Chinese will build Scotland’s houses, as well as our bridges?

5. To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the backlog maintenance risk profile of NHS Dumfries and Galloway, as reported in “State of the NHSScotland Estate 2011”. (S4O-00711)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that more than 50 per cent of the backlog maintenance in NHS Dumfries and Galloway is in the “high risk” and “significant risk” categories and that NHS Dumfries and Galloway has the highest backlog maintenance cost per square metre of any board in Scotland. I am aware of the plans for the new Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary, but it is anticipated that the new hospital will not be completed before 2016-17. Is the cabinet secretary confident that the current facilities will remain fit for purpose until the new hospital is in operation? I seek her reassurance that the statistics pose no threat to community facilities in the region, such as cottage hospitals.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive how much Scottish Government funding was held by the Treasury in the central unallocated provision at the end of the financial year 2006-07. (S4O-00639)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his information, which is indeed what I recollect. He may recall that, in his statement on the budget outturn in 2007-08, he said that he was using £600 million up that year and that he intended to access the remainder over the next two to three years. Can the cabinet secretary advise members whether that happened? What was the sum of almost £1 billion used for? Does he now regret not having held on to that funding, as it could have come in quite useful now?

That is very generous, Presiding Officer. We, too, welcome the aspiration to a world-class and future-proof digital network that is accessible to everyone in Scotland, and we welcome the opportunity to debate the action plan that was published earlier this week. Clearly, there is unanimity among members of this Parliament that digital connectivity is essential for the Scottish economy and for local economies. Many good points have been raised during the debate and—goodness me—who would have expected that this cabinet secretary would have been able to stimulate so much consensus, even on these benches.

And behind him. That may be unusual, too, although Christine Grahame knows more about that than I do. Broadband has already made a great contribution and it will make an increasing contribution to education, health and social activities. Broadband infrastructure, in its widest definition, is as essential to economic growth as transport infrastructure. It truly is an alternative highway. According to Ofcom’s figures from the first quarter of 2011, Scotland has challenges. Other members have mentioned that, too. Our uptake of broadband lags behind that of England, Wales and Northern Ireland and, at 61 per cent, it is 13 percentage points lower than the UK average. Rather worryingly, our take-up has increased by only one percentage point over the past two years. As many members have noted that is partly down to geography and the sparsity of the population, but those are not the only issues. The take-up in rural Scotland is—counterintuitively—8 per cent higher than it is in urban Scotland. The take-up in greater Glasgow is only 50 per cent, and Margaret McDougall referred to North Ayrshire where take-up is only 58 per cent. As Mary Scanlon pointed out, only one in three people over the age of 55 in Scotland use broadband, whereas in the rest of the UK it is 55 per cent.

There is quite a striking difference between the rest of the UK and us. The take-up of broadband is less than one third in socioeconomic groups D and E in Scotland, whereas it is around 55 per cent in the rest of the UK. Only one quarter of households with an income of under £17,500 have internet access at home. Programme 4 of the action plan, which focuses on increasing take-up and stimulating demand, will need to address the reasons why those figures are so much poorer for Scotland than they are for the rest of the UK. It is not just a geographic issue, but a social issue too. As Mike MacKenzie illustrated, people who are excluded from internet usage—whether for geographic or social reasons—will be increasingly disadvantaged. We know how much can be done online. We can look for work, which is a very important use, and children and young people can research materials for school, university or college. We can book our holidays, pay our car tax and income tax, search for bargains when we go shopping, find out about health matters, book theatre or cinema tickets and keep up to date with the news. People who are not online are missing out—including financially, as it has been estimated that the average household saves £560 per annum through internet booking and internet shopping. The action plan expresses an ambition to overtake the rest of the UK in broadband take-up in the next three years, as David Stewart mentioned, but we have some way to go. I know that various parties signed Scotland’s digital participation charter last November, but it will take real determination and focus to tackle that form of digital exclusion. It may be easier to seek technological solutions where that is the problem than to deal with the reasons why people in certain groups are not taking advantage of the broadband provision that in some cases is already there. Those reasons can, according to the Ofcom survey, include lack of confidence, lack of knowledge of the benefits of broadband and a perception that it is too expensive. The other part of our amendment emphasises the need to ensure that local and community projects get an adequate share of the funding. Dave Stewart referred to the Eigg network, which is costing only a remarkable £200 per household. Rhoda Grant outlined the savings that can be made when networks are maintained by the community rather than by other, larger organisations. Margaret McDougall and Mark Griffin gave us perspectives on some of the problems in urban areas, where the actual technology is wrong: it is about distance from the exchange and the fact that the types of wires that link people up can also exclude them. Jim Hume and Aileen McLeod spoke about the south of Scotland alliance. Like them, I am pleased that the document specifically mentions the alliance’s work. I was also pleased that the Scottish Government made £5 million available to the alliance to help it to take forward its plans. It intends to provide next-generation broadband to 100 per cent of the population of the south of Scotland by 2020, which is really quite a significant ambition. I am a little bit concerned about the Government’s proposal on procurement for the 2015 programme, which divides the programme into a Highlands and Islands Enterprise area and a Scottish Enterprise area. Some of the technology needed in the south of Scotland will have more in common with what is needed in the Highlands and Islands than in the central belt because of our remote areas. The differences in procurement may be to do with when the projects can get off the ground, but I would welcome the minister’s clarification of that particular issue. I would like a bit more information about the single programme board within the Scottish Government that will oversee the entire programme’s delivery, and about how some of the local partnerships in the Highlands and Islands and the south of Scotland—and Aberdeen city and shire economic future, which Richard Baker mentioned—will interact with that. We thought about the Tory amendment but, as somebody who believes in the continuation of the United Kingdom, I strongly believe that the UK should give Scotland a fair share of funding, so we will not support it. We will support the Government motion, which asks the UK Government to give us enough money. One or two things in the action plan were slightly amusing, such as the correct statement that the Government’s ambition would require “innovative delivery and commercial models such as joint venture arrangements ... e.g. Institutional Public Private Partnership.” After all that the cabinet secretary has said over the years about public-private partnerships, I am surprised that he let that terminology slip by when he was proofreading the action plan. I am pleased to support our amendment and the Scottish Government’s motion on a topic and a development that is extremely important to Scotland and its future.

Scottish Labour has selected bus travel for debate because we are concerned about the erosion of bus services across Scotland, which is often accompanied by higher fares, and about bus operators’ prediction that allocations in the Scottish budget for 2012-13 will exacerbate the situation. The previous Scottish Executive introduced the concessionary bus fares scheme for older people and all the parties supported that because we understood how important bus services are, particularly to older people who might no longer wish or be able to run a car. That applies to people who are on low incomes, too. Of course, in rural areas, bus services might be so infrequent that not owning a car is not an option. It is unfortunate that increases in fuel prices and other pressures have led in the past few years to a reduction in bus services across Scotland. Buses have become less frequent; routes have been shortened, which means that passengers must walk further to reach a bus stop; and fares have risen substantially. Fares rose by an average of 7.3 per cent above inflation between 1999 and 2010. Research by Strathclyde partnership for transport in its area of operation revealed that cuts in bus services were most acutely delivered in the 15 per cent most deprived areas and in semi-rural areas. A week ago, Richard Baker and I asked colleagues to advise us of proposed cuts that they knew of to bus services in their constituencies and regions. It is clear that the reduction in services is escalating. Services continue to be cut and withdrawn. I have been provided with examples from East Kilbride, Aberdeen, Coatbridge, Dumbarton, Kilwinning and Airdrie, and I know of some in my region. A major concern of the bus companies is the cut to the bus service operators grant, which has been reduced in every year since 2009-10 but which will fall sharply—by £10.3 million or more than 17 per cent, according to the Scottish Parliament information centre—between this financial year and next year, when it will be £50 million. The Confederation of Passenger Transport UK points out that the cut means that that budget will be 25 per cent less than the £66.5 million budget that the Scottish Government originally agreed with the bus industry back in 2010. The CPT also points out that diesel prices have risen by nearly 15 per cent in the past year and that it was advised only as late as November last year that the bus service operators grant was to move from being a payment based on fuel consumption to a payment based on the distance travelled. To be fair, that change was intended to assist rural services and to encourage fuel efficiency. I cannot argue with either of those aims but, unfortunately, the late notification of the changes has made it difficult for bus operators to adjust to them. Scotland is not alone in reducing the bus service operators grant. The United Kingdom Government made a similar announcement in October 2010 and its reduction will be introduced in April. That has already created outrage, as two thirds of authorities in England have decided to cut back on their subsidised services. Communities outside major urban centres will be most severely hit, and petitions on the subject have been submitted to the UK Parliament and others. Transform Scotland predicts a “wave of cuts” similar to those in England as the consequences of the Scottish Government’s cut are felt.

As Keith Brown knows, the Labour Party cannot lodge amendments at stage 2 of a budget bill, when only the Scottish Government can lodge amendments. Liam Byrne was making a joke for a friend. As I develop my argument, I will tell members more about what we can do with bus services in Scotland. The problem is not just the effect on the bus companies, but the pressure that is put on local transport authorities, which subsidise socially necessary but commercially unviable routes. As fuel prices are high and central Government subsidies are reducing, bus companies are asking transport authorities for ever-increasing subsidy to match the shortfall. The public sector can ill afford that funding at present. Moreover, some marginally commercially viable routes may become unviable as the costs to operators increase, with further pressure on transport authorities to subsidise those routes, too. Local government finance is highly constrained, and consequently subsidised routes may have to be discontinued or reduced in frequency. If bus services deteriorate in frequency or route, people are more likely to use their private cars. That is not a green solution, but people in rural areas who do not have cars become more isolated where bus services may already be very infrequent. Older people may have a bus pass, but no access to any bus to use it on. That is where demand-led transport solutions such as community transport can make such a difference, and I am pleased that the Government seems to agree with us on that in its amendment. I will make one suggestion. I know that there are pressures on community transport initiatives: two in Dumfries and Galloway had to go to the council for crisis funding last year. I ask the Scottish Government whether there are other ways of supporting those valuable social enterprises, perhaps through including them in the concessionary transport scheme. As it stands, older and disabled people living in remote areas cannot exercise their entitlement to concessionary bus travel. I know that it may seem as if I am asking for yet more spending on the concessionary travel budget, but it is just a suggestion. The Finance Committee heard yesterday from the Auditor General for Scotland, Robert Black, that £34 million is currently used in funding concessionary travel for people over 60 who are working and using their bus pass to go to work. Retired people living in rural areas who cannot use any type of public transport are possibly more entitled to that funding than people who probably could afford it because they are still in work. I am just asking the Government whether it would be prepared to look at that. I have referred to the concerns of bus operators with regard to the reduction in the bus service operators grant and the cap on the concessionary travel budget. However, I am not saying that the solution is simply to give more money to large bus companies; the issue of market failure and the role of regulation must be addressed. Public subsidy—as we have said in relation to other areas—should be used to purchase public goods, and regulation is a mechanism to define the nature of those public goods and to ensure that the public receive value for money. If the market is dominated by a small number of powerful operators and it is difficult for smaller companies or new ventures to enter the market, it is hard to ensure value for the public pound. At one time, the Scottish National Party believed that some regulation of bus services was necessary, but for some reason it changed its mind before the 2007 election.

No, I have only a few seconds left—I am sorry. In support of regulation, I draw the Government’s attention to the Competition Commission’s report, published in December, which used Fife as a case study. Unfortunately I do not have time to go into the report, but it indicated that one operator controlled 95 per cent of the services, which I do not think ensures competition or that fares are kept low. I urge the Government to look at regulation. My colleague Patricia Ferguson will introduce a bill on regulation of the bus industry, and I hope that the Government will consider supporting it. On the two amendments, the Conservatives have obviously not moved on since the 1980s when they deregulated the bus services; and as for the Scottish Government, I do not understand how its members do not all have sore arms from perpetually congratulating themselves and patting themselves on the back. I move, That the Parliament notes the importance of local bus services, particularly for people on low incomes and older people; is concerned at the withdrawal of bus services and sharp increases in fares in a number of communities across Scotland and believes that these will be exacerbated by the proposed cut in the Bus Service Operators Grant; notes concerns regarding the proposed cap on concessionary fares in 2013-14 and 2014-15; urges the Scottish Government to consider ways in which it can support demand-led transport solutions such as community transport in rural areas; notes the SNP’s 2003 manifesto promise to “bring forward legislation to allow the regulation of buses”, and believes that further legislative action is required to ensure effective regulation of the industry for the benefit of passengers.

Will the member take an intervention on that?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I want to make a clarification, in case it was not absolutely clear from my speech. The point that was raised at the Finance Committee yesterday—

Our motion draws attention to concerns about and possible outcomes of the current situation. The solution that we are proposing is not just to throw money at the problem but to reregulate and ensure that the public pound purchases the best possible value.

That is a bit rich considering that, if we do make a suggestion—for example when I pointed out what the Auditor General said—it is immediately translated as being Labour Party policy. It makes us rather anxious. I would rather put ideas out there and have them discussed than have other parties immediately say, “That’s Labour Party policy.” Let us listen to what others are saying.

For the record, the suggestion was made by the Auditor General, Robert Black, at yesterday’s Finance Committee meeting. When someone such as that makes such a suggestion, the very least that we can do is to look at it. Indeed, I have asked Mr Black to break down his calculations.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has made to the relevant authorities regarding the kidnap of former Dumfries resident Khalil Rasjed Dale in Pakistan on 5 January 2012. (S4O-00604)

I thank the cabinet secretary very much for his answer, because there was a flurry of media activity after Mr Dale was captured three weeks ago, but no information has been publicly available since then. His friends in Dumfries and Galloway are understandably extremely concerned. I have been told that the Foreign and Commonwealth Office does not believe that it is in Mr Dale’s interest to release information at the moment. I can only ask whether the cabinet secretary can reassure Mr Dale’s friends that he will continue to do what it is in his power to do to ensure that Mr Dale is not forgotten and—I hope—to secure his release.

I will be brief. The debate is primarily about services in Glasgow. I congratulate Patricia Ferguson on raising the issue on her constituents’ behalf and on managing to portray some of the anomalies in the debate. It is rather amusing that SNP council candidates have been out there campaigning to save stations from their own transport minister. Like others, I think that we must ask what the consultation document’s purpose is, if the minister says that there are no plans to close any stations. Jim Hume read out the reference in the document to reconfiguring stations. If stations are to be reconfigured and put somewhere else, some stations will have to close. If that is the intention of Transport Scotland and of the minister, they must come clean, say that and talk to people about the stations that might close. When people see a list that includes some stations but not others, they suspect—naturally—that the stations on the list are probably under threat. Documentation has been going around that shows usage at some stations. I looked at it carefully, because we always worry about the stations in our constituencies. If such data is around at the same time as a consultation is taking place, we must ask what the purpose is of having it in the public domain.

No—I am sorry, but I promised to be brief, and the minister will sum up immediately after me. I do not argue that no station should ever close. There might well be arguments for some stations to close. However, like Patrick Harvie, I would like stations to be reopened. If stations are to be closed, they certainly should not be stations on busy commuter lines that move people out of private cars and on to public transport. As the minister knows, I have campaigned for the stations at Thornhill and Eastriggs in my constituency to be reopened. I will not hijack the debate by going on about them, but there are good arguments for new stations. One frustrating aspect, which might have a bearing on the debate, is that train operators are often not keen on trains stopping too frequently. I have heard that the train operators are reluctant to have services from Lockerbie that reach Edinburgh and Glasgow before 9 o’clock, because such services would have to start too early elsewhere or would slow down some trains. Equally, it is argued that if the trains on some commuter lines stopped too much, that would slow down intercity trains, which compete with the airlines. We must recognise the role of trains in supporting commuters in Scotland. People do not commute by train just in the south of England; that happens in Scotland, too. A balance must be achieved between the commuter service’s role and the intercity train service’s role. I will stop there and allow the minister to answer the points that have been made.

Budget decisions are about the Government’s priorities. The Scottish Government frequently cites its purpose as being sustainable economic growth, so it is disappointing that parts of the Budget (Scotland) Bill do not appear to reflect that purpose. In particular, I am—like Gavin Brown—disappointed that housing has not been given a greater priority in the bill, especially as the budget covers the period when the homelessness targets must be achieved. The SNP’s manifesto before the election in May 2011 stated that, if re-elected, the SNP would build an average of 6,000 homes for affordable rent each year. It is unfortunate that that commitment was soon downgraded after the Government took office to refer to 6,000 affordable homes per year. Of the 30,000 homes that are to be built over five years, only two thirds will be available for rent. We must look at the scale of the problem that needs to be tackled. On Shelter’s website, the most recent available statistics show that more than 55,000 households made homelessness applications in 2010-11 and that 41,500 of them were accepted as being unintentionally homeless. Of those households, 29 per cent were families—single parents or couples with children. On top of that is the demand that is created by people who live in accommodation that is unsuitable for their needs—it might be too small for their family or inappropriate for one of the household’s medical condition. In the Dumfries and Galloway Council area alone, about 5,000 households are on the waiting lists of registered social landlords. Given the Scottish Government’s purpose and the desperate need for social rented housing across Scotland, it is disappointing that the budget for supporting economic growth and housing supply will fall by 43 per cent in cash terms over two years—from £291.3 million in 2010-11, which is the year to which the Shelter statistics refer, to £155.3 million in 2012-13. Indeed, the entire housing regeneration budget will fall by 23 per cent in cash terms between this financial year and the next. According to calculations provided yesterday by the Scottish Parliament information centre, the affordable housing supply budget will fall from £356.4 million this year to £214.8 million next year, which is a cut of 37 or 40 per cent in real terms. Using slightly different figures from those that were used by Gavin Brown, I point out that, if we consider total managed and capital expenditure together, the total Scottish budget has decreased by 1 per cent in cash terms and 3.5 per cent in real terms, while the infrastructure and investment portfolio budget has increased by 4 per cent. Shelter’s Gordon MacRae was quite right to say in evidence to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee that this is the second year running in which the housing budget has taken a disproportionate share of the cuts. That matters not only because of all those thousands of households who are statutorily homeless or are living in inadequate accommodation—although they are crucial—but because it is happening against the backdrop of a collapse of confidence in the building and construction industry and a 1.2 per cent fall in construction output in the third quarter of 2011. Only one in 10 Scottish construction firms is now confident about its future. Michael Levack of the existing homes alliance has warned that budget cuts could impact negatively on construction companies and are stirring up “serious trouble for the future ... in company failures and the loss of skills and jobs.”—[Official Report, Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, 26 October 2011; c 203.] Companies involved in the construction of social homes for rent are already going into administration; for example, a large company in the Dumfries and Galloway area, Robison & Davidson, went into administration a year ago in the middle of constructing socially rented housing.

I will touch on that issue at the end of my speech. Scottish ministers have been proud of their focus on preventative spend in this spending review. However, I argue that investment in housing is itself preventative spend. Children who have to live in cramped or damp conditions or in temporary accommodation after being removed from their friends and families—and possibly after having the family pet taken off them—will not achieve their potential at school. Their life chances will be improved by a stable life in decent accommodation. Moreover, adults who have to live in such accommodation or who are worrying about losing their home because they cannot pay their rent, because their landlord is selling up or because they are struggling with a mortgage that they cannot afford—and, in turn, worrying about the effect of that on their children—will suffer from stress, will be more likely to suffer from physical and mental ill health, will perform less well at their work, will take more time off work and will be more likely to experience relationship breakdown. As many of us know, councils or registered social landlords facing waiting list pressures can feel compelled to house a homeless young person in accommodation intended for pensioner households, resulting in conflict between the lifestyles of the residents that can lead to real or perceived antisocial behaviour and a call on police and other resources. When I searched my computer-based records to see how many cases with a housing attribute I had received since the system was installed in 2004, I found that there had been 920. That is not unusual for MSPs. In such cases, people say things such as, “Please help me” and, “We’re turning to you because we cannot think who else to go to.” I ask the cabinet secretary to look at his budget and his consequentials and think about whether he can reprofile certain large-scale projects. After all, he, more than the rest of us, is the person who can help those families.

On the capability of housing associations such as Glasgow Housing Association and others to build more social rented housing, how does the minister respond to the view of the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations that the current subsidy of £40,000 is not sustainable to meet the Scottish Government’s manifesto commitment to build 6,000 affordable homes for rent annually?

Having recently left the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, I would like to start by saying how much I enjoyed serving on that committee and on its predecessor, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, over the past three-and-a-bit years, and to wish the committee well in its future deliberations. Unfortunately for the cabinet secretary, I am turning up like the proverbial bad penny in this debate. This is a time of important negotiation in the EU. The common fisheries policy is up for renegotiation, as the common agricultural policy will be, a year later. As others have said, this is also a time of great fiscal uncertainty in Europe. Indeed, I think that today sees the beginning of the restarting of discussions on the restructuring of the Greek debt. We do not know the extent to which that will affect the EU budget, and therefore the way in which funding is distributed across the EU’s programmes. The Commission currently intends to freeze the budget for the CAP, which—as other members have said—will amount to a real-terms cut of around 9 per cent. It is difficult to predict how the financial problems throughout Europe will affect those allocations in the longer term, and what the knock-on effect will be for the budget streams within the CAP. Fiscal austerity concentrates minds more than ever on the purpose of public subsidy, and the nature of the public goods that subsidy should support. In the early days, the CAP’s purpose was to support food production: in the end, that emphasis led to beef and butter mountains and wine lakes. The reaction to that overproduction led to schemes such as set-aside, in which farmers were paid not to use their land at all. More recently, there has been a recognition of the important role that agriculture plays in preserving and enhancing our rural environment. In many parts of Scotland, the countryside that we love and consider to be nature is in fact the result of centuries of farming. On our hills, grazing by sheep and cattle plays an essential role in preserving habitats and biodiversity, and agricultural activity such as crofting helps to support communities in some of the most remote and fragile areas of our country. The relationship between agriculture and the environment is recognised in the current CAP through schemes such as cross-compliance, in which farmers who are in receipt of single farm payments and other forms of direct support are required to demonstrate good agricultural and environmental conditions. The nature of the public goods that are to be supported and the extent to which each receives support are central to reform of the common agricultural policy. Because agriculture is very different across the 27 EU members states, the policy must be sufficiently flexible to allow member states and devolved Administrations to make the appropriate choices for farming and the environment in their areas. With an increased focus on concerns over food security, food production is an obvious public good, although there must be an emphasis on preventing food wastage and on the sustainability of food production—no one wants to return to the days of overproduction. As Scotland’s climate is—shall we say—less benign than that in much of the rest of Europe, there is perhaps a greater recognition here that agriculture needs more direct support. That is why some of us in this Parliament have been a bit more enthusiastic about the retention of pillar 1 direct payments than have some of our colleagues at Westminster. I welcome the Commission’s intention to retain direct support, and its proposals that will end the support for agricultural activity that is no longer taking place, or so-called slipper farming. Claims in 2014 will have to be linked to activity in 2011, other than for new entrants into farming. Whether the proposed link is strong enough must of course be considered; NFUS and the Scottish Crofting Federation propose that it should be strengthened. The successor to the less favoured area support scheme within pillar 2 is to be welcomed, although—as other members have said—it is not yet clear how the proposed natural constraints payments, which will be linked to eight biophysical criteria, will work in practice. It is quite likely that some areas of Scotland that currently receive LFAS will not be eligible for the new payment. That will be hard on those areas, but it must be right that those parts of Scotland where crofting and farming are most difficult because of the terrain and climate should be the main beneficiaries of those particular funding streams. Activities that address climate change have for the first time been included in the CAP reform proposals. As Graeme Dey mentioned, agriculture is a major source of greenhouse gas emissions, and it is right that support is offered to encourage practices that reduce those emissions. Specific funding streams within pillar 2 are proposed, along with new GAEC conditions—for example, protecting wetlands and carbon-rich soils. However, as other members have said, there are some concerns about the proposals on permanent pasture. Rural development remains key to the CAP, but restructuring around the six priorities is intended to make it more flexible. I, like David Stewart, am particularly interested in the potential of placing a priority on the promotion of social inclusion, poverty reduction and economic development in rural areas. There is a great deal of potential there, and such programmes must be developed to make a real difference to some of our more disadvantaged rural communities. I wish the committee well in its deliberations. I am certain that it will not be possible to achieve consensus among stakeholders on some aspects of the proposals, and on whether they go far enough or possibly too far, but there are many positive aspects to the reform proposals. I hope that the current difficulties and financial problems in the euro zone will not derail the CAP reforms.

I lodged the motion as an individual MSP—it is not a Labour Party position—to use members’ business to discuss some ideas and air some views on a particularly important issue: who should be entitled to vote on Scotland’s constitutional future. I raised the franchise a considerable time ago in a debate, because it has always struck me as slightly strange that my husband, who is English and has lived in Scotland for many years, will get a vote on Scotland’s future, whereas my sister, who is Scottish but has lived in England for a similar length of time, will not be able to vote on her country’s future.

No, absolutely not. As I speak, Joe FitzPatrick will hear more of my view about how the matter could be addressed.

No, I will not take another intervention just now. I considered the issue in more depth after I was contacted by James Wallace. He is naturally a constituent of Alex Fergusson’s, but I have known him for many years. He was at school with my daughter and did some work experience with me after school and when he was first studying at the University of Edinburgh. Mr Wallace was born in Dumfries, attended Dumfries academy, supports Queen of the South—which is a bit of a trial at the moment—and is a proud Doonhamer and Scot. Indeed, it is precisely because he feels so profoundly Scottish that he wants to be able to vote in the independence referendum. He has gained graduate and postgraduate qualifications in law and is a clever, ambitious young man who wants to pursue a career in international law. This year, he has taken up a trainee position with Baker & McKenzie, a global law firm that was based originally in the USA and which has its UK office in London. He would be in the gallery this evening wearing his kilt and “Let Wallace Vote” T-shirt were he not at the firm’s headquarters in the US negotiating something to do with his traineeship. As he is not a student, Mr Wallace is not entitled to be registered to vote at his parent’s Scottish address and if he is still in London in autumn 2014—or whenever the referendum takes place—he will not have a vote. However, he is doing only what generations of Scots have done. They travelled outside Scotland to get work, training or experience. Of course, many of them returned—my grandparents, my parents and I certainly did—while some, like my sister, would like to return but the employment to which their experience is applicable is not available in Scotland. I believe that several current Scottish National Party MSPs have worked in other parts of the UK and abroad and I am sure that, in returning to Scotland, they have brought valuable experience to their roles. Surely they will testify to the fact that living somewhere else does not make a person feel any less Scottish; no one ever loses their Scottish identity because they live in another part of the UK or elsewhere. At a time when youth unemployment is high and graduates are finding it very difficult to get work, many young Scots, in particular, are applying for jobs throughout the UK—not because they wish to leave Scotland, but because they want to gain employment in the careers for which they are qualified. Had a referendum on Scottish independence been held when SNP members were living outwith Scotland they might have taken a different view on not being allowed to vote on their country’s future. It is true that Scots living outwith Scotland do not have a vote in Scottish parliamentary elections, but then they are not directly affected by the decisions that we take here. I did not have a vote in the 1979 referendum because I was living in Cambridge, so one might well ask why I believe the franchise for this referendum should be different. It is because of the very nature of the question to be posed. After all, we are talking about what is probably the most important decision that can be made about Scotland’s future. Whatever the question might be, the choice is between remaining on the path of devolution or changing direction and following the road to independence. That is why Scottish Labour believes that there should be one question to determine whether the Scottish people want to follow a different route, which, if taken, will be very difficult to get off again. Devolution can evolve, but becoming a separate state is a final decision. Many Scots who might be living temporarily in other parts of the UK want to be included in this once-in-a-lifetime vote—indeed, I have received loads of e-mails today from Scots living in other parts of the UK—because it could fundamentally change the nature of the country to which they might wish to return. How could this issue be tackled? Some have suggested that those affected could register to vote at their parents’ address. However, there are specific circumstances in which an elector is allowed to register at a former address—for example, students can do so—but people are usually expected to register at their current address. Indeed, I think that someone who registers at a former address where they do not actually live is probably breaking the law. After looking into this, James Wallace has suggested that a mechanism similar to that enabling expatriate UK citizens to vote in UK and European elections could be applied to this referendum. Holders of UK passports who live abroad can register to vote in those elections if they have been registered to vote at a UK address within the past 15 years—or, in the case of a young person, if their parents or guardians have been so registered. I understand that similar criteria apply in many other democracies across the world. If we made a direct analogy with this referendum, Scottish people who had been resident in Scotland at some point in the past 15 years and wanted to vote could apply to be on the register. The Government would not have to seek them out; they could simply apply to get on to the electoral register in order to vote. I realise that, as responsibility for the franchise lies with Westminster, the Scottish Government does not have the power to introduce those changes. However, the Scottish Government has stated that it wants the franchise to be extended to include 16 and 17-year-olds and I assume that it will attempt to negotiate that with the UK Government at some stage. I ask the Scottish Government to consider whether the franchise can be extended to people who have had an address in Scotland in the past 15 years or whose parents or guardians have such an address to enable them to have their say on whether Scotland should become an independent state. In the meantime, while that issue is considered, I congratulate James Wallace on raising and researching the issue. He has certainly had some impact on the debate about the franchise and how we might consider extending it.

Will the member take an intervention?

An analogy is being drawn with the circumstances under which UK citizens who live outwith the UK can vote. We know how to operate that system, which is not onerous and relies on people registering to vote. The approach that is suggested is analogous with an approach that is already taken.

My proposition is that the criterion would be similar to that used for expatriate British people voting in European and British elections: people who want to vote in the independence referendum should have been resident in Scotland during the past 15 years. That has nothing to do with ethnicity, and it would be up to them to determine whether to take advantage of the opportunity.

I agree that there is no such thing as Scottish citizenship, in the sense that people do not have Scottish passports. I am suggesting that people who have a UK passport but have been resident in Scotland at some point during the past 15 years will have the chance to register to vote.

No.

No.

If I could just clarify that, I said that the person would need to have been on the electoral register at an address in Scotland. That is the equivalent criterion to that which applies to expats’ ability to vote in UK and European elections.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I clarify once again that my suggestion is that people who are eligible to vote will have a UK passport with a passport number that can be easily verified. They will also have to have been registered at an address in Scotland within the past 15 years—again, records of that are kept and it can be simply verified. That is done for every UK and European election. It is not that complex.

The minister’s Government stalled the Dunragit bypass at the same time as it stalled the Hardgrove to Kinmount improvement scheme on the A75. Can he advise us whether that scheme will be completed at the same time as the Dunragit bypass?

It is a few years since I had the pleasure of summing up a Finance Committee debate on the last day before the Christmas recess, but I am back again. The current committee convener keeps being referred to as “the new statesman”. I remember a programme of the same name starring Rik Mayall in the lead role, so I very much hope that the comparison does not have any relation to that programme. I begin by referring to the difference of opinion among Labour members, which has been mentioned by some. I served on the Finance Committee for five years from 2003. At one point, John Swinney was on that committee with me, and we were highly critical of finance ministers; being critical was not confined to Opposition members. When we went to committee meetings, we took our party hats off—that is not a festive reference—and we did not set out to protect our ministers. If we discovered that they were wrongly claiming that efficiency savings had been made, or that they were guilty of double or triple counting, which unfortunately sometimes happened, we ensured that they were criticised for that. Committees were slightly less critical and scrutinised ministers less in the previous parliamentary session, and I think that there was a good reason for that. With minority government, no one in the party of government wants to be responsible for causing trouble for a minister. Now that there is a one-party majority, I very much hope that the committees will again feel enabled to exercise a high level of scrutiny, which is important. The issue on which my party feels disappointed is the budget’s contribution to economic growth. In the economic strategy that it published back in 2007, the Scottish Government stated: “Our Purpose as Scotland’s Government is to increase sustainable economic growth.” So important was that “purpose” to the Government, that every time it was mentioned it had a somewhat Orwellian capital P. That still seems to be the case, as the Government says in its draft budget: “Our focus on delivering the Purpose is even more crucial in these tough financial times.” I would not disagree in any way with the Government’s aspiration, but independent commentators have found evidence for its having such a focus to be somewhat elusive, as Margaret McCulloch and others have pointed out. In evidence to the Finance Committee, both Professor David Bell, the budget adviser, and Professor Jeremy Peat commented on the lack of linkage to the Scotland performs national performance framework. That framework was updated earlier this month, and I had a wee look at it on the internet. I noticed that we are making positive progress on raising the rate of economic growth in Scotland to the same level as the rest of the UK. Unfortunately, that is because we are all doing badly. The difference has fallen to 0.4 per cent. Another performance indicator was to match by 2017 the growth rate of other small independent countries. Our performance in that area is getting worse: the figure, which was +2.5 per cent in 2004, now stands at -2 per cent, which is the lowest level that that indicator has been at since 2001. There is an issue to do with how, in its budget, the Government should address the fact that it is not meeting one of the performance indicators that are identified on its own website. I turn to income from non-domestic rates, which Gavin Brown mentioned. I note what the cabinet secretary said about the buoyancy of business rates, but can we be certain that that will continue? If we go into a double-dip recession, if there continue to be considerable problems in the euro zone or if we see increasing unemployment, it will have an effect on businesses and on income from business rates. I hope that the Government will monitor that extremely carefully, because I am not sure that what started to happen two years ago will necessarily continue. Anne McTaggart made reference to fuel poverty. In addition to the important points that she made, I mention the fact that action on energy efficiency will also help us to meet our climate change targets. That issue was brought to the attention of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee when I sat on it. The Government may want to look at how unallocated consequentials and income streams such as that from the fossil fuel levy could be invested to accelerate the fuel poverty programme. A number of members, including Paul Wheelhouse, Margaret McCulloch and Mark McDonald, mentioned preventative spend, towards which—I think—Mark McDonald said that there was a “dramatic” move. I do not think that the provision of £500 million over three years is “dramatic”. Although preventative spend is important, I am slightly surprised that the Finance Committee put so much emphasis on it in a budget report. However, it is an area on which we should keep an eye. Mary Scanlon mentioned the resource to capital transfer. As has been mentioned, the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee had to request the detail of that four times. Eventually, it received a table indicating who would get the money, but I do not think that anyone has yet been told who will lose money. We need to know where the money is coming from as well as where it is going. I agree with Rob Gibson’s comments on the report on proposals and policies; we did find scrutiny difficult in that regard. The Equal Opportunities Committee asks other committees to make reports on equal opportunities. Would it be possible for the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee to request that other committees report on how climate change proposals are being enacted and how we are making progress towards the RPP? I have four seconds left, so I will sit down.

I start by saying how much I have enjoyed working opposite the cabinet secretary and Mr Stevenson—and Ms Cunningham and Mr Russell—over the past three and a half years. Can the minister assure us that EU implementing regulation 1211/2011/EC has been permanently repealed and cannot be brought back without consultation, as it was previously? Is there any detail attached to the proposed overhaul of the cod recovery plan with regard to issues such as timescale, consultation and, possibly, additional scientific information that might inform any future plan?

Will the member take an intervention?

With regard to the south-west, will the planned but currently stalled improvement schemes for the A75 now go ahead, and will the cabinet secretary consider the A76 action plan?

I, too, welcome the opportunity to take part in the debate and I congratulate the regulatory review group on its work in producing its annual report for 2011. As others have said, the group is chaired by Professor Russel Griggs, who is an eminent constituent of mine. Hearing the wind roaring above, I am not surprised that he may not be in the chamber to hear the debate. As an aside, I note that Professor Griggs was also instrumental in the early days of getting the University of Glasgow to move on to the Crichton site, so we are all very grateful to him down in Dumfries and Galloway for his work on that as well. Like Fergus Ewing and Rob Gibson, I am aware of the work that SEPA is doing to move to a more risk-based regulatory regime, which has the twin benefits of increasing the efficiency of the organisation—achieving efficiency savings is extremely important at the moment—and minimising unnecessary intervention. In the past, some businesses and land managers have viewed SEPA as an inhibitor of their enterprises and have mentioned the organisation’s name in a slightly derogatory or unhappy manner. If the new approach is successful—I very much hope that it is—the agency should be seen, increasingly, as an enabler rather than an inhibitor of enterprise. As the RRG’s annual report notes, that approach involves enabling compliance through “early engagement and the provision of front-loaded advice”. It is a highly refreshing approach. Too often in the past, regulatory bodies felt constrained in offering advice to clients because they had the job of enforcing regulation. I recall a specific example of that. After the passage of the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001, I received complaints that the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care was less prepared to offer advice and help to care providers than local authorities and health boards had been. I think that it felt constrained in that regard because it was the regulatory authority in that sector. I hope that the work that SEPA has been doing in applying legislation in a proportionate manner and reducing regulatory burdens through dialogue and advice can be transferred to other regulatory bodies, and I will be interested to see how that feeds into the proposed better regulation bill that is to be introduced in the next year or so. Although I would like the impact of unnecessary regulation and bureaucracy on the providers of goods and services to be reduced, I will resist being drawn into the trap of implying that all regulation is a bad thing. The Labour amendment makes reference to how regulation supports equal opportunities. It also mentions public procurement regulation, which can be used, as Rhoda Grant said, to encourage the use of locally sourced foods or, as John Park said, to promote employment practices such as the payment of a living wage. Regulation also protects consumers and employees, as has been said. Without it, there would be no minimum wage and no statutory rights to days off or to maternity or paternity leave. I agree with Mark McDonald, who is no longer in the chamber, that a load of baloney is talked about health and safety, the fear of which sometimes results in certain activities—such as going on school trips—not being undertaken. The Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 was passed 37 years ago and the fear of prosecution under it is greatly exaggerated. In fact, it is the increasing use of civil litigation in the event that things go wrong that is causing problems for many public sector authorities. That tendency, which seems to have been imported from across the Atlantic, has had extremely unfortunate consequences for many activities that children and young people used to greatly enjoy, which now cannot be accessed. An early recommendation of the RRG was the introduction of business and regulatory impact assessments, which were implemented in 2010. The RRG has examined progress on the issue. According to its annual report, which was published yesterday, 80 per cent of the primary legislation that has been introduced since April 2010 has undergone a BRIA, but only 57 per cent of the secondary legislation has done so. That is a matter of concern. It needs to be asked why, at times, the Scottish Government seems to refuse to apply a BRIA to policies that directly affect business. I listened to what Fergus Ewing said in response to Gavin Brown’s intervention. He said that only 0.1 per cent of premises would be affected by the proposed public health levy, but we are talking about retailers that are big employers. If they are affected, that may affect the employment prospects of many people. A negative BRIA should not mean that actions should not be taken if the legislative proposal would have significant advantages in other respects but, at times of economic difficulty, the effects of regulation on economic growth and employment opportunities should at least be assessed and placed in the balance. Given that the Government has introduced the Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill, I hope that it will undertake a BRIA on the consequences of the introduction of minimum pricing in Scotland alone and, in particular, on the impact on retail businesses that are situated near the English border, such those in my constituency. Irrespective of the merits or otherwise of minimum unit pricing, there is a strong likelihood of a negative impact on retailers in the south of Scotland in particular. Many of my constituents have told me that, if it comes in, they will shop in Carlisle. The town already has cheaper petrol, and if it has cheaper alcohol as well, there will be a considerable incentive for people to go south to shop. That will affect not just supermarkets or alcohol sellers but all small businesses in Dumfries and Galloway. Once people get to Carlisle, they will be inclined to use the other shops there as well, which will have a negative impact on small, independent businesses in Dumfries and Galloway, particularly in the east. I ask the Government not to run away from business and regulatory impact assessments just because they might provide evidence that is contrary to its policy objectives. It is important to make decisions on the basis of all the information and to understand how it might be possible to mitigate the consequences if the legislation is passed. I support better and more proportionate regulation, but I also support regulation as long as it fulfils the appropriate conditions and is in the greater public interest. I will therefore support—not surprisingly—the amendment in the name of Rhoda Grant.

I should perhaps declare an interest as somebody who threw out her constituency office carpet the other day for the second time in two years. Funding is important, but I wonder whether the Scottish Government can enable the sharing of good practice, because—to be quite frank—many local authorities struggle to find solutions to flooding problems.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the early advance copy of his statement. There is a striking disparity between the regulation to reduce fishing effort that was signed on 23 November and the normal EU bilateral agreement last week, which provided for the continuation of the catch quota scheme, albeit perhaps not with the expansion that the Scottish fleet wanted. Also remarkable is the degree of agreement between the Scottish Government, the UK Government, the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation, the RSPB and WWF in opposing Commission implementing regulation EU 1211/2011. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the withdrawal of the regulation illustrates Scotland’s strength in negotiation as part of the UK delegation? I suspect that he will not agree. Has research been commissioned in Europe to determine whether cuts in days at sea directly correlate with a reduction in fish mortality? Given that the withdrawn implementing regulation would also have affected France, Germany and Ireland, are ministers in the Scottish Government and UK Government working with counterparts in those states to support one another in opposing the regulation’s reintroduction? Are processes for consultation with stakeholders in Europe in place prior to the submission of any new regulation, particularly given Commissioner Damanaki’s comments about regionalisation and stakeholder participation with regard to reform of the common fisheries policy?

I congratulate Neil Findlay on bringing a topic to a member’s business debate that a large number of members feel strongly about. The issue has been a difficult one for many of us. There have been times when people who have said that there were problems with wind turbine developments have been said to be climate change deniers or not in favour of renewable energy, when that was not the case. However, we have to accept that there are significant problems with the dash for wind that has occurred over the past several years. In Dumfriesshire, my constituents are concerned not so much about wind farms as about the overconcentration of onshore wind farm applications that are now coming into the constituency. Many of my constituents, who, like Neil Findlay’s constituents, did not object to the original wind farm applications, now object to the number that are coming in on the back of those original developments. They have said, “Haven’t we done our bit here? We’ve already got all these wind farms. Do we need more?” It sounds as if many others, certainly in the south of Scotland, are having the same experience. Jim Hume mentioned two applications in his area. The straw that broke my back was the Harestanes application that came in before 2007. That application was for a massive industrial development of turbines striding across the hills over Moffat that was almost universally opposed by my constituents. I went to a public meeting about it that was mobbed by objectors, including members of the Green Party. Unfortunately, that development got permission in 2007 after the election. I felt slightly worried when I saw that there was one application in Alex Salmond’s constituency, one in John Swinney’s constituency, one in Karen Gillon’s constituency and one in my constituency. Unfortunately, Karen and I lost out. The Harestanes development is going to happen. However, it does not stop there. Applications are constantly being made for developments all the way up the Nith valley and right across the southern uplands. I do not want to look across the southern uplands and see them totally covered with wind farms. I support renewable energy but I do not want to see the destruction of our natural environment. I agree with the John Muir Trust that we should preserve our wild land, which is vitally important for recreation and our wellbeing. Let us preserve the habitats of some of our iconic species. We have to get the correct balance. Everyone who knows me knows that, since 1999, I have consistently argued for a balanced energy policy that includes nuclear energy. I am not going to rehearse the many arguments that I have made about that—I know that the governing party will not agree with me; in fact, some people in my own party do not agree with me. However, we need a policy that will keep the lights on and enable us to develop the political will to ensure that appropriate renewable energy is being developed rather than rushing for wind because it is easier. We also need to invest in carbon capture and storage technologies that will enable us to use some of our other natural resources; we need to press ahead with that. Some people have talked about offshore wind farming as if that is going to be easy, but just bunging the turbines into the sea is not going to get rid of all the problems. There are issues about the use of the sea, what people can see, tourism and all the other uses to which we put the sea that we discussed when passing the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010. Onshore and offshore technologies are easy and lucrative options for large multinational companies. I sometimes think that when those companies look at the Scottish hills all they see are pound signs. We have to make those options less attractive than other things such as investment in energy efficiency, low-carbon and active travel, and community and individual initiatives. I was upset by the way in which the UK Government changed the feed-in tariffs. We have to look at all the options and not just rush for wind, because it has caused a number of problems.

4. To ask the Scottish Executive how it assessed the future demand for agri-environment schemes when developing the current draft budget and spending review. (S4O-00392)

Does the Government have contingency plans if there is a surge in applications towards the end of the round? The minister may remember that that happened with the rural stewardship scheme as it came to an end. Can he reassure members that demand will not be managed down by changing criteria or cancelling schemes?

The first goal of the Durban conference must be to agree a second commitment period for the Kyoto protocol, or we will have no global targets after 2012. We know that the United States of America has not signed up and that Canada, Russia and Japan do not want to extend the commitment period and are instead focusing on targets for emerging countries such as China and India. The task is not going to be particularly easy for the UK delegation and our Scottish ministers. As others have said, climate change is a matter of climate justice. It affects us, but it most affects the poorest and most marginalised communities—those who, as Sarah Boyack said, contribute least to the problem. Those countries require funding through the United Nations for prevention, mitigation and adaptation measures. Scotland accounts for only 0.2 per cent of global emissions but, individually, we have some of the largest carbon footprints in the world. We cannot lecture others if we do not tackle our own overconsumption. Equally, we can put out the message that, although we produce only one five-hundredth of the world’s carbon emissions, we still understand our responsibilities and are prepared to take action and make difficult—and, let us face it, sometimes unpopular—decisions in the course of shouldering our responsibility to reduce our carbon emissions. Kyoto needs to be extended. However, a replacement must be negotiated by 2015 and I, too, believe that it needs to include legally binding global targets. Those targets should also include other emissions that are carbon contributors. The minister will be familiar with what I am going to say, as we spoke about the matter during the passage of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. The targets must include things such as chlorofluorocarbons and hydrochlorofluorocarbons, which were used as refrigerants and as blowing agents in plastic foam insulation prior to 2004 and which are now being released into the atmosphere when industrial buildings are demolished. Their carbon equivalents are some 300 million to 400 million times those of carbon dioxide, but they are not covered by the Kyoto protocol. Therefore, although we discussed them during our debates on the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, it was not possible to include them in the bill because they were not included in the Kyoto protocol. I hope that, as we look forward to 2015, any future agreement will consider some of those other compounds, which are very dangerous to our environment as well. Our amendment specifically mentions the statutory report on policies and proposals, which is a requirement of the 2009 act. The report states that the policies and proposals require to be fully funded if we are to reach the 2022 carbon emissions targets and that the EU needs to agree a 30 per cent reduction target. I am not arguing that the Scottish Government must fully fund them all or that that needs to be done within the current spending review period: this is not a funding demand; it is a statement of the Government’s own policy. At the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, the minister argued, correctly, that there are several partners who are responsible for funding and achieving the RPP: the Scottish Government, the UK Government, the European Union, the public sector, the private sector and—as Claudia Beamish and Annabelle Ewing said—communities and individuals. We need to be clear about who is responsible for what and how things are being funded. That is where the concern about the low-carbon transport budget, which Jenny Marra mentioned, comes in. At the moment, it is not clear how 94 per cent can be brought in from outside in one year or 90 per cent across the spending review cycle. Our amendment also mentions the increasing challenge, to which Patrick Harvie referred. We may be two thirds of the way to the 2020 carbon reduction target of 42 per cent, but that is, as others have said, partly due to the economic recession. If the euro zone collapses, we will probably easily meet the target because the economy will go down the toilet and we will all be in depression. That would be a pretty drastic way of meeting our target. Obviously, we all hope that the economy will recover, and we all agree that green jobs, renewables technologies and energy efficiency programmes will contribute significantly to recovery. However, economic recovery is also very likely to be accompanied by activities that generate carbon, such as construction, and when that happens we will need to bear down on other carbon reduction programmes so that we can continue to make progress. Graeme Dey made an important point about the recent reports that have indicated that, if we do not all do that, we will see increases in global temperatures of 3.5°C to 6°C. As it stands, the motion comes over as a bit complacent. It smacks slightly of lecturing others and seems to be making the claim that our experience already shows that action on climate change will create economic opportunities. The minister counteracted that in his speech when he talked about the potential for those opportunities. I agree that there is the potential for such opportunities, but I do not think that, two and a half years after the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill was passed, we can say that they will happen. As Patrick Harvie said, we must guard against the view that climate change adaptation is somehow all about economic advantage and not about the moral imperative to tackle climate change. Our credibility is undermined when the Government makes extravagant claims. Members have referred to the First Minister’s claim of a reduction of 700,000 tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions and the praise that he received from Al Gore. However, the Government’s deputy director for climate change was more honest and confirmed that the reduction to 2011 was 125,886 tonnes. Overclaiming does nothing for our credibility. I will support the Tory amendment, but I wish that I had more confidence in the UK Government’s commitment. Although David Cameron, before he was Prime Minister, was ferried around by dog sleds in the Arctic and cycled to work followed by a car that contained his shoes and briefcase, I do not see that commitment in the UK Government’s actions. I will give a couple of examples. I am concerned about the UK green deal because it relies on owner-occupiers taking out a loan for energy efficiency measures, rather than receiving a grant. The power companies have struggled with the uptake of the current scheme, so I do not think that, in a time of economic recession when people are worried about mortgages, wages and their futures, they will take out an extra loan for energy efficiency measures. I am appalled by the reduction in the feed-in tariff, to which Claudia Beamish referred. Energy efficiency measures and microgeneration are essential. Those actions by the UK Government destroy its credibility. I have gone on so much about that that I do not have much time left.

Good. I thought that I was overrunning a little. Sarah Boyack mentioned the importance of peatlands and tropical forests. Rob Gibson has a passion for peatlands, which I think is shared by the minister. I hope that progress will be made on that in Durban. I do not know whether the minister will have an answer to this but, given the announcements on the fossil fuel levy, will change at Durban enable us to use some of that additional money for peatlands? The International Union for Conservation of Nature UK peatland programme estimates that we need expenditure of about £15 million a year. Is the fossil fuel levy a possible source of that extra funding? There has been a lot of debate about transport. Claudia Beamish, Alison McInnes and Malcolm Chisholm referred to concerns about the active travel budget, which is decreasing while the motorways and trunk roads budget is increasing. Surely money could be transferred from the motorways and trunk roads budget, which does nothing to tackle climate change, to the active travel budget, which does a lot to tackle climate change and to improve people’s health and wellbeing. At present, less than 5 per cent of public transport vehicles use alternative fuels, but the SNP manifesto indicated an aspiration to have 100 per cent of those vehicles being fuelled in that way. Does the Government see a way of doing that in the next four and a half years, given the budgets in the spending review? Malcolm Chisholm briefly touched on biomass. In some places, it makes sense to use biomass. In my constituency, forestry off-cuts from sawmills that are literally next door can be used. However, I see no sense in importing wood from other parts of the country or the world to burn in Scotland. How does a market for that type of thing influence land use policies in other countries? I wish the minister all the best when he gets to Durban and I hope that he comes back to the Parliament with good news for us all.

The place in question is in my constituency. What sort of consultation would the minister expect to take place with the community about the application of such techniques? All that happened in Canonbie was an application to drill boreholes to find out how much coal gas is there. With a technique as controversial as hydraulic fracturing, would the minister expect that there should be consultation with and information for the community? People will be quite frightened by some of the information that has come out in the past few days.

As 11 November approaches, it is, as other members have said, fitting that this Parliament remembers the sacrifices made by the men and women of the Scottish armed forces in conflicts past and present, during wartime and in their peacekeeping role, and recalls the suffering of their families and friends in their ever-present concern about their loved ones’ wellbeing—and, for some, in receiving the worst possible news. Although we might as individuals have reservations about decisions to get involved in certain conflicts—I found it impossible to support my own Government over Iraq—any such reservations must never diminish the respect and gratitude that we owe our service personnel for their courage in carrying out the consequences of those decisions. In my first ever members business’ debate, which fell on the last armistice day of the 20th century, I sought an official pardon for the 39 Scottish soldiers and 260 soldiers from other parts of the British empire who were shot during the first world war for so-called cowardice—or what we now recognise as post-traumatic stress. Indeed, I think that that is the members’ business debate for which I have received most cross-party support. I am glad to say that a pardon was eventually announced by the then Secretary of State for Defence, Des Browne, in 2006. It was a long time coming, but it happened in the end. Over the past century, we have come to understand that the scars our veterans bear can be psychological as well as physical. However, because the psychological scars are less clearly visible, the suffering that they cause is still not always well recognised. I wonder why that is—but then, of course, warfare has changed, from the battlefield warfare of previous generations, to the constant fear of death that may come from wherever. In the trenches of the first world war, people did not know when the shells were coming; in Afghanistan, people do not know when the sniper will fire, or when there will be a roadside bomb. That constant threat is bound to have a psychological effect on people. As Richard Simpson said, the consequence of that pressure can persist for many years after active service has finished. It can result in mental ill health and addiction problems. Two of the persistent street drinkers in the town of Dumfries are former servicemen. Another, who has since died of his addictions, became a heroin addict and an alcoholic, and was often seen selling The Big Issue in the town. It is easy for us to condemn the antisocial behaviour that can result from those addictions, but the veterans’ addictions were the consequences of their experiences in the service of their country. They deserve far more than just our condemnation. Fortunately, as others have said, many organisations are determined to make life better for our veterans. I pay tribute to a good friend and colleague of mine—Councillor Archie Dryburgh—who is Dumfries and Galloway Council’s veterans champion. Archie is a veteran himself, having served in Northern Ireland, and his son is on active service in Afghanistan. Archie is very proud of his military bearing. I have been on the campaign trail with him, and it is easy to tell that he is a military man from the way in which he campaigns—he works people very hard. Archie has worked closely with Dumfries and Galloway Housing Partnership, which I believe is the first in Scotland to introduce a housing list for veterans—rather than simply dealing with veterans by accommodating them via the homelessness route. I understand that Glasgow Housing Association will shortly be announcing a similar policy, but DGHP got there first. I say “well done” to the people involved. A total of 1 per cent of DGHP properties each year—around 10 or 12—will be allocated to service personnel and their families. To qualify to join the list, applicants must be within one year of full discharge, within 6 months of having been discharged, or the surviving spouse or partner of a member of the armed forces who has died within the past six months. Among other things, that means that members of the armed services and their families will no longer have to become homeless after leaving the services, and will be able to transfer directly from their services accommodation to a registered social landlord. Another example of good practice from my constituency is run by First Base Agency—not firm base but First Base—which has been working closely with Dumfries and Galloway Council. First Base Agency was formed to offer drug and alcohol addiction support services, especially to the families of people with addiction problems, although it is now involved in a number of other projects. The original contact with veterans involved those with addiction problems—mainly men aged 40 or over with service in Northern Ireland and Bosnia. At first, First Base provided them with a get-together over a fortnightly meal, but it then expanded its help. Members who know Dumfries and Galloway may know of a former country house called Carnsalloch House in Kirkmahoe near Dumfries. It was purchased recently. The owner wanted to develop the ground for housing but was unable to get planning permission because it was on a flood plain. He therefore agreed to make the walled garden available to First Base for its veterans project. The veterans now grow vegetables, some of which go towards the food parcels that First Base provides to homeless people in crisis. The veterans also have a market for their vegetables, through one of the farm shops in Dumfries. They have also established a flock of free-range chickens, which produce eggs for sale at—I must say—considerably less than supermarket prices. I can well recommend them. There is also a log project, which involves the chopping and selling of logs provided by the Forestry Commission. Again, those are sold for around half the price of commercially produced logs. The projects aim to be self-financing. First Base is also considering the possibility of offering veterans from outwith Dumfries and Galloway the chance to come and stay and do some work. The debate has been an opportunity for me not only to highlight some local initiatives that complement the actions that Government is taking to support our veterans, but to reflect on those things as we come up to remembrance day.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive whether tenant farmers relinquishing their tenancies have a right to compensation for investment made in their farms and, if so, whether the Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) Scotland Bill will alter this. (S4O-00303)

May I ask the cabinet secretary for some advice on behalf of a tenant farmer in my constituency who wishes to leave his tenancy because of ill health? He has a 1944 lease, I believe, and he has invested some £200,000 in his farm over that time. The factor for the landowner has basically said that they cannot afford—

I am asking the cabinet secretary for his advice. Does somebody in that situation have any right to compensation, or can the landowner just say that they cannot afford it and tell them to go away?

11. To ask the Scottish Executive how planned reductions in the national health service workforce will impact on newly qualified nurses and midwives. (S4O-00258)

The cabinet secretary may recall previous correspondence regarding a constituent of mine who is a recently graduated nurse who has experienced considerable difficulty in gaining employment, particularly in Dumfries and Galloway. Does the cabinet secretary share my concern that the workforce reductions in Dumfries and Galloway—70 whole-time equivalent nurses and midwives this year, on top of the 57.7 that have been lost since 2009—will make it even more difficult for recent graduates to find full-time, permanent employment in nursing and midwifery? I hear what she says about internships and temporary ameliorations that she can introduce. How can we tackle the future for recent graduates who want to establish a career in nursing and midwifery but may find it more difficult as the workforce reduces?

I congratulate Christine Grahame on getting her motion debated in Parliament. I apologise for the state of my voice and because I may have to leave before the end of the debate to catch a train. I apologise to the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs if I have to do that. I did not actually sign Christine Grahame’s motion, because my constituents would probably look askance if I signed a motion suggesting that I support Galashiels as one of the licence locations: there is a strong feeling in Dumfries and Galloway that there should be such a location there. I used to be quite happy with Border Television from Carlisle, which is the local city for most of my constituents. People were perfectly happy to hear what is going on in Carlisle, and we use its services and facilities quite a lot. Indeed, if minimum unit pricing for alcohol is introduced in Scotland, I suspect that my constituents will use Carlisle’s facilities considerably more than they do now—but that is a debate for another time. The local opt-outs on Border Television ensured that Dumfries and Galloway issues were regularly highlighted and, indeed, politicians of all Scottish parties were often interviewed in that regard. I am sure that Alex and Christine can remember the times when we were brought together to talk about the Scottish budget or whatever, and we had coverage from local television that was envied by many of our colleagues in other parts of Scotland. The general issues in our areas also got a lot of coverage. Unfortunately, since the merger with Tyne Tees in 2009, the situation has gradually deteriorated. We sometimes get good coverage, but mostly the news is local to north-east England and is of little relevance to people living in south-west Scotland. We now get a sort of Newcastle news. I used to resist the notion that the Border Television area in Scotland should be taken over by STV, because I felt that, like the BBC, it would tend to offer Scottish city news. It is not surprising that that happens, because most people in Scotland live in and around the cities. My constituents would rather hear what is going on locally, but in fact they are not hearing that. As I said, they are hearing Newcastle news now rather than Glasgow news or Edinburgh news, and it is not particularly relevant. There is therefore now a pressing need for a local television channel. I was quite hopeful in that regard, because the previous UK Government proposed to use some of the remaining digital switchover funding to develop local opt-outs on channel 3. Several strong bids were being developed in Dumfries and Galloway, including one that was headed up by one of the local newspapers. However, the current Government had a different policy, and Jeremy Hunt’s proposals are probably now the alternative to using the switchover funding in that way. On 25 August, Dumfries and Galloway Council agreed to make a submission to the consultation calling on the Government to include Dumfries and Galloway in its list of potential areas. There was a counter-proposal from a Conservative council to support the Carlisle bid. That would have helped many of my constituents, but only 50 per cent of Dumfries and Galloway would be covered from Carlisle because only 50 per cent of the area gets the direct signal from the Caldbeck transmitter, and there was no proposal in the Department for Culture, Media and Sport framework to include relays. There is the potential, through the south of Scotland broadband delivery bid, for us to do exactly what Christine Grahame described and develop a local TV channel through broadband. That is but one alternative among others, but I am sorry that the Government does not have an option at the moment that is suitable for south-west Scotland. However, there is potential if we go forward with superfast broadband.

Yes, I was.

As the cabinet secretary said, the widespread consensus has been that the common fisheries policy has not worked. It has not produced sustainable fisheries—many are still overfished; it has not worked for the EU market or for fishermen, many of whom cannot make a living; and it has been criticised by fishermen, environmentalists, politicians and now the Commission. The policy has presented particular problems for the Scottish fleet—for example, the maximum sustainable yield for single species has been extremely problematic and unreliable in mixed fisheries, in which many of our fleet operate. I apologise to Alex Fergusson for my amendment being picked, because I know that he submitted one similar to mine. I hope that he will find it possible to agree to our amendment. I am slightly surprised that much of the cabinet secretary’s speech was about problems with the current policy and that he spoke a little less about his reaction to the EU’s reform proposals, which were much anticipated. In July, Commissioner Damanaki outlined the basic principles, which I will run through, as we have not said much about them. The measures are: bringing all stocks to sustainable levels by 2015, which is a bit of a big ask; taking an ecosystem approach that is based on the best scientific advice; phasing out discarding over three years; introducing individual tradeable catches in member states; providing better information for consumers; using solutions that are tailored to regional and local needs and which involve a stronger role for fishermen’s organisations in making economic decisions about the fleet size and market supply; restricting financial support only to initiatives that promote “smart and sustainable growth”; and including aquaculture in the reformed policy, as the cabinet secretary said. The European Parliament’s Fisheries Committee has yet to commence consideration of the proposals. The allocation of reports was delayed at the committee’s meeting on 31 July because of an argument that grew up between the groups on that committee about the distribution of reports—who could bid for the reports was apparently discussed. The reports were to be allocated at the further meeting last Monday, but that had—unfortunately—to be cancelled because of a power cut that resulted from a fire in a transformer. I hope that the committee has better luck in beginning to consider the proposals in the future. As always with the common fisheries policy, the new proposals have not met with universal approval, although there has been a general welcome for the direction of travel. Of course, it is the detail of the proposals that will be important. That is one concern for the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation and environmental organisations. The SFF said in an article in its newsletter in the summer: “how exactly we are to move from hell”— that is, the current position— “to heaven while retaining a viable fishing industry ... has yet to be filled in.” The RSPB states: “A striking key feature of the proposal is its vagueness in many areas repeatedly prompting the question ‘who should do what and by when?’” WWF Scotland states: “crucial delivery mechanisms, time-frames and responsibilities ... are still lacking”. Scottish Labour welcomes many of the Commission’s proposals. We are in favour of an ecosystem approach that delivers a long-term and sustainable future for the Scottish fleet and enhances the biodiversity of our seas. That is easy to say, but a lot less easy to do. To do it, the EU must invest in the science on which decisions are based, and all stakeholders need to be confident that the science is well founded and correct. We support the regional management of fisheries, through which nations that border a sea work together with their stakeholders to protect biodiversity and promote a sustainable industry with a long-term future. We agree with the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation that co-operation with other states will be required to make the most appropriate regulation. At times, the Scottish Government’s approach to the CFP appears to be rather at odds with its policies on an independent Scotland with membership of the EU. For example, the Government’s response to the interim green paper on CFP reform in 2009 stated: “The Scottish Government aims to manage Scottish fisheries outwith the Common Fisheries Policy.” On several occasions, the cabinet secretary has referred to repatriating fishing policy. I might be mistaken, but I do not believe that that is possible while retaining membership of the EU. We know from what the First Minister said in “Your Scotland, Your Voice: A National Conversation” that the Government’s intention is that an independent Scotland would be a member of the European Union. The Lisbon treaty states that the European Union “shall define and implement a common agriculture and fisheries policy”, which will be established by the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers. So if an independent Scotland joined the EU, it would have to adhere to the common fisheries policy. It could of course negotiate for itself as one of a large number of nations—probably at least 36 by the time that an independent Scotland joined. By that time, another 96 million citizens will quite possibly have joined the 495 million who are already in the EU. I suspect that Scotland’s number of members of the European Parliament would remain at about six out of 750. I and my colleagues in the Labour Party fail to understand how that would better protect the interests of the Scottish fleet or of Scottish aquaculture than being the predominant interest, as those issues should be, for the much larger UK delegation. Surely, the best way in which to protect the Scottish industry is to work to persuade our UK colleagues that the Scottish interest is also the UK interest.

No, not necessarily. I have only ever been at one Council of Ministers meeting, so I bow to the cabinet secretary’s experience on that, but the issue depends on the interest. Our fleet does not have much in common with the artisanal fleets of the Mediterranean. The small countries in the Mediterranean have a common interest that we do not share, but we should have a common interest with our UK colleagues. That is why I believe that we can negotiate better from within the UK. Two thirds of the volume of fish that is landed in the UK is landed by the Scottish fleet; the most valuable nephrops and mackerel fisheries lie in Scottish waters; and Scotland is the largest producer of farmed salmon in the EU, and currently the second largest in the world because of the problems that Chile is having, so it should not be impossible to persuade the UK that that is the UK’s interest. The Scottish aquaculture industry should be a major participant in the creation of the advisory council for aquaculture that is proposed in the reform package. Negotiation as part of the UK member state is the situation in which CFP reform will be considered, as it will be introduced by January 2013. Hence the need, mentioned in our amendment and in the one that Alex Fergusson lodged, to work with the UK Government in Scotland’s interests.

That depends on the detail of the proposals. As I said, the proposals lack detail at the moment. However, there are opportunities in there because of the strength of the Scottish aquaculture sector. Indeed, bodies such as the Scottish Salmon Producers Organisation recognise those possibilities. I do not care whether it is a UK or a Scottish minister who takes the lead. What I really care about is that whoever does so has a real commitment to the Scottish fishing industry for the long term and to the biodiversity and health of our seas. I mentioned regionalisation as one of the areas of consensus. I was therefore concerned to hear in evidence to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee last week that the Commission’s legal service has since said that any meaningful devolution at all, even to regional management, would be in breach of the treaties. That needs urgent clarification. There are problems, too, with individual transferable quotas. Although the commissioner believes that the proposals offer safeguards, the committee heard evidence suggesting that articles 31.2 and 32 of the proposed regulation could allow member states to authorise transfer to other member states. There would be inherent dangers for the Scottish industry if trading of quotas is not constrained to within member states and remains voluntary. The purchase of quotas could lead to the industry becoming concentrated under the control of large operators that may choose not to land catch in smaller fishing ports and instead transport it directly to larger centres of distribution, with the consequent loss of onshore activity and employment in rural areas. My colleague Claudia Beamish will explore that issue. How much more time do I have, Presiding Officer?

Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall’s “Hugh’s Fish Fight” has brought the issue of discarding unlandable fish to public attention across the EU, although it has been an issue of concern for fishermen and politicians for many years. We just do not have the clout of celebrity chefs. No one likes the idea of catching and killing fish just to throw them back overboard, but the solution is not as simple as it might at first appear. For example the SFF has stated that, although it abhors discarding, “in the complex mixed fisheries that our fleet operates in it is totally impracticable to ban discards altogether.” Taking the approach of landing everything will not address the issues of sustainable stocks and biodiversity. Discards are not only the “good quality fish being dumped overboard”, as the cabinet secretary described them in Scotland on Sunday. They may also be juvenile fish or species that we should not be landing at all. We must avoid creating a market in those fish; doing so would go against everything that we are trying to do for sustainability. The principle must be to avoid catching them and measures applied by Scottish fishermen, such as real-time fishing closures, selective fishing gear and the use of closed-circuit television cameras on boats, are essential. We should have proper incentives for our fishermen to avoid discarding altogether. The common fisheries policy reforms are due to come into force in January 2013. Some of the proposals are to be welcomed; others carry a health warning and need considerable clarification. No doubt there will be much discussion in Europe—when the fisheries council eventually manages to start discussing it—and in the member states over the next year. Our aim in Scotland must be to secure the long-term future of the Scottish fishing industry, the Scottish aquaculture industry and the long-term health of our seas. The Scottish Government does not even plan to have had its independence referendum by the time the new CFP comes into effect, so it will have to work closely with the UK Government to secure the best possible deal. It would be unforgivable if that was sacrificed in order to score constitutional points or to pick fights with Westminster. I do not like the current Westminster Government any more than the cabinet secretary, but it is necessary for both Governments to work together for the Scottish industry. The industry is too important to be used as a stepping stone to independence. This is not about constitutional reform; it is about an essential and much-respected Scottish industry. I move amendment S4M-00904.1, to insert at end: “; however recognises that these discussions will be undertaken by the UK as a member state, and therefore urges the Scottish Government to work closely with the UK Government to ensure that the long-term interests of the Scottish fishing and aquaculture industries and Scotland’s marine environment are at the centre of the forthcoming discussions on reform.”

Does the member accept that, as a common fisheries policy will be implemented in January 2013 and the SNP will not even have had its referendum by then, the UK as the national state will have to negotiate and therefore the most important thing that we can do is to convince the UK that the Scottish interest is its interest? That is the purpose of our amendment.

I am slightly confused by Alex Johnstone’s reference to Murdo Fraser, because I thought that Murdo Fraser’s new party would advocate withdrawal from the CFP.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will review the eligibility criteria for exemptions from the payment of water rates. (S4O-00178)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his reply and Stewart Stevenson for the written response that I received yesterday. When the minister considers the new scheme, I ask him to bear in mind the example of Dryfesdale lodge visitor centre at Lockerbie cemetery, which is run by a charity that was set up in 2003. It has information on the area, but also acts as the gateway to the memorial that commemorates the victims of Pan Am flight 103, which means that it welcomes quite a number of overseas visitors who come to the memorial to their relatives. That charity pays more than £10,000 in water rates. If a new scheme comes in, and exemptions continue, will the minister ensure that eligible recently constituted charities such as that one can be included?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Excuse me, I have a mint in my mouth—I did not realise that I was about to be called. [Laughter.] In the area of rural affairs, climate change and the environment—which is covered by the committee on which I sit—a couple of bills were mentioned in the First Minister’s statement yesterday. It is no surprise that an agricultural holdings bill is imminent, as it will complete business to do with succession by grandchildren and issues around rent reviews and appeals to the Scottish Land Court that could not be dealt with by regulation in the previous session of Parliament. However, tenant farmers may be disappointed that there is no commitment to consolidation of the legislation on agricultural holdings. The First Minister also mentioned an aquaculture and fisheries bill to deal with aquaculture, wild fish and sea fisheries. We know that there are significant areas of conflict between those sectors. Indeed, it is extremely unlikely that fin-fish aquaculture can continue to expand in rivers that are important for wild stock, at least not with the current containment methods. Fin-fish aquaculture needs to be controlled in those areas in order to protect wild fisheries, which are also important to Scotland’s economy. There are rumours—I do not know how substantiated they are—that, although much of the aquaculture industry in Scotland is Norwegian owned, the protection for wild fish in Scotland is not the same as it is in Norway. I hope that that issue may be looked at in discussing the bill. However, despite the First Minister’s mention of a bill in his speech yesterday, the document that supports the statement, “Renewing Scotland: The Government’s Programme for Scotland 2011-2012”, speaks of “developing consultation proposals with a view to legislation” rather than the introduction of a bill. Maybe that could be clarified. A water bill, which was promised last year but not introduced, has also resurfaced with a commitment to making Scotland a “Hydro-Nation”—although I am not quite sure what that actually means. Of course it is vital that Scottish Water plays a full role in economic growth, and that is not only about the potential for hydro or other renewable forms of power generation: there are other possibilities for Scottish Water to become involved as an economic tool. However, Scottish Water is a public agency and has a biodiversity duty. Its role as a tool of economic growth should not be at the expense of its role as a major environmental asset. On renewables, let me say that I am little concerned about the rush for offshore wind. It rather reminds me of the dash for onshore wind, which we all indulged in but which has had consequences that have been deleterious to other parts of the economy. We do not need to put all our faith in silver bullets such as offshore wind or carbon capture and storage and assume that they will meet all our economic and climate obligations. Offshore renewables have impacts on our communities, on other industries such as fishing and on wildlife and habitats. Let us not make some of the mistakes that we have made with onshore wind. Other methods of climate mitigation such as energy efficiency, reduction in consumption, alternative forms of transport and improved communications are essential to achieving our climate change targets, and they must not be secondary to the shibboleth that is offshore wind. Some bills, such as the referendum bill, are conspicuous by their absence. There is no mention, for example, of a sustainable procurement bill—despite the SNP’s manifesto promise of a clear legislative programme for procurement decisions to support the greater use of social and environmental benefits. Prior to the election, the First Minister claimed that that could deliver savings of more than £400 million over three years. If the current framework is not sufficiently clear to enable that, should not the bill have been a priority? Many stakeholders with interests in environmental and social benefits to communities are disappointed that nothing is planned this year. I am not suggesting that everything in the manifesto should be done in the first year, but I would have thought that that bill would be a priority. The SNP also made promises on allotments. As we know, waiting lists for allotments are increasing, and there was a commitment to bring allotments legislation up to date to allow for the sale of surplus produce and to extend the availability of land for allotment use. This may seem a fairly minor point, but there is significant interest in allotments and in people growing their own food. That can contribute considerably to people’s understanding of healthy eating, and it can be very useful in educating children about where their food comes from. I also believe that it can play a significant role in tackling obesity. Of course the legislative programme includes secondary as well as primary legislation, and I would like to comment on the zero waste regulations. I support the principles behind some of the suggestions. Secondary legislation is likely to be introduced to require source segregation and separate collection of specified waste materials, to prohibit recombining separately collected waste and to ban using recyclable materials in energy-from-waste facilities. In principle, all of that is great, but there will be a tremendous headache for some local authorities such as Dumfries and Galloway Council. The council is five years into a 25-year contract with Shanks, which sorts waste mechanically at an Ecodeco plant and recycles materials. It also uses combustible materials, such as paper and plastics, to produce solid recovered fuel. The private finance initiative agreement was signed off by Mr Lochhead’s predecessor and was an acceptable method of reducing waste going to landfill at that time.

A number of local authorities may have problems with the regulations—which they undertook in good faith. When—

Can we look at—

I, too, congratulate Aileen McLeod on securing her first members’ business debate to celebrate the savour the flavours food festival in Dumfries and Galloway. Last year, the Scottish Government sponsored a debate on Scottish food fortnight, in which I highlighted that food festival, so it is good to return to the topic a year later. That debate coincided with the Pope’s visit to Scotland and I remember grumbling that too few people would be involved in the discussion. The food festival is even bigger this year—it involves 92 events over 16 days and covers the whole region, including Moffat, Sanquhar, Thornhill, Langholm, Gretna, Annan and Dumfries. I could go right round my constituency eating for the next few days but, as I am shorter than Alex Fergusson, doing that might have a worse effect on my weight than it would on his. It is important that savour the flavours is led by the industry but supported by Dumfries and Galloway Council and the LEADER programme, which granted a two-year funding package. The organisation supports producers, manufacturers and retailers and encourages food outlets, which include restaurants, hotels and cafes, to do exactly what Rob Gibson described—to use and advertise their use of local produce. Savour the flavours encourages local people and visitors to the area to try our local food and has an important role in educating children about local produce, how food is produced and the value of good food. The organisation encourages people to eat local, which is important to reducing food miles. If anybody has looked, they will know that the savour the flavours website is excellent. It links to local suppliers with which people can place orders for food. For lucky people such as me, who have the great privilege of living in Dumfries and Galloway, some suppliers will deliver orders for free on some days of the week. The festival is important to local industries, producers, processors, retailers and tourism links in the region, but it is wider than that—it promotes the appreciation of quality food. As I said last year—I say sorry to the cabinet secretary for repeating myself—that is important to matters such as the fight against obesity. If people are encouraged to eat less but better-quality food, that benefits their health, as well as being a much more enjoyable experience. We need the supermarkets and big retailers, as well as small independent retailers, to do what Asda is doing and commit to having local produce on their shelves, as Rob Gibson described. Retailers should sell smaller portion sizes so that people can afford to buy quality food, and they should provide for the needs of single people. As we have touched on previously in the Parliament, single people are often not catered for by food markets. We also need a labelling scheme that gives consumers confidence that they are buying local produce. I want to touch on the issue of abattoirs, which Alex Fergusson did not have time for. We need local abattoirs and local processing facilities to ensure that all stages of the food process are local. In the previous session of Parliament, we discussed concerns that the Food Standards Agency’s proposals on abattoir charges might have a deleterious effect on local abattoirs such as the one in Lockerbie and could make it less likely that animals will be slaughtered locally. There is no sense in having locally produced lamb or beef that has to travel to the other end of the country to be slaughtered and then travel somewhere else to be processed and then back again to be sold. I ask the cabinet secretary to update us on what has happened on that issue because, to an extent, I have lost sight of the concerns. I do not know whether the issue has been resolved, but it is important if we are to reduce food miles and ensure that local food really is local.

Due to the welcome delay to stages 2 and 3 of the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill, the first term of the Parliament is ending with an unexpected debate on rural connectivity. Addressing digital exclusion is an increasingly important issue, so it is, in a way, a pity that the debate has been scheduled for an afternoon when many MSPs from the two largest parties perhaps have business elsewhere. I decided to lodge an amendment to the motion not because I disagree with its aspirations, but because, quite frankly, I feel that it is very badly expressed—to the extent that it does not even mention the name of the Government’s digital strategy document. I was tempted to amend the part about welcoming the Government’s wish—which is a curious concept for a parliamentary motion—but who could disagree with a desire for a “rural Scotland that is outward looking and dynamic with a diverse economy and active communities”? So, I desisted from putting my red pen through that part of the motion. However, I could not resist amending the rest of the motion because it is, frankly, waffle. The purpose of a strategy is to plan how to make things happen and not just to wish things to happen. I do not understand why ministers should be coy on the issue. The motion does not mention the name of the strategy document or its aspirations to deliver next-generation broadband to all by 2020. Even more strangely, the motion does not mention the £50 million commitment from the Scottish futures fund. I have not corrected that omission in my amendment, although I think that I have bigged up the Government enough in my amendment, as it is. Most important, however, is that the motion and, to an extent, the strategy document do not seem to acknowledge adequately the pressing nature of the problem or the possible solutions. In that respect, the Royal Society of Edinburgh’s “Digital Scotland” report and Reform Scotland’s “Digital Power” report, both of which were published last year, make much stronger contributions. The strategy is high in aspiration and mentions many of the benefits that new technologies can bring, including efficiency savings for public services through simplified recruitment and e-procurement. Technology can also provide the public with better information from, access to and interaction with service providers. Telehealth care can help people remain for longer in their homes, for example, through health and fitness monitors that are connected to call centres to access medical assistance. Technology can allow housebound people to maintain social contact. E-learning provides training opportunities for people who live in geographically remote communities and who would otherwise have difficulty attending colleges or universities. Telecommuting can enable people to work from home and to work flexible hours. That benefits workers in rural areas, reduces car travel to work and enables people who have caring responsibilities to re-enter or enter the workplace. Businesses, too, can benefit from reductions in transaction costs, access to global markets, improved data collection and analysis, and better interaction with their customers. “Scotland’s Digital Future: A Strategy for Scotland” contains many examples of the benefits of digital access and several examples of good practice. For example, Innerleithen is to be congratulated on being one of the six winners, and the only one in Scotland, of BT’s race to infinity campaign, which will result in the town’s exchange being upgraded to 40 megabytes per second by early next year. Highlands and Islands Enterprise is to be congratulated on its successful bid to broadband delivery UK to implement one of the four UK superfast broadband pilots. I issue those congratulations through slightly gritted teeth, as the south of Scotland alliance also bid for the project but was not successful. However, the Government is working with partners in the south of Scotland to deliver a local broadband plan, building on the pathfinder project. A wee problem with the pathfinder project is that, unfortunately although it has delivered for the public sector, small and medium-sized enterprises are unable to access it because of state-aid rules. The cabinet secretary mentioned the new initiative in Annan in my constituency. The strategy is too vague. I welcome the ambition to make “next generation broadband ... available to all by 2020”, but even that is a bit unspecific. It does not indicate what speed is considered to be the next generation or what “available to all” means. BT and Virgin Media are rolling out upgrades that are capable of delivering between 40 megabytes per second and 100 megabytes per second to more than 50 per cent of the UK by next year and to 65 per cent by 2015. However, an estimated 40 per cent of the Scottish population will be excluded from the plans because their inclusion would not be commercially viable.

I apologise, although I think that the proportions remain the same. At present, the average connection speed in rural areas of the UK is 27 megabits per second. Rural communications could enjoy particular benefits through telehealth care, e-training and telecommuting. Members should just consider how disadvantaged those communities will be if their broadband delivery speeds are one fifteenth to one fortieth as fast as speeds in parts of the central belt and the rest of the UK. The issue is not just a rural one because some suburban communities outside cities have limited broadband access, and it is well known that access is low in areas of deprivation. Page 34 of the strategy states: “There could be a role for government in helping to raise demand for broadband services in areas that are not commercially viable”— such as rural areas— “to a level that will trigger industry investment.” What about areas in which there are just too few people to provide that demand, or even where people might want it but cannot afford it? Of course, it is not only fibre optic cable broadband that is unavailable in much of Scotland. As the cabinet secretary said, 3G mobile coverage is also patchy. The digital strategy recognises that rural areas will suffer if left to the market alone and that there is a need to develop a robust plan for the roll-out of next-generation broadband across Scotland. Its summary of actions indicates that a more detailed financial analysis of the cost of roll-out will be carried out by August this year and that, in October, working with industry, priority areas will be identified for future intervention. When he sums up, the minister might be able to advise us what will happen after that. A lot of detailed work on cost and possible models of public sector involvement was published in 2010. One of the issues that were flagged up by Reform Scotland, the Royal Society of Edinburgh and BT as militating against investment in rural areas concerned business rates on optical fibre, which is currently rated by the kilometre. Clearly, that adds to the cost per consumer in more remote and less populated areas, so I wonder whether ministers have given any consideration to how that issue might be resolved. There are many examples of good practice in other parts of the UK, such as in Wales, and in other parts of the world, including in New Zealand, Sweden and Finland. The Royal Society of Edinburgh’s document, “Digital Scotland”, estimates that an additional 2,500km of new cable is required to link all our communities. The cost for rural areas varies between £15 and £40 per kilometre, depending on whether existing trunking can be used or whether new trunking and cabling has to be laid alongside roads. Those costs are substantiated by the Welsh experience, and lead to an estimate of £100 million of initial capital—

Indeed I am, and those aspects come into the Royal Society of Edinburgh’s calculations. At the moment, however, I am talking about the initial part, which is the rolling out of high-speed broadband. About £10 million a year will be required for operations and maintenance. If connection charges are taken into consideration, the funding costs average about £25 million a year, over 15 years. That investment would bring a rural fibre optic connection to all communities that have populations of more than 2,000, and a copper or wireless connection to the smaller communities, which relates to Fiona McLeod’s point. The Royal Society of Edinburgh reckons that that could be implemented over five years, with investment reaching islands and remote communities in years 4 and 5. That means that, if we want it, we could have that in place by the end of this parliamentary term. The Royal Society of Edinburgh suggests that the costs could be met by a number of methods. Businesses could be charged £25 a year, domestic users could be charged £125 a year or council tax or business rates could be increased by 1.25 per cent. Alternatively, it could be met through the efficiency savings that new-generation technologies could provide. The total budget of the health and wellbeing department is £11.8 billion this year, and the grant-aided expenditure of local government is £11.2 billion. An efficiency saving of slightly more than 0.2 per cent would fund the investment in new-generation technology across Scotland. The Scottish Government has already committed £50 million to new-generation activity through the Scottish Futures Trust. That is halfway towards the initial capital cost. The idea that we are talking about is doable. If it is not done, Scotland will continue to fall behind. This matter must be addressed as a matter of priority. Investment will provide better services for Scottish residents, efficiency savings for the public sector and global opportunities for rural businesses. The time for warm and woolly words is over. Let us get on with making this happen. I move amendment S4M-00448.2, to leave out from “and notes” to end and insert: “; welcomes the aspiration expressed in Scotland’s Digital Future: A Strategy for Scotland that next generation broadband will be available to all by 2020; notes however that market forces alone will not deliver next generation broadband and mobile phone access to much of rural and suburban Scotland and that without public sector involvement the digital gap will widen, and therefore urges the Scottish Government to develop its strategy for investment in the necessary infrastructure throughout Scotland as a matter of priority.”

5. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government will take to provide confidence to investors in light of the report by the Ernst and Young Scottish ITEM club that the prospect of continuing constitutional change could put Scotland at an economic disadvantage. (S4F-00073)

Indeed, the Ernst and Young report is extremely interesting. It points out, for example, that the public sector in Scotland began to cut jobs well before overall public spending constraints were introduced. It is a very interesting report indeed. However, if we can get back to the economic recovery—

I will go for a question. The ITEM club report identified business investment as the key driver for growth. For the sake of the Scottish economy and investment and employment in Scotland, will the First Minister act to reduce uncertainty and increase confidence, through the early introduction of a referendum bill? A promise delivered on early is not a promise broken. [Interruption.]

Will the First Minister include the referendum bill in his statement to the Parliament on the legislative programme, in September?

I am pleased to be summing up for the Labour Party in the first debate on rural affairs, climate change and the environment in the fourth session of Parliament. I, too, congratulate Richard Lochhead on his reappointment as cabinet secretary and Stewart Stevenson on his appointment as minister for such an extensive and important portfolio. I am sure that we will hear how his extensive life experiences contribute to his performance in the role. The portfolio certainly contains many challenges for the next five years, as many members have ably demonstrated during the debate. The EU’s common agricultural policy is due for reform in two years, and among the many issues that have been raised today is the recent rumour that the EU might be considering the abolition of pillar 2 support, which funds programmes such as the SRDP and rewards farmers, crofters and others for environmentally friendly land management. I believe that that must be resisted, and I would like the minister to reassure us that his team is working closely with the UK Government to resist any such move. In addition, I hope that our ministers, at least, will support the greening of pillar 1 by linking payments to environmental as well as agricultural outcomes. Similarly, the CFP must be reformed in the same timescale. We have often debated the need for a more regional policy-making process, and how the Scottish fishing industry can become sustainable in the long term and cease to be subject to crisis management. Both this afternoon and at the RACCE committee this morning, the cabinet secretary spoke about returning management from Brussels to Scotland, but my understanding of regional management is that it involves the management of shared seas on a regional basis rather than individual member states or regions managing their own seas. Sarah Boyack and Jackson Carlaw mentioned that the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 celebrates its second birthday this week. Progress needs to be made with its implementation. According to Friends of the Earth, the Government’s report on proposals and policies reveals that only three of the 12 targets can be met through existing policies, so proposals must be transformed into policies with some urgency. I do not often agree with Jackson Carlaw but, on this occasion, I agreed with a lot of what he said about the need for the Government to bring forward the appropriate policies. Making progress with the zero-waste strategy, which Mark McDonald mentioned, is key to meeting the targets. I think that we are all signed up to that, but it is still unclear how the necessary infrastructure investment will be funded to ensure that the correct solutions are implemented, rather than the easy ones that commercial investors may favour. Siobhan McMahon made an important point about the types of investment that the market makes, such as in large-scale incineration of waste or the use of imported biomass. In future, energy-from-waste solutions should be acceptable only when the waste has no other value. There are other issues that must be taken into consideration apart from diversion from landfill, which has tended to drive developments in the past, such as the waste hierarchy. One of the main other challenges is encouraging changes in behaviour, which is extremely difficult because people tend to resist behavioural change, especially if it causes them inconvenience. Encouraging change requires a degree of leadership, as we realise if we look down south at the fankle that the UK Government got itself into recently on waste disposal. Scotland may not be blessed with reliable weather, as we know, but we are blessed with fantastic landscapes that look good even in the rain and with iconic and varied wildlife. In the past, we have not valued either sufficiently. For example, we have allowed our unique peatlands, which can make such a big contribution to reductions in carbon emissions, to deteriorate. It has been estimated that restoring 60,000ha of degraded blanket bog and phasing out peat extraction during the current parliamentary session would prevent 2.7 million tonnes of CO2-equivalent emissions annually, in addition to that sequestered in the land itself. I raised that issue with the cabinet secretary this morning, and it must be factored into the spending review discussions. Helen Eadie made an important point about how EU funding can assist many such projects, and I hope that the sources of EU funding that might be available to them will be looked at. Sadly, Scotland consistently fails to meet its biodiversity targets. The Scottish biodiversity strategy has not succeeded in that regard, so it is right that it is to be revised. Much of that failure is the result of loss of habitat and, although the Government’s commitment to a national ecological network and large-scale habitat restoration in the national planning framework is welcome, significant progress needs to be made during this session to reverse that decline. Biodiversity loss has not happened only through neglect and ignorance; in the past, it has sometimes been the result of deliberate acts. Towards the end of the previous session, we passed the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Act 2011, which contains important initiatives to tackle wildlife crime, but there continue to be issues with enforcement, at a time when police budgets are constrained. The previous environment minister was sympathetic to consulting on whether the role of the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals could be enhanced with respect to the prosecution of wildlife crime. Perhaps the current minister can advise whether that is still under consideration when he sums up. The rural environment is, crucially, about people and communities and how they are sustained, as Mark McDonald, Helen Eadie and David Torrance said. As a representative of a predominantly rural constituency for the past 12 years, I am acutely aware of how deficient rural infrastructure is compared with the infrastructure of larger, urban communities. In the past couple of weeks, several members have highlighted the rural broadband issue. Many users in the town of Dumfries receive broadband speeds that are far lower than 8 megabits per second—including my office, so I am sympathetic—and that is in a town with a population of 35,000 people. In the more remote parts of my constituency, and I am sure that it is not alone, the only broadband access uses technologies that are both expensive and very slow. Public transport is patchy or non-existent in some areas. We also have problems with the high price of fuel and of oil or liquid gas heating, because gas supplies are not available in many rural areas. There are also problems with rural housing, employment and training. We need to reverse the drift of younger people to the towns and cities and keep a mixed community in rural areas. We do not want the countryside to be left only to retired people who are wealthy enough to live there and to wind farms, as my colleague Neil Findlay pointed out.

I will. That is not a scenario that will take rural Scotland forward. We need policies that will encourage thriving, mixed rural communities throughout Scotland.

As this is my first speech in the fourth session of the Scottish Parliament, I begin by congratulating the cabinet secretary on his reappointment. I would have also congratulated the minister on her appointment but, unfortunately, she is not here. I am sure that I will get an opportunity to do that in the future. At the end of the previous session, the Scotland Bill Committee did an excellent job. There were areas of disagreement—indeed, a minority report was produced—but the committee came forward with some well-thought-out and evidenced proposals, for example on the need for a higher limit on capital borrowing and a timescale for earlier implementation. I am pleased that we are moving to a position in which the Scottish Government will have greater fiscal responsibility. I noted with interest what the cabinet secretary said about the Deputy Prime Minister. The only note of caution that I would put forward is that I remember Mr Clegg saying that he did not believe in tuition fees, so perhaps the cabinet secretary is right to be cautious about wanting to see the detail of any statement before he agrees with Nick. I am no fan of the policies of the UK Conservative-led coalition Government. I am firmly of the view that its policies are deeply damaging to public services and to the Scottish economy. The Labour Party has said on many occasions that the UK Government is inflicting cuts that are too fast and too deep, and that is also the view of the majority of Scottish voters. Albeit that they did not go the way that my party would have liked, the results of the recent election demonstrated that most people in Scotland reject the cuts-led economic model and would prefer to see an investment-led economic model. We need to have the tools for that. Whatever we feel about the political complexion of the UK Government, progress must be made through constructive dialogue. I agree with David McLetchie in that I caution against the type of language that has been used recently in the context of other UK issues such as the Supreme Court. It is counterproductive to use such terminology in discussions, or in speaking publicly and in the media about the nature of such discussions. I am assured, however, that the cabinet secretary is probably more temperate in his language than are some of his colleagues. The rationale for increased borrowing powers delivered in a faster timescale is to implement a different type of economic recovery. That must be sustainable, and infrastructure investment—as many members have said—is key. However, like Neil Findlay, I am interested in how we will spend the money, not just in the fact that we will have the money to spend. We need to have a nationwide and not just a national recovery. There is a lot of interest in and emphasis on large-scale projects such as the new Forth crossing. Although I appreciate how important those are to the national economy, I remind members of the need for smaller-scale investment, especially in rural areas such as my constituency. The early casualties of the £1.3 billion cut that the UK Government imposed on the Scottish Government were two improvement sections for the A75, one of which was the Hardgrove to Kinmount section in Dumfriesshire. That improvement had been planned for a number of years and should have been completed in 2007, but it was delayed initially by objections to the initial traffic orders. I am not quite sure what went wrong later, but it did not come to fruition. The A75 is a Euroroute and is crucial to the economy of much of Dumfries and Galloway. The scheme would have improved connectivity with the Annan, Gretna and Lockerbie areas, which are being affected by the decommissioning of Chapelcross. We need the scheme to be implemented. I am not asking for a dualling of the A75: all I want is for the two improvements to be undertaken. Yesterday’s tragic accidents on the A75 emphasise that we need to improve the safety of the route. Similarly, the A76 connects the coalfield communities of Sanquhar and Kirkconnel with Dumfries town and Ayrshire. Improvements to that trunk road are needed for the regeneration and economic recovery of those communities. Contributors to last week’s debate highlighted the desperate need to upgrade broadband infrastructure, especially in rural areas, which will not be serviced by the private sector because they are not competitive. I was pleased by the cabinet secretary’s comments in that regard in his response to Willie Rennie’s intervention today. Rural areas will otherwise be left behind to the detriment of business, medical services and education and training. I want our borrowing powers to be used to invest in rural infrastructure such as broadband, as it benefits those communities. My colleagues and I have had much to say in the previous session of Parliament about the Scottish Futures Trust, and much of it has not been complimentary. Given the result of the recent elections, I recognise that the SFT will be a major delivery vehicle. However, I draw to the cabinet secretary’s attention some concerns that have been raised with me locally about the hubco model. Local firms are worried that the size of the geographical territory that is required for a population of around 1 million and the involvement of a single private sector delivery partner—in all probability a large national or multinational company—will mean that small local businesses will be unable to compete and may be excluded, even at a subcontractor level. Unfortunately, the operation of the Scottish Government energy assistance programme in my area has no businesses from Dumfries and Galloway within it. Most businesses in rural areas such as mine are small and medium-sized enterprises, and it is essential that they, too, benefit from the local infrastructure investment and from investment in our local economy. I am sorry if my contribution has appeared to be parochial, but I promised my constituents when I was elected last month that I would continue to bang the drum for them, and I have taken the opportunity to do so today.

I thank those members who signed the motion and those who have stayed for the debate. The Scottish Parliament passed the Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Bill on 31 May 2006, just over five years ago. Much of the bill was enabling, giving Scottish ministers the power to introduce regulation by secondary legislation after consultation. The ministers at the time, Ross Finnie and Rhona Brankin, indicated that the Government intended to consult on a number of prospective statutory instruments. Mr Finnie stated: “In the next few years, our officials will undertake a huge programme of secondary legislation that will include in the first instance provisions on mutilations, pet animal dealers, animal sanctuaries, livery yards, riding establishments, travelling circuses, animal gatherings, pet fairs and animal boarding establishments. We have brought forward the timing for regulations on animal sanctuaries following the issue’s high profile in committee, and, following concerns that have been raised, we intend to consult further.” on the issues. Mr Lochhead, who was a shadow minister at the time, was equally enthusiastic and stated that he hoped that there would be “full consultation with the committees” on secondary legislation “and an opportunity for maximum input.” He said that he hoped the Government would “bring forward many of the most important provisions ... as soon as possible.”—[Official Report, 31 May 2006; c 26211 and 26208.] It is disappointing, therefore, that so little progress has been made on many of those issues since the bill was passed. Today, I will address the issue of the use of wild animals in travelling circuses. The Daily Mail is not my newspaper of choice, but I commend the exposure that it and other national papers gave to the plight of Anne, an elderly elephant suffering from arthritis, who travelled with the Bobby Roberts circus for more than 50 years. That media exposure eventually led to Anne being retired to Longleat safari park earlier this year. The more that we learn through research about the intelligence and complex social behaviour of elephants, the more we realise how cruel the incarceration of that solitary animal for such a long time really was. I also commend Animal Defenders International, who filmed evidence of Anne’s ill treatment during the three months for which the circus was overwintering, and OneKind in Scotland for highlighting the issue every time that the circus travelled to Scotland. I was disappointed, too, with the United Kingdom Labour Government for the length of time that it took to act on the issue. A consultation was undertaken by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, and the previous UK Government stated in March last year that it intended at last to introduce a ban on the use of wild animals in circuses. Unfortunately, the Scottish Government at that time stated that, even if the UK Government introduced a ban, the Scottish Government would not follow suit. Since then, the UK Government has changed its position—there has been a change of Government—and has stated recently that it will not implement a ban but will rely on improved licensing. Those who oppose an outright ban cite two principal reasons for that. The first is that the Radford report, which was commissioned by the UK Government, found “little scientific evidence” that the conditions under which wild animals were kept were “better or worse” than other captive environments. The reason for that, however, was that very little scientific research had been done on the matter—possibly because it is pretty obvious to anyone who has any knowledge of pack or herd animals that being kept confined in a small enclosure, travelling nine months of the year and then periodically being exposed to a large and noisy group of excited omnivores while being obliged to undertake unnatural activity is hardly conducive to animal welfare. We do not keep solitary elephants, camels or big cats in small enclosures in zoos any longer—for good reason—so why does it remain acceptable for travelling circuses to do so? Moreover, a recent review by Harris, Iossa and Soulsbury of the University of Bristol records both physical and psychological effects on wild animals that are subject to constant travelling. The second reason, which was cited by the Scottish Government, is that there are no circuses with animals based in Scotland. Frankly, that is irrelevant because travelling circuses do precisely that—they travel. There are still three UK circuses that use animals and many circuses in Europe that could decide to travel to Scotland. The legislation that regulates performing animals is the Performing Animals (Regulation) Act 1925, which requires a circus to register with the local authority in whose area it is to perform. That offers no safeguard with regard to animal welfare or local accountability, as was evidenced last year when the Bobby Roberts circus visited Dumfries with Anne the elephant, a camel and a number of ponies. Libby Anderson of OneKind contacted me to advise that the circus was coming to Dumfries again. I spoke to one of the members of the licensing board, who investigated and discovered that a licence had already been issued by council officials without the matter going to the licensing board, because the circus had been licensed in previous years and the elephant was not performing. However, she appeared during the interval, when members of the audience could pay to be photographed with her and feed her candyfloss—clearly a staple part of an elephant’s diet—so she was obviously still being used to generate income for the circus. Anne was also still travelling for nine months of the year and, as Animal Defenders International discovered, spending the remaining three months tethered in an enclosure where she was regularly beaten by circus employees. Our understanding of animal welfare has improved immensely over the past 80 years, as public opinion shows. Some 94 per cent of respondents to the DEFRA consultation last year wanted the use of wild animals in circuses to be banned; 83 per cent of those polled by OneKind in Scotland agreed; and 15,000 people signed a petition organised by The Independent. It could be argued that the people who responded to those polls and petitions were animal welfare enthusiasts and that, therefore, they were biased. However, a poll that was undertaken by YouGov of the general public this year found that 72 per cent of respondents also wanted a ban. Scotland has the opportunity on this matter to lead the rest of the UK while representing the majority of public opinion. Mahatma Gandhi is credited with having stated: "The greatness of a nation and its moral progress can be judged by the way its animals are treated." I do not know whether it really was Gandhi who said that, but it is a wise statement that could have been his. We should say something about Scotland’s moral progress by stating loud and clear that subjecting animals to unsuitable and unnatural conditions and behaviour is not entertainment. We do not live in Victorian times, when animals and people with disabilities were exhibited for the amusement of the general populace. Let us jettison the final vestige of that view of entertainment: the use of wild animals in circuses. Scotland is better than that.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to introduce secondary legislation under the Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Act 2006 and, if so, what regulation it is considering. (S4O-00007)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the disappointment in the last session that expected secondary legislation did not materialise. Is he considering the regulation of animal sanctuaries and livery stables, the protection of racing greyhounds and a ban on the use of wild animals in circuses and electric canine collars?

Deputy Presiding Officer, it is 17 years since you and I joined Charlie Gordon on Strathclyde Regional Council. I have known him a long time and know that he is the sort of guy who speaks his mind. If he had wanted to renationalise the bus service, he would have introduced a bill that described itself as renationalising the bus service; what he is talking about today is regulation. As he said in his opening speech, the train service is heavily regulated—for good reasons—and it is not nationalised.

No, I want to get on with what I have to say. I say to Shirley-Anne Somerville that workhorses are probably more useful and less trouble than thoroughbreds, and I am sure that Charlie Gordon would be happy to be a workhorse. As the curmudgeonly Mr Carlaw reminded us, deregulation came into effect in October 1986, as part of Mrs Thatcher’s privatisation agenda. The Transport Act 1985 allowed for two types of bus service provision: the commercial service and the subsidised service; so, it is not correct to say that there is a totally free market. However, the previous requirement for the cross-subsidy of unprofitable routes by better-paying routes was transferred from the operators to the public sector through the local authorities and the passenger transport executives. As we all know, deregulation did not result in competition delivering better services in many parts of Scotland, especially in rural areas such as Dumfries and Galloway. Larger operators have been able to dominate the market and drive out competition by, as Charlie Gordon said, running services at the same time as their smaller competitors and undercutting them on price, thereby driving them off the routes and, in some cases, out of business altogether. With no requirement for operators to cross-subsidise unprofitable routes, services to outlying rural areas and off-peak services have been cut back, forcing people in those areas to become, as Karen Gillon described, increasingly reliant on the private car whether they can afford it or not. At the moment, the cost of that to those individuals is considerable and rising, and there is also a cost to the environment. As has been said, the Parliament has tried to regulate—not to nationalise—bus services through the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001, which enabled councils to set up statutory quality partnerships. However, the unfortunate fact is that none of those has been set up in the past 10 years. Clearly, the time is now right to take further and stronger action to deliver a bus service that serves its passengers and helps to achieve our climate change targets. The need for reregulation was brought home to me by the experiences of many of my constituents. In December 2008, our local regional transport partnership, the south west of Scotland transport partnership, and the bus operator Stagecoach heralded proposed timetable changes on their websites as improvements; however, I discovered that the bus service for some of my constituents was being reduced from a half-hourly service to an hourly service and that elderly people living in some parts of Dumfries did not have any buses running near their houses and were having to struggle up the hill with their shopping as a result of the changes. At the end of last year, private bus operators in Dumfries and Galloway warned SWESTRANS that they intended to increase their contract charges on some subsidised routes by up to 84 per cent, and SWESTRANS estimated that the overall cost of the subsidy would increase from £3.8 million to £6 million—an increase of 57 per cent. That means that SWESTRANS is now having to consider cutting the number of routes that it subsidises. I understand that it intended to undertake a consultation exercise in January, although I cannot find information about that on its website. The result of such cuts will be even poorer services across Dumfries and Galloway, especially in outlying areas, and increased reliance on private cars—hardly the right direction of travel, if members will excuse the pun. At times when fuel prices are higher than they have ever been, public transport ought to be more attractive to travellers. However, in Dumfries, I see buses travelling around with three or four people in them, which provides hardly any advantage in terms of emissions. One of the aspects of Charlie Gordon’s bill of which I was particularly supportive was his suggestion that community transport be allowed to accept concessionary bus passes. The Annandale transport initiative in my constituency has been pressing for that for years. The initiative has been around since 1999 and has a fleet of five wheelchair-accessible minibuses and two accessible cars, based in Lockerbie, Moffat and Eastriggs. Community transport provides services in areas where regular bus services are absent or infrequent and to people who are unable to access normal services. The free bus pass is a great initiative but it is no use to a pensioner who lives in a rural area where there is no bus or to a disabled person who is unable to use the services that are available. The transport initiative also provides a programme of day trips to older people who otherwise might become isolated. Subsidy through inclusion in the free bus pass scheme would provide a vital source of funding for community transport at a time when its funding through local authority grants is being withdrawn. The former Scottish Executive funding that, latterly, was provided through councils will cease at the end of this financial year, and the proposal would be a means to ensure that the vital services that are provided by community transport initiatives would continue. I look forward to Charlie Gordon’s bill being introduced and passed in the next session of Parliament—hopefully as a Government bill, and maybe even with Charlie Gordon as the minister who introduces it.

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what the powers and responsibilities of Historic Scotland and local authorities are regarding the protection of historic buildings. (S3O-13241)

The minister may be aware of the growing concerns about the number of listed buildings and buildings in conservation areas in my constituency that have fallen into disrepair. Indeed, there has been an e-mail campaign directed to her MSP address on the subject of St Mary’s Street, in Dumfries. The problem is that the owners often do not live locally and it is sometimes difficult to trace them or they do not respond to communication. Can the minister advise me of any examples of intervention to prevent the loss of built heritage that could be copied as examples of good practice? Will she also comment on the request for her to call in the planning application regarding St Mary’s Street?

The bill’s passage through Parliament has been relatively fast. It was introduced only five months ago, and the stage 1 debate was only six weeks ago. That is rather unfortunate, as it rules out the possibility of my simply repeating the speeches that I made at that stage. People might remember what I said six weeks ago. Several committee members had the foresight to visit Malawi then, of course. Unfortunately for them, they have no such excuse not to be here today. Despite 102 amendments being lodged at stage 2, that stage was completed in one hour and nine minutes. All but two of the amendments were in the name of the cabinet secretary. Twenty more amendments have been passed this afternoon in probably less than 15 minutes. That does not indicate that the subject of the bill is unimportant; it is far from being so. As the cabinet secretary mentioned and as Jamie McGrigor mentioned in the stage 1 debate, the effects of failure can be catastrophic. They have both referred to the terrible events in Hungary at the time of the bill being introduced. The bill requires the registration of all reservoirs with a capacity of more than 10,000m3 and the assessment by SEPA of the risks of the probability of flooding and the consequences of an uncontrolled release of water. In everyday language, we would refer to that as flooding, which can be very serious. Many reservoirs are situated above population centres; in those circumstances, flooding can be extremely serious. Before the bill was introduced, reservoirs of less than 25,000m3 did not have to be registered and their risk was not required to be assessed or categorised. The Reservoirs Act 1975 was amended by the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009, which, among other provisions, transferred the enforcement duties from local authorities to SEPA and required the production of flood plans. Those provisions have not yet been commenced, but the bill will link in with them. The bill will also enable offences to be created under the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003, which I am sure we all recall with affection. In the stage 1 debate, members noted that the bill was specialised and that a number of drafting errors had been made. Expert witnesses from bodies such as the Institution of Civil Engineers, Scottish Water and Scottish and Southern Energy raised other technical concerns. The cabinet secretary undertook to lodge amendments at stage 2, which addressed many points that the committee made. For example, the definition of a reservoir manager could have been interpreted to include organisations such as angling clubs that used or leased a reservoir for recreational purposes. A stage 2 amendment made it clear that such organisations would be responsible for supervision and maintenance only if they also had the power to operate the dam. The bill’s financial impact on individuals, small businesses and charitable organisations that might now be caught by legislation because they have on their land a reservoir with a capacity of between 10,000m3 and 25,000m3 was discussed at stage 1. Committee members were concerned that some reservoir owners might be unable to afford to register, to undertake required maintenance work or to decommission a reservoir if they could not afford maintenance. Committee members therefore welcomed the amendments that enabled the Scottish ministers to provide grants under conditions that they consider appropriate. A couple of financial issues cannot be resolved now but should be monitored after the bill is enacted. In the stage 1 debate, I and others raised SEPA’s ability to undertake its additional responsibilities when its budget is being substantially reduced. SEPA’s budget is due to reduce by £4.9 million—11 per cent—in the next financial year, while implementing the bill could involve one-off costs of up to £2.9 million and staffing costs of £2.19 million up to 2016. Those figures were estimated in the financial memorandum before the welcome decision was taken to give ministers grant-making powers. I assume that SEPA will issue grants on ministers’ behalf, as SEPA will register reservoirs and could require maintenance work to be undertaken. If I am incorrect, I am sure that the cabinet secretary can correct me. The new planning regime has changed SEPA’s role in relation to planning applications. In addition, SEPA has consulted on introducing a more efficient and risk-based regulatory regime. Budget savings from those sources are probably to be expected. However, the cost of implementing the bill is difficult to estimate, so it should be monitored once the bill is enacted. I assume that the bill’s close fit with other legislation, such as the 2009 act, could enable work under the bill to be undertaken in conjunction with duties under other acts. I would welcome the cabinet secretary’s views on how the bill’s budget implications will be monitored and published. Overall, Labour members and I welcome the bill’s final stage. We look forward to the bill’s progress to being enacted. It will be important legislation, despite the jokes that we all made about it during its passage through Parliament.

On behalf of Labour committee members, I thank the clerks and the bill team for their assistance with our consideration of the bill. I also thank the witnesses whose expert evidence illuminated the committee’s consideration and who pointed out to us and the cabinet secretary where amendments were required. Without the advice of organisations such as the Institution of Civil Engineers, we would not, during our consideration of the bill, have been aware of some of the problems that have arisen. John Scott and Peter Peacock made an important point about the effect of climate change in increasing the risks of uncontrolled releases from older reservoirs. We have to consider climate change in a wide variety of pieces of legislation, not least this bill. As climate change causes erratic weather patterns and stormier weather, we will have to take preventive action as part of the way in which we adapt to climate change. Climate change is an issue not just in this country. It is an issue of international concern, and some of the problems that committee colleagues who went to Malawi observed on their travels relate to the effects of climate change in some of the hotter parts of the globe in addition to the effects that we see here, such as inundation and heavy rainfall. I was reassured to hear that Liam McArthur, Maureen Watt and Karen Gillon rushed back to our stage 1 deliberations when they returned from Malawi. I am sure that they found the Official Report to be very illuminating. I thought that Liam McArthur referred to two naughty issues, and that I had missed something much more exciting than what was in the bill.

Maureen Watt referred to John Scott’s professional knowledge as a trained engineer. I have to say that John was probably more enthusiastic about the consideration of the bill than many other committee members, and I am grateful to him for bringing many different aspects to our attention. John normally advises us about agricultural issues from his position as a farmer, so to get his input as a civil engineer was interesting. At stage 2, my colleague Peter Peacock raised the need to ensure that there is clarity in the interpretation of the bill and the responsibilities of the various individuals and organisations concerned. He pointed out then that the bill will create many new small registered reservoirs, that the managers of the reservoirs will be required to comply with legislation, and that to do that they will have to be able to understand both the nature and the scope of their responsibilities. Part 1 of the bill is the most substantive. It places duties and responsibilities on the owners of reservoirs between 10,000m3 and 25,000m3, which are currently not required to be registered. I was therefore pleased that amendment 17 was agreed to this afternoon. It requires ministers to publish guidance, after consultation with SEPA, the Institution of Civil Engineers and any other persons who might seem to be appropriate, on how the legislation has to be interpreted. The amendment also requires ministers to review and republish the guidance as they think appropriate. At stage 2, Peter Peacock made the point that the previous legislation ended up with extensive guidance as it was revised over the years. Mention has been made of the use of reservoirs for leisure, but they also provide an important habitat for many species, such as waterfowl. RSPB Scotland or one of the other non-governmental organisations raised the concern at stage 1 that, if reservoirs were decommissioned as a result of the legislation, important habitat might be lost. The fact that ministers could make grants available means that they could help to protect those habitats and biodiversity in general. I do not know whether today’s speech was Stewart Stevenson’s 401st—I know that he reached 400 fairly recently.

It was his 402nd speech. He reminded us of the issues around the weight of water and the speed at which it can travel. I was almost inclined to intervene in the debate between him and John Scott about what would actually happen as, of course, the water would not be flying through the air but pouring down the hillside, and the effects of friction and turbulence would have to be considered in judging the speed at which it would reach the bottom. However, I did not intervene because Karen Gillon was sitting beside me and I thought that she might hit me if I did. [Laughter.] However, the dialogue between John Scott and Stewart Stevenson was a good prelude to the science hustings, which I am hosting in committee room 1 this evening—I thought that we would have a little advert for that. The cabinet secretary referred to a six-week break. It may be a six-week break for some. I think that this is probably the last stage 3 speech in this session in which I will take part—I am sure that members are relieved about that—but I hope to return to this place both leaner and fitter after my six-week break. Finally, Jamie McGrigor and Stewart Stevenson both referred to the film “The Dam Busters”. My colleague Karen Gillon, who was with me when they did, observed that perhaps we should be considering “Reservoir Dogs”.

Irene Oldfather’s amendment 5 reflects Labour Party policy, as accepted at our annual conference and included in our manifestos for the 2007 and 2010 elections. In the Labour Party, we like to stick by our manifesto commitments. If amendment 5 is not agreed to, the subsequent amendments in my name give members the opportunity to tighten up further on the use of snares. There is no doubt on this side of the chamber that holding a frightened animal without food, water or shelter for up to 24 hours, possibly in extreme weather conditions, causes suffering to that animal. The Humane Society aims to prevent unnecessary suffering, and practices that cause suffering should not be used unless there is no other method of control available that would cause less suffering. That is the purpose of my amendments. Amendment 15 would require a person who is setting a snare to be assured that no alternative method of controlling or capturing the animal is possible and would require Scottish ministers to provide guidance on how that judgment should be made. Anyone setting a snare would have to consider alternatives before doing so. If they were found to have set a snare in circumstances in which it was not reasonable to consider that other methods would have been ineffective, they would commit an offence. My amendments are alternatives to the ones that I lodged at stage 2, which required a judgment to be made by the chief constable, and which were felt by the minister to be overly bureaucratic for the police. Amendment 16 would require the chief constable issuing a snare identification number to be satisfied that the applicant had received training, for example on what alternative methods of control might be available, before issuing that identification number. Under amendment 18, failure to comply with the requirement to ensure that no alternative and preferable method can be used would constitute an offence. Amendment 51 would require the chief constable to revoke the snare identification number if an offence had been committed. The bill as introduced will allow someone who has committed an offence to retain their identification number and to continue to use their snares. It is important that someone’s ability to use a snare is revoked if they are found guilty of committing an offence. That will help to concentrate the minds of the users of snares on the circumstances under which their use is permitted. Amendment 17 would require the chief constable to consider whether an offence has been committed when an identification number has been issued. Amendment 20 would empower the Scottish ministers to make provisions by order, describing the circumstances under which the use of a snare is considered appropriate. Amendment 21 would allow such an order to include the conditions that would have to be met for an applicant whose identification number had been revoked after being found guilty of committing an offence to successfully reapply for an identification number. We support amendments 23 and 24 in the name of Liam McArthur. Amendments 1A, 1B and 1C would amend Bill Wilson’s amendment 1. His amendments 1 to 4 require a review of the snaring provisions to be undertaken by 31 December 2016 and further reviews to be undertaken every five years. That was the committee’s recommendation at stage 1. However, that would mean that no review would take place during the next parliamentary session, even if that session is increased to five years. My amendment 1A would enable the next Scottish Government to review the effectiveness of the snaring provisions. The date by which that would have to be done—30 June 2014—would give the next Government time to introduce new measures even if the session runs for only four years. My amendments 1B and 1C would reduce the period of review to every four years. In conjunction with amendment 1A, that would enable the provisions to be reviewed once in every session of Parliament.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

John Scott misinterprets the purpose of my amendments, because if no other reasonable method of control was available, snaring would be permitted. That is the opposite of what he described.

At stage 2, I raised concerns over the delegation of licensing powers to local authorities in the bill. That was not a power that local authorities seemed to want—those that responded indicated that they did not particularly wish for the delegation—and concerns were expressed that it could lead to inconsistencies between local authority areas if, for example, different views were taken on the issuing of licences to take protected species. At stage 2, I received assurances from the minister that the intention referred only to planning issues and local authorities’ planning responsibilities. My amendment 25 makes that clear in the bill. I move amendment 25.

I am pleased to have received support from John Scott and the minister. I press amendment 25. Amendment 25 agreed to. Amendments 54 and 55 not moved. After section 19

I will be brief. I welcome amendment 26. There is cross-party condemnation of wildlife crime. A report, as suggested by the minister, would help to inform future legislative proposals and it is very much to be welcomed.

We have considerable sympathy for the intentions behind the amendments. The committee was concerned about what happens when a landowner simply does not engage with the deer management group or ignores the code. The sanctions that are available when that happens have not been made clear. Both Robin Harper and Liam McArthur have attempted to strengthen the bill, and I welcome that very much. I also welcome the fact that Robin Harper proposes to state in the bill the need to manage deer sustainably. That is an omission, as we have not made that intention explicit in the bill. I am, therefore, happy to support the amendments in the names of Robin Harper and Liam McArthur.

I will first touch on snaring. As I said earlier, an outright ban has been Labour Party policy for a number of years. The opinions that have been expressed by Sarah Boyack, Irene Oldfather and Marilyn Livingstone are the views of the Labour Party, Labour members and the Labour conference. This may take Liam McArthur slightly by surprise, but when I go into committee I take off my party hat and I listen to the evidence. To me, no evidence was presented to the committee that proved totally that there should be an outright ban; therefore, it was not possible to argue for that as a committee, as we had not heard the evidence for it. The one thing that really troubled me is the fact that there are perhaps circumstances in which no other form of control can be used. That was the background to my amendments.

No. I am sorry, but I have only about four minutes and I cannot take any interventions. There might be occasions on which no other form of control is possible, so I sought to tighten up the regulation while the evidence was accumulated. I also wanted a review in every session of Parliament, not after one year. The regulations are already in place and we have evidence, so let us collect the evidence. Let us also not allow people who have been convicted of an offence—we are not talking about licensing, but about people who have been convicted of an offence in using a snare—to continue using snares. That is wrong. The matter was not pointed out to me until stage 3, by the bill team, which is why I did not raise it before. I do not have a problem with having a slightly different view in committee. I just want to see the evidence and have a bit more time to think about it before we make a decision. That may be a boring way of doing things that I learned during my training—I am not sure—but I would like to see the evidence first and I do not have a problem with that. On wildlife crime, I must say that I am not anti-shooting, and I am not going to argue that shooting has no place in the Scottish economy; I agree that it contributes significantly to the Scottish economy. However, we must be clear that wildlife tourism also contributes significantly to it. As the minister said, there must therefore be balance. Wildlife tourism is growing. In Galloway, for example, the red kite trail is assessed as having contributed some £21 million to the local economy over six years. It is necessary to preserve that part of the economy as well as the other. I welcome the fact that the minister introduced vicarious liability at stage 2. As I said at that time, I thought that it was brave of the minister to do that. However, we have to accept that it might be difficult to secure convictions. Earlier, John Scott talked about raptors predating each other. I do not think that that is why there are not many hen harriers around, because there are not many golden eagles around either. Something man-made is happening to raptors. I know of estates near me where peregrine falcons are not breeding—a breeding pair appears, but the female disappears and there are no chicks. Something that is not right is going on. When I was a small child, I used to think that buzzards were an American bird. I had never seen a buzzard, and thought that they did not exist in Britain. Now, I like seeing them, because they are a native species. Over many years, we did a lot of damage to our wildlife and our native species. We need to reverse that and I welcome all the steps that we are taking to do so. I, too, had representations made to me about wildcats, but they were too late to be brought into consideration today. I am glad to hear that we might find ways of taking forward that issue. We must be clear that we have to do more about our biodiversity duty. We are not hitting our targets and, as others have said, neither are other European countries. We must take that seriously, and I am pleased that Robin Harper, in what I think was his last amendment in Parliament, raised some of those concerns. The issue of ecological coherence, which we did not touch on today, is not just a planning issue within local authorities. We must have a national overview on that. I conclude by thanking the clerks who, as ever, worked extremely hard. I also thank the witnesses, who brought us a plethora of sometimes conflicting information, and the bill team, which assisted members with the amendments that we lodged at stages 2 and 3. I know that we caused them a lot of work. On behalf of Labour members, I thank all those who helped during the passage of the bill.

During our discussions on the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill, we talked about the development of ecologically coherent networks, which are necessary for the conservation and promotion of biodiversity, especially in cases of adaptation to climate change. If the WANE bill is not the vehicle for taking forward the issue at national level, has the minister had any more thoughts about how we can achieve that nationally, instead of relying purely on local authorities?

I, too, congratulate Jackson Carlaw on securing the debate. I do not have a constituency interest in the Loganswell proposal, but I have read about it and listened to what other members have said about it. It is clear that there is extensive public opposition to the proposal, not least because it involves the development of a 29-hectare industrial site on a greenfield area that is only 3 miles from a centre of population and because it proposes to bring in waste from 11 local authorities from across central and southern Scotland, with an estimated 350 to 400 vehicle movements just to bring the waste in. I, too, have looked at the Lifetime Recycling village website. The rhetoric looks cosy and green, but the information is skeletal, as Ross Finnie said. The proposed facility would not be the first batch gasification plant in Scotland, as Scotgen operates such a plant at Dargavel, just outside Dumfries. The minister’s predecessor, Mike Russell, opened that plant in August 2009. Dargavel is a much smaller plant than the proposed plant. It is designed to process only 60,000 tonnes of hazardous and non-hazardous waste annually and it obtains its fuel from the nearby Ecodeco plant, which Shanks operates on Dumfries and Galloway Council’s behalf. Little public concern was expressed about either facility. That is probably partly because they process Dumfries and Galloway’s own rubbish—people’s own rubbish is always slightly less distasteful than other people’s rubbish. The Ecodeco plant is also adjacent to the former landfill site, so it created no great increase in vehicle movements. In defence of the technology, I must say that it is not incineration of raw waste. Batch gasification is a newer, much more sophisticated and cleaner technology. My home is less than 4 miles from Dargavel as the crow—or possibly the buzzard—flies and I have no fears whatever about toxic fumes affecting me, my family or my constituents. However, I have other significant concerns that apply to Loganswell and similar proposals and which other members share. The rationale behind the Ecodeco plant was improving Dumfries and Galloway Council’s dismal record on recycling and sending material to landfill. It has achieved that—according to SEPA’s latest figures for July to September last year, 38.5 per cent of municipal solid waste is now recycled or composted and 46 per cent goes to landfill. As other members have noted, the EU waste directive and the Scottish Government’s zero waste strategy describe a waste hierarchy that starts with prevention, which is followed by reuse, recycling and recovery, such as energy from waste. Landfill is at the bottom. In the Ecodeco plant, all wood, paper, cardboard, textiles and plastics become solid recovered fuel—they are burned and not recycled. The paper and cards that my constituents put in their rubbish bins in good faith are not recycled—they are burned. Ferrous and non-ferrous metals can be recycled as metals and biological materials can be composted, so the recycling at the Ecodeco plant is only partial. Like Patrick Harvie, I do not object to recovering energy from waste that cannot be reused or recycled and if the best possible use is made of the heat. However, that is not—unfortunately—happening in Dumfries and Galloway and is probably not what will happen at Loganswell. Moreover, as far as I am aware, the Scotgen facility at Dargavel has yet to sell any energy to the national grid. Waste2Energy Engineering Ltd, which designed the gasification plant, owes a string of unpaid debts to small businesses throughout my constituency. A bit like Kent County Council, Dumfries and Galloway Council is only five years into a 25-year contract with Shanks for a technology that is already out of date under EU and Scottish waste policy. If the targets change, I do not know what Dumfries and Galloway Council will do. I therefore advise caution and scepticism about such proposals. In their consideration, the phrase about not touching with a bargepole comes to mind.

I congratulate Joe FitzPatrick on bringing the debate to the chamber, and I welcome the visitors to the gallery—among whom I see one of my former colleagues from the Open University. Sensation is one of the four science centres in Scotland. As Joe FitzPatrick said, it was opened in 2000, and it is a very important visitor attraction in Dundee, which is a city that also includes HMS Discovery and Verdant Works. As Sensation’s mission statement notes, it is a community resource that fosters engagement with science and the city’s science research community, as it has links with the two local universities. Along with its sister centres in Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edinburgh—as Stewart Stevenson said, we all know Our Dynamic Earth as a meeting place for us—it is a member of the Scottish science centres network, which was formed in 2000 to promote greater collaboration and networking between the four centres. The centres were formally inspected by HM Inspectorate of Education, which reported in June 2007. The follow-up report, which came out in November 2009, highlights many examples of good practice and collaborative working in the delivery of the core functions of the science centres. The centres were found to have developed very effective partnership working with local and national agencies to deliver an extensive range of continuous professional development activities for primary and secondary teachers, including residential courses for more than 170 primary teachers. Primary teachers who do not have a background in science may lack confidence in their ability to teach science subjects at the later stages of primary school. The type of activities that go on in the science centres have enabled teachers to feel a lot more confident about their ability to teach science and to implement curriculum for excellence, largely because of their improved understanding. School pupils are, of course, involved in programmes in the centres, too. They are able to get involved in science activity and, as Joe FitzPatrick said, to observe scientists at work. They are also able to find out more about different scientific disciplines, which enables them to make choices about the science subjects that they might want to follow later in their careers. The science centres also perform outreach work with local authorities, and they involve pre-school pupils: both Dundee and Glasgow have offered early explorers programmes for the three-to-five age group. Very young children are able to take part in learning and fun activities that are based around science, and they get the opportunity to explore the exhibitions. The 2009 report did, however, identify that there was less engagement with secondary schools. At that stage, there seemed to be more difficulty in matching the curriculum in secondary schools with the activities of the science centres. However, the situation may be improved as the curriculum for excellence beds in and the type of activities that are available in the science centres may be better aligned with the secondary curriculum in the future. Joe FitzPatrick talked about speed-dating events at the science centres. I did not know about those; however, one of the science centres offers sleepovers for family and uniformed groups. I hope that they are not anything to do with the speed-dating events and that those are totally separate. We have seconded teachers who are working in the science centres to develop materials for teachers and pupils, which ensures that the materials are consistent with the curriculum for excellence. Work placements are also used to prepare resources for teachers that support the curriculum for excellence. Joe FitzPatrick welcomed the investment by the current Government in the four science centres. I also welcome the investment that took place before the current Government took office. The previous Scottish Executive also invested in the science centres and recognised the contribution that they were able to make to education. In 2005-06, the investment in the four science centres was less than 0.5 per cent of the overall public expenditure on science in Scotland. That was extremely good value for money, and the current investment is also good value for money.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the impact on the viability of rural abattoirs of the Food Standards Agency’s proposed new charging regime for meat hygiene and welfare controls. (S3O-12888)

The cabinet secretary may be aware that I have recently written to him on the issue because I had been advised that the only abattoir that slaughters cattle in Dumfries and Galloway has been told that, under the proposals, its charges for meat hygiene inspection would increase more than fourfold. Does he share my concern that such increases could result in the closure of rural abattoirs and animals being transported long distances for slaughter? I appreciate that the decision is made by the FSA at United Kingdom level, but can he advise whether there are any sources of financial support that could assist rural abattoirs to remain viable?

Labour members, too, support the general principles of the bill, which requires all reservoirs with a capacity of more than 10,000m3—we were told that that is four Olympic swimming pools—that lie above the natural level of any part of the surrounding land to be risk assessed and categorised by SEPA according to risk. The bill maintains consistency with the United Kingdom Flood and Water Management Act 2010 and modernises the regulatory regime, which is currently fragmented. Although there have been no fatalities in Scotland due to reservoir flooding since the 1920s, there have been serious incidents, as the cabinet secretary said. Climate change and increased precipitation will also increase risk, so a more consistent approach is to be welcomed. As others have said, the bill is technical and does not involve many policy issues. However, because of its size and technicality, a number of drafting issues were picked up by witnesses who gave evidence to the committee and they will have to be clarified by amendment at stage 2. For example, the bill appears to require all water-bearing structures that are attached to a controlled reservoir to be inspected, which could be interpreted as meaning that all the kilometres of tunnels that are attached to a reservoir are also to be inspected, which would be very onerous. It is important that those drafting issues are rectified at stage 2. It is also a matter of concern that they were picked by external consultees and not by the bill team. I seek the cabinet secretary’s assurance that all amendments will be thoroughly checked for any further inconsistencies. I realise that we are all galloping towards 22 March, but it is important to get the bill right. The committee debated the proposal from some witnesses that the only factor that should be considered is the risk to human life. Although that should be paramount, Labour members strongly support the retention of environmental and cultural heritage as aspects that must be considered. I would be concerned if risk to the environment were excluded from consideration when assessing how the risk of a reservoir should be categorised. The bill will have implications for some reservoir owners who are currently excluded from the 1975 act but who will be caught by the new legislation. Some reservoir owners might be uncertain about whether their reservoir exceeds the threshold volume and the bill is not clear about who will pay for the inspection that will be required to assess whether the reservoir requires to be risk assessed. We would welcome clarification on whether SEPA will provide that service and, if it will, what the financial implications are for SEPA, as they are not included in the financial memorandum The Minister for the Environment and Climate Change also suggested that there might be some financial support for owners, and the cabinet secretary referred to that again today. There might be assistance for some reservoirs that are included in the regulation for the first time and I am interested to learn further what those provisions might be. I appreciate that such assistance should be available only in particular limited circumstances when the reservoir owner cannot afford the cost of registration or the cost of decommissioning the reservoir. I would also like to see some consideration of SEPA’s budget. We know from the draft budget that SEPA’s budget will decrease in 2011-2012 by 11 per cent to £4.9 million. I know that SEPA is in the process of consulting on better environmental regulation with the aim of developing a proportionate risk-based approach that would reduce complexity and introduce efficiencies. I support that approach in principle and I wish SEPA every success with the consultation and further implementation of its approach. However, a budget reduction of 11 per cent when SEPA has already been given additional responsibilities in flood risk management, for example, will make things difficult. The financial memorandum states that the costs to SEPA are difficult to estimate at the moment because we do not know how many new reservoirs will be included under the legislation or what category they might fall into. It estimates that there will be a one-off cost of between £1.7 million and £2.9 million, and staffing costs of £2.19 million for the implementation period up to 2016. Thereafter, there will be revenue costs of £0.41 million per year. SEPA will be able to charge reservoir owners to fund its administration costs, but the financial memorandum still estimates that the cost to SEPA could be around £4.12 million until 2016. That is almost as much as next year’s budget reduction, so I would welcome reassurance from the cabinet secretary that the money can be found without detracting from SEPA’s other responsibilities, which are quite onerous in some respects. Overall, we are supportive of the bill. I suppose that we are looking forward to stage 2, although I suspect that it might be a rather technical process.

Peter Peacock referred in his speech to John Scott’s role on the committee, given his experience as a civil engineer. I concur with those remarks: John Scott exhibited an enthusiasm for the bill that was possibly not mirrored by all his colleagues on the committee, and he certainly brought some extremely useful expertise. I also acknowledge the role that Peter Peacock and Sarah Boyack played in filling up some of the time in this debate by exceeding their five minutes. The bill is technical, and generally consensual. However, Jamie McGrigor was quite right to remind us in his closing speech of the serious consequences of flooding that we have seen across the world, even in the past year. It is easy to be flippant about consensual matters, but the issue at stake is serious, and we should bear that in mind. Sarah Boyack, Peter Peacock, John Scott and other members referred to the concerns of reservoir owners. It is not just big companies that own reservoirs; private individuals, small groups and non-governmental organisations are also among those that do. Owners are worried that the bill will place new regulatory burdens on them if they happen to have one of the estimated 1,150 new reservoirs that are likely to come into its scope. That is not a reason to oppose the bill, but RSPB Scotland, in its briefing for the debate, points out that some bodies of water that will be captured by the bill are managed for wider public benefits such as biodiversity, rather than for commercial gain. As the cabinet secretary said, consideration is being given to how to assist reservoir owners, but has consideration been given to some sort of scale of charges for different types of reservoirs that are managed for different reasons? Sarah Boyack mentioned that community groups have taken on land, including reservoirs, from Scottish Water, without realising that there might be extra financial burdens. Public liability insurance has not been mentioned in this debate, but we considered it in the committee. There was general agreement in the committee that reservoir owners should be encouraged to take out public liability insurance if at all possible, and should possibly even be obliged to do so. The costs of that should decrease and the availability of insurance should increase if all reservoirs in Scotland are in such a scheme. Currently, 662 reservoirs are regulated under the 1975 act. As I said, the bill’s financial memorandum estimates that 1,150 reservoirs will fall under the scope of the new regulation. That number of reservoirs could be the basis for an insurance scheme, which would assist reservoir owners and those who might be affected by the consequences of any breach of regulation. Bill Wilson, Peter Peacock and Sarah Boyack made important points about planning. Bill Wilson was concerned about the consequences of designation and Peter Peacock talked about the consequences for subsequent development. It is unclear how the designation of a reservoir will affect subsequent planning decisions or how subsequent development might affect the designation of a reservoir. A reservoir might become higher risk if somebody builds downstream of it, which could result in the reservoir owner incurring additional expenditure through no fault of their own. We would like clarification of whether a developer would be liable for the additional costs if a development caused an increase in costs to a reservoir owner. The committee suggested that that would be a good idea. We also touched on the assessment of the risk of failure. Jamie McGrigor asked whether it is the probability of failure or the consequences of failure that have to be taken into account, or whether it is a combination of the two, and, if so, how those are weighted. There was disagreement during the evidence sessions about whether examination of the structures of a reservoir and its maintenance are sufficient to assess risk appropriately. We have talked a little about climate change. Climatic factors such as increased rainfall and events such as peat slides, which we were advised are fairly common in Scotland, can change the level of risk that is associated with a reservoir. Jim Hume touched on the consultation on the guidance. Chapter 9 of the bill, which is entitled “Civil Enforcement, Emergency Powers and Further Offences”, gives SEPA the powers that it requires to enforce regulations. Many of the provisions are framework ones that give ministers the powers to create civil enforcement measures. Section 85 requires SEPA to publish guidance on how it will use the powers. Several organisations expressed concern about the breadth of the powers and said that they would welcome consultation on their implementation. As I think John Scott said, it would be helpful if SEPA consulted civil engineers and others before publication of the guidance so that, when the act is implemented, the guidance is available and stakeholders and reservoir owners are aware of their responsibilities. I have probably used up my time, Presiding Officer.

I was wondering about that. I look forward to stage 2, when I hope we will address the various technical issues that have been raised.

I have a lot of sympathy with the cabinet secretary’s arguments about the need for people to be able to pay for the maintenance of their reservoirs. However, the issue is to do with those people who do not know whether their reservoir holds 10,000m3 or less. Who pays for the assessment of whether they need to be captured by regulation—SEPA or the reservoir owner?

5. To ask the First Minister what contribution the Scottish Government made to securing the recent renewable energy deal with China involving Shanghai Huanuan Boiler & Vessel/Cochran and W2E Engineering Ltd. (S3F-2853)

Is the First Minister in a position to advise us what the deal means for the two companies’ subsidiaries in Dumfriesshire? Cochran Ltd last week appeared to be unaware of the deal and has submitted a petition to Dumfries sheriff court to request that Waste2Energy Engineering Ltd be wound up, claiming that a bill worth several thousands of pounds owed in connection with the Scotgen Dumfries plant has not been paid. The First Minister was keen to claim some publicity around the deal at the beginning of last week. In connection with that publicity, can he assure us that the deal means jobs in the Annan area and money coming into Dumfriesshire?

I do not think that I have had the opportunity to welcome Angela Constance to her ministerial role, so I offer her my congratulations. I am delighted to have the opportunity to celebrate a local success story, which ties in to the wider successes in, and importance of, vocational training and the modern apprenticeships scheme in Scotland. Minerva People started out as Minerva Training—a partnership between Tricia Hunter and Rosemary Slack. I welcome Tricia Hunter and her husband to the public gallery. Rosemary Slack retired from her post last year and is currently on holiday—I hope that she is somewhere rather sunnier than Edinburgh. Rosemary and Tricia had both taken time out from work to bring up their children before returning to work part time in the training department of a small business in Dumfries. Prior to having their families, Rosemary had worked in her family’s shoe retail business and Tricia had been a medical secretary. They started off by training themselves in the new information and communications technology of the time—things like fax machines, for those of us who remember that time. They took teaching qualifications and moved on to set up a new training centre for another local organisation. They then branched out and launched their own business in November 1998. In the beginning, Minerva offered training in administration and office skills to skillseekers and modern apprentices, developing its own customised vocational awards, but it did not take Rosemary and Tricia long to start to expand their company. In 2000, they branched out into recruitment. By the following year, the company had outgrown its premises and moved to larger premises—called Queensberry house, interestingly enough—in Dumfries High Street, adding an information technology suite and a training facility and becoming approved as a branded learndirect Scotland centre. Over the next four years, management, business start-up, retail, learning and development, call handling and IT were added to its mix of training opportunities. When Minerva became a limited company, Tricia and Rosemary purchased the Pitman Training franchise for Dumfries and Galloway. That was rapidly followed by approval as a City and Guilds centre offering child-care qualifications. In 2008, Minerva joined the Scottish Training Federation, working with Dumfries and Galloway Council to offer courses in developing management excellence. The following year, it was approved by Skills Development Scotland to offer training for work, and by the Scottish Qualifications Authority to offer management SVQs, or Scottish vocational qualifications. Last year, it was approved to deliver vocational qualifications in administration, management, customer service, learning development and child care, and it diversified further into hospitality. Minerva currently employs 10 full-time, one part-time and four freelance workers. More than 1,600 trainees have received certificates, and more than 650 people have been helped into work. Those are pretty impressive statistics in a rural area. Minerva has received many nominations and awards since 2000. It was a Scottish finalist for training centre of the year in 2003, for training provider of the year in 2004, for best practice in marketing in 2007 and for a learndirect Scotland award for best practice in 2008. Last year, it won the learning provider of the year category at the modern apprenticeships awards. Sadly, the bad weather at the end of the year prevented anyone from Minerva from going up to Glasgow to accept the award, although I understand that it was delivered to the company this week. Moreover, many of Minerva’s learners have received individual accolades. One of its learners won the young learner of the year accolade in 2006. The same year, the then Minerva Training produced the first Scottish student to achieve the new management level 4 national vocational qualification, the first Scottish student to gain the new administration level 3 award and the second Scottish student to achieve that award at level 2. Seven learners have been selected as learndirect Scotland champions, and one reached the Scottish final in September 2008. One of Minerva’s business clients—the Buccleuch Arms hotel in Moffat—won the small employer category in 2009 for its work with Minerva in developing its workforce. Minerva People states that its vision is to be the “training and recruitment company that best understand the people and organisations within our region and exceeds their expectations though providing best quality, innovative services which are customer focused to ensure we are instinctively the first choice.” I am delighted to have had a long relationship with Minerva. It was “instinctively” my “first choice” when a valued staff member had to take several weeks off work to recover from a tricky operation on her arm. Minerva recommended an excellent temporary replacement, who fitted in to our office extremely well. She went on from her temporary post with me to join the planning department of Dumfries and Galloway Council. I think that she fitted in pretty well elsewhere too, because she is now Tricia’s daughter-in-law and recently made her a granny for the first time. In 2004—I was speaking to Tricia about this today, and we think that it was in 2004—Tricia and Rosemary asked me whether they could bring some of their trainees up to the Scottish Parliament to celebrate their awards. I was pleased when, at fairly short notice, I was able to recruit the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning at the time, Allan Wilson; the then convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, Alex Neil; and Alex Fergusson, who was not Presiding Officer at the time, but was the MSP for Galloway and Upper Nithsdale. They all helped to present awards and to make the occasion especially memorable for the trainees. I think that Tricia and Rosemary must have enjoyed the trip, as they have been kind enough to invite me to present awards at subsequent ceremonies. It will not surprise members to learn that when Tricia discovered that Dumfries and Galloway was not getting its fair share of the additional modern apprenticeships that had been negotiated by Andy Kerr and his team through the 2009 budget, she simply did not put up with it. She and I made phone calls and the situation was rectified fairly quickly and the funding was used successfully. Minerva has been appreciative of the Government-funded initiatives that have supported it over the years. Indeed, in a recent e-mail, Tricia urged me to mention to my party “the successes the additional modern apprenticeship places have had down here”. Our skills spokesperson, David Whitton, will speak later. I do not think that he needs any convincing about the modern apprenticeship programme. Indeed, there is cross-party support for continuation of the programme in future years. Minerva People Ltd is a fantastic example of lifelong learning in action. Rosemary and Tricia started to develop their skills when they began to work together in 1990. They worked for and achieved qualifications that enabled them to set up and grow their own business. That business has allowed more than 1,600 people in Dumfries and Galloway to participate in lifelong learning, to develop their confidence and to prepare themselves to achieve new opportunities. That is a great story. Two women who returned to work after they had both had eight years out to look after children saw and seized an opportunity, from which they created something. When the recession is over, Dumfries and Galloway—and the rest of Scotland—will need a well-trained, skilled and confident workforce to enable our economy to recover and grow. Companies such as Minerva People Ltd will train and encourage that workforce. Minerva was the Roman goddess of—among other things—wisdom, commerce and magic. The company is well named, because its story is a combination of all three of those qualities.

The point that some of us have been trying to make is that we have to assess at what point a voluntary approach has failed and we have to bring in regulation. The minister gave an excellent example of that in relation to the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill at the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee this morning; she said that the Government had to introduce vicarious liability because the assessment had been made that the voluntary approach to wildlife crime had failed and it was now necessary to introduce regulation. There is a point at which we have to be able to assess where the voluntary approach is failing.

I welcome the addition of climate change to the minister's brief. As the chamber can see, climate change has also been added to my brief—I think it is for one day only. I, too, am an interloper from the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. Although I was not involved in the production of the report, I have read its conclusions with considerable interest. Extreme weather events across the world should focus our minds on climate change. The extremely low temperatures in Scotland caused chaos on the roads last month and resulted in many of my constituents lacking the basic services of running water and sanitation, some for as long  as two weeks. Now, on the other side of the world, appalling flooding in Queensland, Australia has resulted in loss of life and livelihood with possibly as many as 40,000 homes in Brisbane affected and damage to the economy that could run into billions of dollars. Of course, during the summer, severe flooding affected many parts of Asia. At one point, a fifth of the land mass of Pakistan was under water. It cannot be proved that those events are directly caused by climate change, although we know that global warming will result in more extreme and chaotic weather patterns. We also know that the temperature of the planet has been rising over the past decade. If there is anyone out there who still thinks that the interests of the environment and the economy are diametrically opposed, they need only consider the economic damage that is done to individuals, communities and countries when the environment turns nasty. Reducing climate change and its consequences must be a priority for economic and social reasons as well as for environmental reasons. It is not good enough to pass good legislation and collectively pat ourselves on the back at how groundbreaking we have been. Priorities for expenditure have to be set and choices—sometimes difficult ones—have to be made. Labour shares the committee's concerns about publishing the draft RPP at the same time as the draft budget. That meant that it attracted little attention and, as Patrick Harvie described, that the committee had only a short period in which to take evidence and report on the proposals. We hope that in future changes can be made that will allow a better span of time for consideration. Policy should inform budget decisions. It is difficult for committees to interrogate the draft budget with regard to whether proposed expenditure is appropriate to deliver targets, such as the 42 per cent reduction in emissions by 2020, when the draft RPP comes out at the same time as the draft budget. Labour agrees that RPPs should be published in advance of the draft budget and that this and future RPPs need to be comprehensively monitored to determine whether sufficient progress is being made to deliver the 2020 and 2050 targets. The final version of the RPP should outline ministers' intentions on assessment and evaluation. There are many factors that will determine whether the aspirations of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 are delivered. As other members have said, public engagement and involvement will be crucial. There are many incentives: with sky-high energy prices there has probably never been a better opportunity to engage people in energy efficiency measures. However, such measures tend to have up-front  costs that many people cannot easily afford, so we need to consider how those capital costs can be addressed so that we all benefit from the resulting energy savings. Alison McInnes, Rob Gibson and Liam McArthur all mentioned eco-driving. I, too, took the one-hour driving lesson. I have been quite surprised at how much fuel can be saved when I remember to follow what I learned. Again, the current high fuel prices will be a big incentive for people to find out how to save money by driving more efficiently. I have been interested in the discussion on the voluntary approach. The draft RPP suggests that regulation should be a last resort. Jackson Carlaw seemed to go even further when he suggested that failed politicians introduce regulation. In that case, we collectively failed in passing the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 in the first place. Presumably, in Jackson Carlaw's ideal world, everyone would be following the act's provisions voluntarily and we would not need any laws on the subject. I cannot follow that line of argument. It is obvious that unnecessary regulation should be avoided, but to assume that the default position in all cases should be voluntary agreement is likely to result in delays in implementation. Regulation should be considered particularly where the voluntary approach has been tried without success. Labour agrees that criteria must be established regarding how we assess whether such an approach has failed. The way in which future UK and EU decisions impact on our targets must also be taken into account. There already appears to have been some retreat from zero waste south of the border and there is dubiety about whether UK policies and funding for reducing emissions will be sufficient. If they are not, there is uncertainty about what alternative funding might be available in Scotland and how we will access that funding. Ministers should not rely on the EU to deliver emissions targets through the emissions trading scheme. The final RPP should state what ministers will do if the EU does not agree to increase the ETS to 30 per cent and how we will ensure that we meet our targets. John Scott referred to the Scottish Government's land use strategy, which arose from the 2009 act. There has been some disappointment that the draft strategy fails to address how some of the fundamental conflicts in land use should be addressed. I hope that the final document will take those concerns on board. The next RPP, in common with a host of other policies, will need to be informed by the land use strategy. New technologies will pay a vital role in reducing carbon emissions, providing the opportunities for new skills and green jobs. However, such opportunities have infrastructure and training  implications and require policy direction and priority. Alison McInnes referred to reducing the need to travel; there is the issue of people being able to work from home. One of the key aspects of that is the availability of fast broadband throughout Scotland, which is a major investment requirement. It could deliver climate change targets, too, but we have to understand how to deliver that in order to be able to do it. The final RPP needs to be more detailed and ambitious. However, the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee and the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee—especially the former—should be congratulated on the work that they have done. The Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee has done an excellent job in a limited timescale in evaluating the draft RPP and suggesting improvements. I hope that the Scottish Government takes on board those suggestions when it produces the final RPP.

To ask the Scottish Executive what arrangements are in place to ensure that the content of the traffic Scotland website is current and accurate. (S3O-12395)

I welcome Keith Brown to his new position. On 5 December, the traffic Scotland website failed to carry any information about serious disruptions on major roads such as the A80, the M73 and the M74 several hours after problems had arisen. The website subsequently crashed, although the Automobile Association website and the BBC website did not. Consequently, drivers set out on journeys that they might have avoided if accurate information had been available, and some spent many hours in sub-zero temperatures. As drivers are referred to traffic Scotland by the police and by motorway gantry signs as the source of information on traffic problems, is the minister aware of any measures that have subsequently been taken to ensure that the problem will not happen again?

Does the minister agree that, as valuable as technologies such as anaerobic digestion are, the emphasis should be on not wasting food in the first place? Prevention is always higher up the waste hierarchy than re-use or burning. What action can the Government take, possibly working with the grocery retailers forum, to encourage retailers to take action that prevents people from creating food waste in the first place?

To ask the Scottish Executive what consideration it will give to the A76 five-point action plan that was launched in November 2010. (S3O-12282)

The minister is referring to the former action plan. If there are significant changes in capital spend and projects are not going ahead, there is now an opportunity to review. Upgrades to the A76 are necessary to improve the safety of that trunk road and for the development of the local economy. Campaigners were very disappointed when the minister cancelled the improvement to the Ellisland stretch, on which many accidents have already happened. Will the  minister meet representatives of Dumfries and Galloway Council and East Ayrshire Council who have worked hard on the project over many years—possibly on site so that he can see the problems on the road—to discuss how the new action plan can be progressed?

I thank everyone who provided written and oral evidence on the bill, the committee clerks, and our hosts at the meetings that we undertook. When the bill was introduced, it appeared at first to be a rather random amalgam of different pieces of legislation, and I found it difficult to feel enthusiastic about it. However, during its progress I have, like Peter Peacock, learned to love it more and to become more engaged with it and enthusiastic about it, as it has enabled us to consider how to tackle issues such as wildlife crime and to tidy up some rather antiquated regulations, such as the game laws. As usual, the committee's recommendations offer opportunities to strengthen further the regulations. Robin Harper and Rob Gibson referred to the overarching vision for the environment. During stage 1, some contributors have been disappointed that there is no overarching vision for the natural environment in the bill through, for example, strengthening the biodiversity duty or improving ecological coherence, and they have pointed that out that that was, however, achieved in the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010. Ecological coherence would provide corridors for the spread of wildlife should the conditions alter—through climate change, for example—and it would help to preserve biodiversity. I know that the minister feels that that is not appropriate in a bill that will create a criminal offence: I bow to her knowledge as a solicitor. I presume that the difficulty is because of possible ambiguities about the meaning of terms such as "biodiversity duty" and "ecological coherence" in a bill that will create criminal offences. That said, I am sympathetic to the need to make progress on those issues. If that cannot be done in the bill, we need to consider carefully how it can be done elsewhere. Wildlife crime took up a lot of the committee's time and has taken up a certain amount of time in the debate. Scotland's natural environment and the wildlife that inhabits it are among our greatest assets, as many have said. A recent SNH study estimated that wildlife tourism is worth about £126 million annually to the Scottish economy, which compares fairly closely with the income of £137 million that is generated by all field sports. However, past practice has decimated some of  that wildlife, particularly raptors, as Peter Peacock and Robin Harper said. Some species were persecuted to the point of local extinction and have had to be reintroduced. An example is the red kite in Galloway, which is now a considerable attraction. The species had to be built up in the past 10 or 12 years through a reintroduction programme and now makes a significant contribution to the economy in the area. Unfortunately, because raptors are predators, they are still targeted through poisoning and, in some cases, shooting. Despite all the outrage, the situation is not improving, as the minister said, and stronger action needs to be taken. I am afraid that John Scott appears to be in denial on the issue. We cannot shy away from the fact that some of that illegal activity appears to stem from shooting estates. Wildlife crime does Scotland's image no good at all and it is unhelpful to wildlife tourism and field sports.

There is a lot of evidence in terms of successful pairs of breeding raptors in particular habitats and so on. There is also evidence on the other side. We are broadly supportive of the minister's intention to lodge an amendment at stage 2 to introduce vicarious liability. Obviously, we have yet to see the amendment. Current legislation allows the prosecution only of the person who actually carried out the crime, which is usually the gamekeeper, and does not recognise that the keeper might be under pressure from his boss to reduce the loss of his birds. Why should the guy on low wages in a tied cottage have to take all the responsibility? After the conviction of a 22-year-old gamekeeper in Karen Gillon's constituency just a few weeks ago, his lawyer stated that he had been trying to impress his boss. There is a precedent. Vicarious liability already exists in the licensing trade, as a pub landlord can be held responsible if his or her staff break the law. However, we received evidence that it might be difficult to enforce such a provision. If vicarious liability does not work and if that stick is not successful, we will need another tool in the toolbox. We believe that we should give ministers the power to develop a licensing scheme and to introduce it under the super-affirmative procedure. I, too, welcome the wildlife estates initiative. Nobody intends to hijack that. We want it to work. If it works, and if vicarious liability works, there will be no need to introduce a licensing  system, but if those measures do not work, we will need to clamp down further on wildlife crime. Some of the provisions in the voluntary code could form the basis of a licence. Labour and the SNP have been sympathetic to an outright ban on snaring; the issue has been discussed at both parties' conferences. I was happy with that position until I visited the Langholm moor demonstration project the summer before last—although I did not do so as part of the bill process. That project involves the SRPBA, SNH and Natural England. As members have said, it aims to manage uplands to support game birds, hen harriers and wild ground-nesting birds. There is a little part of me that cannot quite see an alternative to using snaring in that type of terrain. I am a bit anxious that, if we take away snaring, we might damage that type of project. There has been contrary evidence on the issue. Bill Wilson alluded to that and mentioned the question whether predation of lambs by foxes leads to significant losses. Bill Wilson thinks that it does not, but John Scott thinks that it does. The contrary evidence is such that I think that I support the recommendation that the effectiveness of the regulations needs to be monitored, maybe after five years. It has been suggested that that needs to be done after two years, and perhaps we should look at that at stage 2. I would like that to be coupled with a power to introduce a complete ban, in the event that what is proposed in the bill does not work. In that sense, it is a bit like the situation with vicarious liability.

No. I have already taken an intervention and I need to get on. On deer management, as others have said, deer are an iconic species, especially the red deer, which, like the golden eagle, is strongly associated with Scotland. However, large numbers of deer are damaging to the environment, through overgrazing, and to biodiversity. Some stakeholders have expressed disappointment that the compulsory approach that was suggested in the consultation has been replaced by a voluntary code. We believe that clarification is necessary on what measures will be taken if landowners do not participate in deer management groups, or if the groups fail to produce deer management plans. The code of practice is welcome, but what will happen if it is breached? What sanctions will SNH be able to apply? We might need to consider further whether a duty to comply with the code is required and should be added to the bill. The provisions on non-native species are broadly welcome. The most contentious issue is whether pheasants and red-legged partridges  should be exempt. The issue is not whether they are native but whether, if they are released in large enough numbers, they can cause damage to the environment. If that is the case, we believe that it would be appropriate for reserved powers to be available. Bill Wilson and Peter Peacock made important comments about native species, notably bees, which I hope will be looked at further at stage 2.

I conclude by saying that I welcome the bill. I am more enthusiastic about it than I was, and I look forward to further discussion of it at stage 2.

I get the impression from other members' speeches that they, too, have struggled to find something new to  say in this annual sea fisheries debate. I looked at my speeches from the past two years and it would have been easy to rehash one of them, but I have resisted the temptation to do so. The reason for that situation is that the subjects of agreement do not change—they are the fishing industry's importance to Scotland and particularly to some of our coastal communities; the need to manage the industry sustainably; the need to conserve stocks and the industry; the need to reduce discards; and the need to reform the common fisheries policy substantially. The subjects of disagreement do not change much from year to year, either. Arguments always arise about the validity of the science; whether it is possible to reach maximum sustainable yields for all stocks by 2015; and how mixed fisheries can be managed when some species' populations are in good shape while those of other species are not, which often leads to the problem of discards. It is clear that the marine environment is complex, so it is necessary to continue to invest in marine science, in order to improve the understanding of the factors that influence the fish population. Marine Scotland's budget will reduce from £62.4 million to £55.9 million next year. Of course, the cuts that are coming from Westminster must be shared around, so I will make no unrealistic demands, but I am interested to know how the reduction will be managed. I was reassured by the reply that I received last week from Mr Swinney to a written question on how the reduction will be achieved. He said: "Priority research programmes will be maintained through the scheduling of government vessels and a consensual approach to research priorities".— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 25 November 2010; S3W-37666.]  The Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment referred to that when he gave evidence to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee this morning. However, I am more concerned that the implication in the answer was that the support for studies and gear trials that was previously provided without charge will be realigned, which I suspect means that it will now incur a charge. I hope that those charges will not be at a level that might detract from efforts to improve the reduction of discards through the use of selective gear. I also hope that, in implementing the staff release programme, due account will be taken of the need to preserve the valuable experience that Marine Scotland currently has. The cabinet secretary, or the minister, may wish to advise how they intend to ensure that fisheries science is preserved in these difficult times. Scottish fishing fleets have made great efforts and undergone great sacrifices to stem the  reduction of the stocks that they fish, so it must be very disheartening when the ICES advice to the European Commission indicates that more pain and sacrifice will be demanded, particularly in areas such as the west coast and from fishers of some species. As the downward pressure on fishing effort continues, the emphasis has to be on minimising waste and maximising the value of each catch. Everyone talks about the need to reduce discards—we have been talking about it for years—and great strides have been made, with Scottish fishermen leading the way through the use of selective gear and the Scottish conservation credits scheme. The reform of the CFP presents further opportunities to tackle the problem and there seems to be a fair amount of consensus among stakeholders on issues such as catch quotas replacing landing quotas. However, as Tavish Scott pointed out, there is a need to work with people in the industry, because they are the experts and what may appear to be a particularly useful model may contain flaws. I think that there is also consensus on the need for regional fisheries management, although, as Ian Gatt advised the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, it will not necessarily solve all the problems of the pelagic fishing industry. A case is also being made for an approach that uses days fishing rather than days at sea, which seems to be a sensible proposal. I cannot disagree with the sentiments in the Government's motion. I hope that Parliament can also support Karen Gillon's amendment, which stresses the need for economic support for the communities that are affected by the restrictions emanating from the European Commission.

I thank the cabinet secretary for inviting me, along with other members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, to the dairy stakeholders meeting next Thursday. Given that the main theme of the meeting is to share best practice to ensure a sustainable future for the dairy supply chain in  Scotland, has the cabinet secretary been informed of whether the retailers will attend this time?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has been consulted by the United Kingdom Government regarding its response to the European Court of Human Rights decision on convicted prisoners having the right to vote. (S3O-11917)

The cabinet secretary's reply has come as a bit of a surprise to me. I am of the opinion that people who are convicted of serious breaches of the law should forfeit the privilege of deciding who determines the law. The Scottish ministers have responsibility for running the local authority elections in 2012. HM Prison Dumfries has a population of 120 long and short-term offence-related protection prisoners, such as sex offenders who have refused to take part in a STOP programme. Does the cabinet secretary share my concern that if those offenders are permitted to vote, their votes could materially affect the results of the election to Dumfries and Galloway Council in the North West Dumfries ward? Have he and his colleagues considered how such a situation might be avoided in North West Dumfries and in other council wards in Scotland that have prisons in their boundaries?

Given the time pressure, I will try to be brief. I congratulate Bill Wilson on securing the debate. The annual science and the Parliament event has been a  great success over many years. It is always well attended by the scientific community but, unfortunately, external events such as by-elections and stage 3 debates have in some years inhibited MSPs' attendance. Sadly, that has been the case this year. I have been happy to be associated with the event as a sponsor for several years. As always, I thank the Royal Society of Chemistry for initiating this celebration of Scottish science and organising the event effectively every year. The contribution of Scotland's scientists—James Clerk Maxwell, James Watt, John Logie Baird and Alexander Fleming, to mention just a few—to the nation's international reputation is well known. It is important that we celebrate and widely recognise the fact that that success continues. In 2008, Scottish universities' research in biological and clinical sciences was assessed as being world class. We were also assessed as having significant strength in the physical sciences sector. Those successes have fuelled the contribution of Scotland's life sciences sector to the Scottish economy, for example. I say to Maureen Watt that I know that the Government recognises the importance of the life sciences; so did the previous Government, which identified the life sciences as a key sector when Wendy Alexander was the minister with responsibility for enterprise. The physics-based science sector also contributes significantly to the Scottish economy—about £8 billion annually. The economic climate and the cuts that the comprehensive spending review has imposed present considerable problems for maintaining and expanding on those successes. It is unsurprising that Scottish universities anxiously await details of how the ever-widening funding gap between Scottish and English universities is to be addressed. Funding shortages could present a particular problem for the sciences in Scotland. Science and engineering degrees are more expensive to provide than those in many other subjects. Universities compensate for the comparatively low level of investment in research and development by business, which carries a significant cost to universities. We need to consider how we will continue to enable funding to be provided for science and engineering degrees and for postgraduate research. Funding is probably the key pressure that Scotland's universities face. If continuity of funding is necessary to maintain our science expertise, so is the supply of scientists in the future. Scotland is among the top four countries in the world for research output in physics—I believe that that is because of the significant contribution from the Scottish  universities physics alliance, which gets universities to work together—yet the Institute of Physics in Scotland remains concerned that the number of young people who choose to study physics to higher level has fallen over a period of years. Much good work is being done to stimulate the interest of primary-age pupils in science. That needs to be sustained over their school careers, and I hope that the curriculum for excellence will succeed in achieving that. I thank the cabinet secretary for organising for me a meeting with the principal scientific officer to discuss that in the summer. Girls often perform better than boys in science subjects at school, but young women continue to be underrepresented in science and engineering at university. Women scientists are more likely to leave science than are their male counterparts. More than two thirds of the women who are qualified in science, engineering and technology do not work in that sector. The reasons for that are many and complex, but if we want the highest-quality scientists to be available in Scotland we must address the gender inequality issues, as well as the attractiveness of science overall.

I very much welcome both this debate and the IUCN's United Kingdom programme and commission of inquiry on peatlands. I am sorry that I was unable to accept an invitation to yesterday's event, but the members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee were quite busy in the morning and in Parliament in the afternoon. I congratulate Rob Gibson on securing the debate. We do not always agree, but I found it difficult not to agree with anything that he said tonight. He is right to highlight the importance of peatlands in delivering benefits in respect of biodiversity, water purity and our carbon emissions targets. For many years, we have been aware of the importance of forestry in combating climate change. However, perhaps because peat is underground, it has taken us longer to appreciate the value of peatlands. Sadly, during that period of non-recognition, many important peatlands have been damaged and are now in urgent need of restoration. As Rob Gibson said, a 2007 study estimated that Scotland's deepest peat stores about 10 times as much carbon as the whole of the UK's forestry biomass. I find that to be a spectacular statistic and cite it not in any way to detract from the importance of increasing woodland cover, but to emphasise the importance of our peat resource. Unfortunately, the UK is among the top 20 countries for carbon emissions from damaged peatlands. For example, in the 1980s,  inappropriate forest planting for profit, rather than for environmental benefit, caused serious damage to some of our most important peatlands, and around 50 per cent of Scotland's 2 million hectares of peatland has been damaged by past activity. As we have heard, that damage can be reversed: indeed, almost 10,000 hectares in the flow country have already been restored. Actions such as blocking ditches and raising the water table allow sphagnum mosses to regrow, so peatland will eventually recover. That will not happen without action being taken and without money being spent, but the sums of money that we are talking about are not enormous. A sum of between £60 million and £120 million over six years—just £10 million to £20 million a year—would deliver an annual carbon emissions saving of around 2.7 megatonnes and would restore some 600,000 hectares of peatlands. So, for a relatively small amount of expenditure, we could deliver major environmental benefits. The Government's draft land use strategy states that the protection and management of carbon stores "includes exploring the potential for re-wetting formerly drained peatlands (particularly where this will re-create valuable peatland habitats) and adopting lower-impact agricultural and forestry practices on carbon-rich soils." That is fine, but I would like the final version of the land use strategy to go a lot further than that and to provide some elucidation of how that will be achieved. The consultation on the land use strategy will possibly clarify some of that. I would also like the strategy to reflect current knowledge of peatland restoration and its costs. RSPB Scotland's briefing for the debate states that positive actions need to be taken. Rob Gibson went through a number of the actions that are mentioned in that briefing, including the direction of Government agencies. [ Interruption. ] It may even be possible to give Government agencies a duty to deliver peatland restoration and to direct Scottish Water to facilitate restoration using its priority catchment management fund. The importance of the peatland carbon store needs to be fully recognised in the land use strategy. [ Interruption .] I would like to know whether the SRDP's funding streams could be reformed to make it simpler and easier for land managers to apply for multiple land uses. I also believe that the Government should take full advantage of European Union funding streams to lever in additional funding for restoration projects. As Rob Gibson said, peatlands can deliver a huge amount in terms of carbon emissions reductions, improved water quality and improved biodiversity. For relatively modest expenditure, we could realise a huge environmental benefit. I hope  that that idea will be incorporated in the land use strategy.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to encourage sexually active individuals under the age of 25 to undergo testing for chlamydia. (S3O-11846)

The sexual health statistics, which were published last week, highlighted the work that needs to be done to ensure that chlamydia testing is targeted at the 16 to 25 age group. NHS Dumfries and Galloway has a commendable rate of testing but also has the highest proportion of positive tests among young men, at 18 per cent. Are further initiatives planned to make young men in particular aware of the need for prevention and testing?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to protect bird of prey populations. (S3O-11432)

Last week, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee heard evidence from a Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals officer that he had once discovered 25 poisoned birds on one estate. What consideration  has the minister given to making estate owners more responsible for preventing wildlife crime on their land? Is she considering lodging amendments to the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill to address the situation?

For most of us who attended the debate, it was interesting and instructive. A small group at the back of the SNP benches spent most of the time talking to each other, but I think that the rest of us were quite interested in the speeches that were made cross-party. Members made thoughtful contributions about where improvements could be made to strengthen the industry and the serious challenges that the industry is facing, which Liam McArthur described. It has not been some sort of happy-clappy debate about how great everything is, although we have heard about very good examples from around the country. John Scott illustrated some of the problems that the food and drink producers are facing. Jim Hume talked about discrepancies in performance between local authorities. If we are looking at public procurement, we have to understand why some authorities are doing so much better than others.  A number of speakers—Rob Gibson, Iain Smith and Peter Peacock—talked about the problems with being able to access locally produced food. Like Iain Smith, I find it astonishing that, although we talk about the need for deer management and how there are too many deer in parts of the country, it can be difficult in certain areas to procure venison, which is a good, local, healthy food. Why is that? Ian McKee rightly said that it is important that we do not become too complacent. He also mentioned the need to have a sound home performance and good-quality service as well as good-quality food if we are to be able to exploit our food and drink for tourism purposes. David Whitton spoke about skills. There is a skills gap in the food and drink production and manufacturing sector, despite the fact that it is one of Scotland's largest manufacturing industries and despite its importance in export. That concurs with evidence that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee received on farming, particularly hill farming. The loss of people from the land has resulted in a loss of skills. In particular, it is compounded by the fact that farmers have to find other incomes and are not able to maintain their skills. There is a skills issue not only in production but in primary production, which needs to be addressed and taken on by the colleges and further education establishments. John Scott also spoke about food security, which is an increasingly important issue. The food and drink supply chain is the UK's largest single manufacturing sector—it accounts for something like 7 per cent of gross domestic product—but, despite the fact that UK farming exports £12 billion of food and drink, Britain is not self-sufficient and imports something like 40 per cent of the total food that is consumed in the country. The food supply chain is also vulnerable to changes in society and the environment, which can lead to volatility and price changes, such as the increase in grain prices in 2008. That is an issue not only for us, because the global population is increasing and food production is threatened by climate change, scarce water supplies in many parts of the world, an increased range of pests as temperature increases, the decline in numbers of pollinators such as bees—Peter Peacock likes to remind us about that—and the distortion of the market by the demands of wealthy consumers in rich countries for specialist food and flowers, which often prevents local people from growing the food that they need to supply their demand. I wonder about the asparagus to which Peter Peacock referred. What could be grown in Peru that the local population needs if it was not exporting asparagus to Britain and incurring many food miles? Irene  Oldfather mentioned the importance of the fair trade movement, which seeks to address that imbalance. One of the other issues to which Peter Peacock referred in passing was waste. He spoke about people not knowing how to cook the entire product. There is quite a lot of television interest in that at the moment and various programmes try to encourage people to use the whole animal—I saw one last night, as it happens—but the statistics on food waste are shocking. The cabinet secretary is probably concerned about that issue. In Scotland, more than £1 billion-worth of food is thrown away every year. That is £430-worth per household and 566,000 tonnes of food, two thirds of which could have been eaten and half of which has not even been touched. That is the equivalent of 1.7 million tonnes of carbon and it would be the equivalent of taking a quarter of our cars off the road if we could eliminate it, although we will not do so altogether. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in Rome estimates that more than 1 billion people throughout the world are starving, which means that, in Scotland—in this small nation—we throw away £1-worth of perfectly good food per starving person in the world. That is one of the reasons why food waste needs to be addressed. The statistics are scandalous and, if we could get that message over to the public more, we might move away from the commonly held view that people can throw whatever they like in their bins because they pay their council tax and that is what the tax is for. I support Scotland's zero waste campaign—love food, hate waste—and believe that we need to get the message out more widely. We must also not allow excuses about the fiscal climate to deflect us from efforts to reduce waste. In England, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs appears to be pulling back from some of its waste management agenda and I very much hope that that will not happen in Scotland, because the consequences for the climate are significant if we do not tackle waste. We must find innovative ways around that. A number of members have mentioned the allotments movement. It is an exciting movement. Allotments were very common during the war—there were about 70,000 or 80,000 allotments in Scotland then, but that total has now gone down to about 7,000. However, there is now huge interest in growing one's own food and that is very much to be encouraged for all the reasons that members such as Sandra White have described. Peter Peacock described an interesting initiative in his region, which links the issues of food security and sustainability on the island of Eigg. He pointed out that the food chain depends on local facilities such as slaughterhouses being  available. That is an important consideration for producing local food in rural areas. There is no point reducing food miles by selling local food if the animal has to go to the other end of the country to be killed, and the produce then has to come back again. We have to address that. Several areas of policy have been referenced in the debate, and we need to tie them all together. There is Scotland Food & Drink and "Recipe for Success"—a number of members have referred to the photographs in the document, but there are other issues there, too. There is the skills strategy, which David Whitton mentioned; there are also the land use strategy, the zero waste strategy, the tourism strategy and other strategies relating to reducing climate change. Our food and drink policy can positively affect all those strategic areas, but we need to understand how the strategies work together if we are to get the maximum benefit. That is particularly the case during times of financial stringency such as the period that we are experiencing at the moment. It is good to celebrate the success of food and drink fortnight and its growth across the country since its inception. It is also good to look forward and address some of the challenges that we face, through this and other policies.

The debate coincides with the second week of Scottish food and drink fortnight. It might be that I am being cynical, but I suspect that it was scheduled for this afternoon to allow members away to celebrate the Pope's visit to Scotland. It appears that rural affairs and environment debates are often scheduled when many members want to be away. Food and drink is and has been for many years one of Scotland's key sectors. However, like Gavin Brown, I am slightly confused about the figures. According to the Scottish Enterprise website, 122,000 people are employed in the food and drink processing sector throughout Scotland, which generates £7.57 billion in sales, but the Scottish Government press release this month quoted £9 billion in turnover and 369,000 people in the supply chain. As Gavin Brown pointed out, there seems to be some discrepancy as to whether the revenue that is generated by the sector is £4 billion or £5 billion. Whatever the figures are, there is no disagreement about the sector's importance, especially in rural areas, in which the largest private sector employers are often in food production and processing. That is the case in my constituency. Earlier this year, the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, Jim Mather, announced that 2010-11 had been designated Scotland's year of food and drink. That followed the year of homecoming. In light of recent evidence that suggests that the success of the year of homecoming may have been exaggerated, I hope that the success of the year of food and drink will not need to be exaggerated. It is, of course, tempting to use such a debate to recite the many successes of the Scottish food and drink industry and to use local exemplars as illustrations in it. I am keen to draw members' attention to the savour the flavours fortnight in Dumfries and Galloway, which is a new event in the region. The region's food and drink are celebrated in it and local people and visitors are encouraged to enjoy locally produced food. The event aims to promote farmers and producers markets, encourage local hotels and restaurants to use local produce, let residents know where they can purchase locally produced food, and educate children about healthy eating. In July last year, savour the flavours was awarded LEADER funding for two years. The aim was to develop a dynamic business base, and increased awareness and enjoyment of local food.  It is useful to consider more generally how a food and drink strategy can interact with and support other policy areas, and to reflect on how synergies can be improved and whether there are contradictions that need to be resolved. An internationally recognised reputation for quality and excellence in the food and drink sector will increase its contribution to the economy. Such a reputation will assist Scottish companies to expand their markets outside Scotland and contribute to our tourist offering, especially where there are partnerships between providers that support and promote each other. Despite the quality of our local produce, many Scots still have an inferior diet. Scotland's obesity levels are among the world's highest. More than a million adults and 150,000 Scottish children are obese—that is, their body mass index is 30 or more. Two out of three Scottish adults are either overweight or obese. Scots on low incomes suffer disproportionately from obesity and poor diets. To misquote Susie Orbach, fat is a social justice issue. Our obesity record is not something to be proud of. Apart from anything else, it is hardly an international advert for our food and drink. Surely our ability to produce excellent local food should be able to help to address that problem. In some cases, regulation could help. I was disappointed, for example, that my colleague Richard Simpson's proposed bill to ban trans fats did not receive sufficient cross-party support to progress to parliamentary consideration. I am not suggesting that we should ban buy-one-get-one-free offers, large helpings or anything of that sort, but I wonder whether the Government could help by working with retailers and supermarkets to encourage people to eat less, but better. If I recall correctly, it was Christopher Harvie who, in a previous debate, described the lack of provision for single people in supermarkets. Most products are sold in pre-wrapped quantities that are aimed at family purchase. Purchasing food in quantities that are larger than are required encourages both overeating and waste. If retailers could be persuaded to sell produce in smaller quantities, purchasers could decide whether to buy smaller amounts of higher-quality products or larger proportions of cheaper products for a similar financial outlay. I know that work on obesity is being done through the recipe for success strategy, but I am interested in whether that issue has been discussed in the Government's grocery retailers forum.

I will come on to that later in my speech. The issue of labelling is related to what I have been talking about. Purchasers need to be confident that they are actually buying locally produced food when they think that they are doing so. Members have discussed in the chamber and in the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee how producers ought to benefit from the higher animal welfare standards that operate in this country. We have previously looked at pig meat production problems, but a similar situation could be arising with eggs post 2012. Consumers need clear information about nutritional content, product origin, and animal and environmental welfare. As we are all aware, eating behaviour patterns are established in childhood and they can be hard to break later on in life, although adults tend to be more adventurous than children in trying new foods. Children need to get the chance to enjoy good locally produced food and to understand where and how it is produced. Sadly, healthy eating initiatives in Scottish schools appear to have gone disastrously wrong, although I do not blame the current Government alone for that. Only a quarter of secondary school pupils in Dumfries and Galloway take school meals. Uptake has been falling for some time, but I am afraid that it was not helped by the Scottish Government's draconian guidance in 2008, which advised, for example, that condiments such as tomato sauce or salad dressing should not be displayed and should be sold only on request. I had a school meal in a secondary school in my constituency where the salad was bits of lettuce and tomato neat, with no dressing. All that did was to remind me why I did not like salad when I was a child. Serving pupils of secondary school age in particular with bland, tasteless food just sends them off to the nearest fast-food outlet in town. We need to strike the right balance by offering nutritious, tasty food, locally produced where possible. On that note, I would be interested to know what progress is being made in the procurement of local produce, particularly in the public sector, where there is more direct control. Such procurement does not just support local producers, but cuts down food miles and helps to reduce carbon emissions. I know that there is an online portal—public contracts Scotland—that was established to try to assist with that. Are recent figures available on whether locally sourced food and its use are increasing across the public sector? I was encouraged last week by reports of the progress that has been made by Scottish agriculture in reducing carbon emissions by 22 per cent over the  past 20 years while production has remained stable or increased. Agriculture and food production in Scotland still make a significant contribution to our carbon emissions, but it looks like they are going in the right direction with the commitment to maintain momentum. Finally—this addresses Sandra White's point—there is a huge interest among the public in Scotland in growing their own food. A briefing that was given out at the Scottish Allotments and Gardens Society reception last night stated that almost 6,000 people are on the waiting lists for local authority allotments, of which there are around 7,000 in Scotland. Sixty new groups are also looking for land and support. With such demand for allotments and community gardens, we need to find innovative ways of freeing up land for cultivation by the public. I was interested to hear from the environment minister last night that housing associations and others are now getting involved in making land available. Other landowners, such as farmers, might also be able to get involved in enabling expansion to meet that demand. It is well known that involving young children in growing food helps to engage their interest in healthy eating and in trying foods that they would not normally like, such as vegetables. Some schools are able to incorporate that into their eco schools programmes and some of the schools in my constituency do so. However, not every school has the land to be able to do that. Allotments and community gardens, particularly in urban areas, could play an important role in the eco school programme as well as in outdoor learning. We on the Labour back benches are happy to join in the celebration of the growth of the Scottish food and drink fortnight and to wish the year of food and drink every success, but we need to recognise that a food and drink strategy has to be long term and inherently linked to other strategies and priorities.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last reviewed its guidance to local authorities on school transport. (S3O-11367)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his interesting reply. I realise that the work is still under way, but perhaps he can give some guidance on the importance that local authorities should place on the safety of young people who have to walk to school, particularly in rural areas, where roads can be unlit and the speed limit is often 60mph. How should those considerations be weighed against the application of the 2-mile and 3-mile walking distances?

The announcement that Connaught has gone into receivership is a major concern to many of my constituents. One hundred and fifty jobs are on the line, many of which transferred to Connaught from Dumfries and Galloway Council when Dumfries and Galloway Housing Partnership awarded its maintenance contract to Connaught. In addition, Connaught subcontracts to a number of small local businesses, the future of which are now uncertain. Will the First Minister assure me that his Government will do whatever it can to facilitate a solution that safeguards those jobs in Dumfries and Galloway?

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive how its zero waste strategy will be financed. (S3O-11184)

The zero waste strategy recognises that there will be initial costs for local  authorities and others. Indeed, on page 3, the plan states that the Government "will enable local and targeted support to help different sectors improve their understanding and use of resources." Following on from that, what is the role of the Scottish Futures Trust in supporting the zero waste strategy? Will the targeted support include financial support? Does the cabinet secretary see a role for private finance in the development of waste management facilities?

At stage 1, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee received evidence of concerns that a corporate body that acts as a tribunal should not have Crown immunity and that, if the commission does not have Crown immunity, commissioners could individually be liable to legal action with respect to their decisions and an award of expenses could be made against the commission if its decision were appealed to and overturned by the Land Court. At stage 2, the minister stated: "the Crofters Commission is not a tribunal exercising a judicial function and it does not currently have Crown status of any kind."—[ Official Report, Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 2 June 2010; c 2742.] She argued that the wording of the bill is intended to clarify the situation rather than to remove an existing power. That was the first time that that argument was put to us; it was not raised at stage 1 by the minister or by any witnesses. I have therefore lodged a probing amendment to enable the minister to develop her argument and perhaps refer to the existing legislation governing the Crofters Commission, which does not confer Crown immunity. If the minister can confirm on the record that Crown immunity has never been invoked in the case of the Crofters Commission, I will be happy not to press the amendment. I move amendment 99.

I am somewhat disappointed that the minister has not taken the opportunity to confirm on the record that Crown immunity has never been invoked—that was what my question was about. If she says that the commission has never had it, it must never have been invoked. She has not confirmed that, so I will press the amendment.

Amendments 76 and 77 are alternatives, to give members a choice, so I will not move them en bloc. They represent the rewording of an amendment that I lodged at stage 2 and relate to a different section from the stage 2 amendment. Section 20 permits a crofter to engage in or refrain from "an activity for the purpose of conserving ... the natural beauty of the locality of the croft; or ... the flora and fauna of that locality", without being in danger of falling foul of their duty not to neglect their croft. That could create a loophole that could be used to excuse neglect if the crofter claimed that he or she refrained from an activity to preserve the habitat of a species, for example, unless an arbitrator could give advice on whether such action was appropriate. Amendment 77 states that the commission should not conclude that a crofter is in breach of their duty if it has requested a conservation body such as SNH to confirm whether refraining from or engaging in the activity contributes to the conservation of the natural beauty of the locality or its flora and fauna, and that that has been confirmed by the organisation. In addition, amendment 76 requires the commission to take evidence from the crofter or owner-occupier crofter on "planning and management relating to the activity being engaged in or refrained from". That is in addition to the advice of the conservation body. At stage 2, the minister was concerned that my amendment would require all crofters who were engaged in conservation to have a plan that was approved by a conservation body. I trust that the wording of amendment 76 is now clear in setting out that all that the crofter is required to do is to provide "evidence of planning and management". The advice of the conservation body will be requested separately by the commission. I hope that that removes concerns about overburdening crofters. If not, amendment 77 is similar to amendment 76, but does not require evidence of planning and management from the crofter. Amendments 76 and 77 help to address the concerns that John Scott expressed in speaking to group 9 amendments, regarding purposeful and meaningful use in respect of the control of, for example, iris and other plants for the protection of corncrakes and other farmland birds. A crofter could present that sort of evidence to demonstrate  that they were not neglecting their croft. I hope that the revised amendments, in particular the fuller provisions of amendment 76, receive the support of members. I move amendment 76.

I neither accept nor fully understand the minster's objection to my amendments. All that my proposed measures do is require the commission to seek from the crofter a reason why they are refraining from activity and then to check with an appropriate conservation body that the course of action is appropriate. It is simple. I do not understand the objection, and leaving the bill as it is might create a loophole that a solicitor could use in the future with regard to crofting legislation. We will be talking about loopholes again later, but there is one in the bill that my amendments in this group would help to close.

I hope that amendment 77 is more acceptable.  Amendment 77 moved—[Elaine Murray].

The committee was concerned about how suspected breaches of duty in respect of absenteeism and neglect might be progressed. For example, when we were in Sutherland we heard about a crofter who was aware of neglected crofts in her township  that she would have been keen to work, but neither she nor the grazings committee were sure how the situation could be tackled. The committee also heard somewhat contradictory evidence from witnesses—Andrew Thin of Scottish Natural Heritage wanted the crofting commission to be under a statutory duty to investigate suspected breaches of duty whereas Drew Ratter was concerned that the commission should not be required to act as "a private detective agency ... inspecting 18,000 crofts at regular intervals".—[ Official Report, Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 23 February 2010; c 2459.] There were three amendments on the issue at stage 2—from me, John Scott and Rob Gibson—none of which was mutually exclusive. Indeed, our amendments today are not mutually exclusive either. The minister was sympathetic to the intentions of all three amendments but had reservations about the wording, so they were withdrawn to allow the members to discuss with the bill team how they might be progressed. I am grateful to the bill team for revised amendments 74 and 75, which I hope will now receive the minister's support. Amendment 74 would place a duty on the commission to investigate a suspected breach of duty reported in writing by a grazings committee, grazings constable, assessor or member of the crofting community in which the croft is situated, unless it considers that the complaint is frivolous or vexatious. Amendment 75 is a consequential technical amendment. John Scott's amendment 1 would require crofters to provide the commission annually with information. At stage 2, John Scott suggested that that could be tied in with the agricultural census. That was a neat solution, but it has not survived into his stage 3 amendment. Nevertheless, I am happy to support amendments 1 and 87 as well as my amendments 74 and 75.

To ask the Scottish Executive what criteria it will use to assess the pilot national health service board elections that took place in Dumfries and Galloway and Fife on 10 June 2010. (S3O-11063)

Does the cabinet secretary share my disappointment that only 22 per cent of  the electorate of Dumfries and Galloway voted on 10 June, despite its being an all-postal ballot? One of the points that my constituents have made to me is that having to read through the biographies of 70 candidates for 10 places was rather off-putting. Should the pilots be rolled out elsewhere, I wonder whether consideration might be given to voting on a ward basis, particularly in rural areas, or to requiring candidates to have a certain number of supporting nominations.

I had intended to make a critically constructive contribution, but the tirade of personal abuse that was the cabinet secretary's opening speech, and which has been reflected in the speeches by some of his back benchers, makes that rather more difficult. Nevertheless, I will do my best to be constructive because I am not negative about the curriculum for excellence, and I am desperate for it to deliver the best possible outcomes for the children of Scotland and for Scotland's future.  There were good and sound reasons for wanting to introduce a more flexible approach to the curriculum. The rigid subject-bound approach in secondary schools was, for many children in S1 and S2, not delivering. The period of adapting from a topic-and-project based approach in primary school to separate subjects delivered by different teachers in different classrooms too often resulted in a period of stagnation in the early years of secondary school and, in some cases, in a deterioration of children's skills and confidence. I have observed in schools examples of excellent practice that would fit in very well with the principles of the curriculum for excellence. I attended Dumfries high school a couple of weeks ago—to partake of a school dinner, but that is a totally different issue—where I was given the chance to drop in on an S2 environmental project, which was exemplary. The young people were looking at the changes in the school's environment over the past 100 years and were collecting samples of plants, insects and so on. The science teacher was working with a creative writing teacher and an art teacher, and he was brimming with enthusiasm. I could see that enthusiasm being caught by his pupils, who in front of my eyes were developing their skills of observation and classification, which are key scientific skills. I said to the headteacher afterwards that it was the type of learning that was envisaged by those who had conceived the curriculum for excellence. I also recently presented Duncow primary school with its second green flag. That gave me a chance to chat with its eco committee, which includes children as young as primary 3. Without a teacher being present, they were able to describe to me what they had done to get the award. They communicated effectively—part of what the curriculum for excellence is about—and they were clearly developing early science skills. I studied science and I also taught science, admittedly mainly to adults, and I have some concerns about the way in which the curriculum for excellence will be implemented in science education. It is great to get young people interested in and enthusiastic about science, but there is a time when the "Wow!" factor has to develop into core competencies, skills and knowledge. That development will and should be challenging, and those competencies, skills and knowledge are not identical across the spectrum of sciences. I know that the teaching unions have expressed concerns that teachers may be expected to teach unfamiliar subjects because of the interdisciplinary nature of the coursework. I have had some experience of that, as I was required to teach both geology and biology when I taught the Open University science foundation course, but had  never studied either in my life. It told me something about the learning and teaching experiences, but it was challenging. I know that teachers, in particular, will be sensitive to the effect that their possible lack of confidence may have on their pupils' learning. I know that the science baccalaureate is intended to prepare school students to study science and engineering at university; we had a presentation on the science baccalaureate at the cross-party group on science and technology a few months ago. There was a lot of enthusiasm from those who are involved in its delivery, and I imagine that many students will be enthused, but I am not convinced that it will be right for all students or that it is a panacea. First, pupils who are going on to study scientific subjects need to develop their problem-solving skills and knowledge before the senior stage, which commences in S4. Students will need, for example, to distinguish between physics and biology and other sciences and to know which disciplines they are attracted to. That is obviously tied in with both teaching resources and the new qualification arrangements. Secondly, I am concerned that the science baccalaureate might narrow students' focus. It seems to be more in line with the English A level system and the three-year honours degree. The flexibility of the four-year Scottish honours degree has its advantages—the cabinet secretary addressed a reception last week to celebrate the success of Scottish science and engineering, during which he described being forced to take a science subject at university and then really enjoying studying it. I had the converse experience at university of not being allowed to do extra maths and being forced to do philosophy, which I then really enjoyed. The fact that we have a broad curriculum, even at higher education level, that brings us out of our comfort zone and allows us to learn new things, is a strength of our system, and I would not like us to lose it. My final point on the curriculum for excellence is on how it fosters what I would call general scientific literacy. I must say that that is an area in which previous education regimes have failed. Too many people feel that science is too difficult and that they cannot do it. The vast majority of people do not have the confidence in their own scientific judgment to challenge what they are told by the media or advertising, which leaves them open to being conned. I believe that what is perhaps even more important is that everyone can enjoy science at some level, just as they can enjoy sport or the arts at some level. One of the great strengths of the curriculum for excellence is its potential to give children the confidence to engage with science—a  confidence that, I hope, will grow with them. That will not be achieved if we do not get the curriculum for excellence right. Rushing it in without proper consultation and discussion with those who will deliver the curriculum will not result in the kind of education system that we all want. I will finish on a local issue. Kenneth Macintosh mentioned the pressures that are building in the Scottish education system at the moment. I know that the cabinet secretary has had—and possibly still has—an interest in Dumfries and Galloway, and I wonder how he feels about the loss of 23 teachers in this current year, the potential reduction in the numbers of classroom assistants and the removal of school transport from places such as Stranraer and Heathhall in Dumfries. We are seeing reductions in the quality of our education in that area at the very time when we should be seeing consolidation, given that there is a new curriculum coming in.

Obviously, one of the ways in which the Scottish Government could promote food and drink from the north-east, or from other regions of Scotland, such as Dumfries and Galloway, is by promoting the procurement of locally produced food by the public sector. What steps is the cabinet secretary taking to encourage Scottish Government departments, councils and health boards to procure food locally?

I congratulate Stuart McMillan on securing this debate and organising last week's Scottish boating alliance reception, which highlighted the contribution of recreational boating to the Scottish economy. I understand that the figure is comparable to that for golf, which came as a surprise to me. Stuart McMillan's motion refers to the contribution that the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 can make to improving the health of the seas around Scotland. As a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, which scrutinised and amended the legislation during its passage  through the Parliament, I strongly agree that the 2010 act has the potential to make a significant contribution to Scottish marine health. However, as Scottish Environment LINK's briefing points out, that will depend on the act being well implemented. As it is brought into force, much will depend on the way in which the duties that are placed on the Scottish ministers and public authorities are exercised. For example, section 5 requires the Scottish ministers to set a number of objectives: economic and social, on the marine ecosystem, and on mitigation of and adaptation to climate change. As Scottish Environment LINK points out, those objectives will need to be reconciled. The various partners in the marine planning partnerships that will be tasked with drawing up regional marine plans will have a range of interests, some of which will be in competition with one another. Work will be required to negotiate a solution that is acceptable to all partners, in so far as that is possible. Passing the bill this year is just the beginning of a process that I believe will continue for many years. During its passage there was much interest—and rightly so—in the welfare of seals, particularly as the population of the common seal has declined substantially in recent years. The part of the bill dealing with seals received the greatest number of responses from the public during the consultation period. Sharks, whose populations have also declined significantly, do not enjoy the same level of public affection, unfortunately. They might not look cute and cuddly, but sharks are an important indicator of the health of the seas, as they are at the top of the marine food pyramid. Loss of population among sharks, as predators, can significantly affect the ecosystem. At least 30 species of shark occur in UK waters. Some are resident off our coasts all the time; others are migratory. Half of British shark species appear on the red list of the IUCN—the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources—which assesses species' risk of extinction. Sharks are vulnerable, because their development, both before and after birth, is slow, meaning that they mature very slowly and grow slowly. They also have few young, so they are highly susceptible to overfishing, either for their meat and fins or as bycatch. Organisations such as the Scottish Sea Angling Conservation Network believe that more effort should be made by Government and fisheries managers to protect shark species. The network's argument for that requires to be backed up by evidence, which is why the SSACN has organised the Scottish shark tagging programme. The next event, Sharkatag 2010, takes place during the weekend of 18 June in the western Solway.  Last year's event in the Solway tagged 222 sharks, which at first seems a reasonable figure, although the majority were immature females, with a small number of larger females—and the male breeding stock that would have been expected was absent across the region. In addition, only a handful of rays were tagged. Twenty years ago, mature rays and tope were plentiful in that part of the Solway. The good news for humans in Dumfries and Galloway—in contrast to the sharks—was that, of the 175 sea anglers who registered for the event, 90 per cent came from outwith the region and over a third from outside Scotland, so the event was shown to contribute to the local economy. I welcome the focus that world oceans day brings to our consideration of the marine environment. Like others, I believe that the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 has the potential to improve the health of Scotland's seas significantly, but I also believe that we have a lot of work to do to achieve that improvement—not least through enhancing the protection of vulnerable marine species such as sharks and rays.

I congratulate the Local Government and Communities Committee on a detailed and thoughtful inquiry and report. I hope that the Scottish Government and COSLA will take on board many of the recommendations and conclusions that the committee produced after several months of hard work. I offered to speak in the debate not because I have a detailed knowledge of the contents of the report, nor because I am a member of the committee. Thus far in the debate, committee members have gone into considerable detail in explaining the contents of the report. I offered to speak because I want to talk about the consequences of a Tory-Liberal Democrat coalition—not the shiny new Con-Dem coalition that was formed last week, with all those shiny new faces, but one that has been running Dumfries and Galloway Council for the past three years—as that illustrates some of the problems to which the report refers. Next Monday, Mr Gideon George Osborne, the new Chancellor of the Exchequer, intends to reveal how he will save £6 billion through efficiency savings and waste reduction. In a speech given as recently as 29 March, he confidently told voters: "Not a single penny will come from the frontline services that people depend on." We will see on Monday. If we look at the record of Dumfries and Galloway Council over the past three years, the story is rather different. The council administration's budget this year removed £491,000 from the secondary school budget, axing 23 teachers posts. I always thought that delivering education to our young people was a front-line service—an important one that influences both individuals' futures and our country's future economic success. The council has taken 49.1 million pennies from a front-line service. That was not all. Later this year, the council is to consult on cutting a further £133,000 by cutting the  number of primary classroom assistants, who help to free up teachers' time so that they can teach and who support children's education. In fact, the politicians in the administration wanted to inflict £545,000 of cuts on secondary schools, but their officials warned them—going with the grain of the committee's report—that the cost of severances would be so significant that such cuts would not be possible. That must be set against the backdrop of the fact that in the previous year the education maintenance programme was underspent by £5.2 million—money that was not spent on repair of the region's schools. Now a new line of attack is opening up, because the school meals service is under attack. Because of poor uptake, councillors are considering reducing secondary school meals provision to a cafe deli-type service in 10 of the region's schools, including five in my constituency—Langholm academy, Annan academy, Dumfries academy, Dumfries high school and St Joseph's college, pupils from which were here earlier today. It has been estimated that the proposal will result in the loss of up to 20 council catering posts, as well as reducing the quality and choice of food in schools. I suspect that it is unlikely to reduce the problems of poor uptake. Not just education is suffering the axe. The community transport fund has been cut by £169,000. Community transport initiatives such as that in Annandale have been invaluable to residents in rural areas, transporting disabled and elderly people to medical appointments and lunch clubs, and providing day trips to other parts of the south of Scotland. For example, recently a group of teachers and pupils from Hightae primary school, a small rural school in my constituency, used the Annandale initiative bus to arrange a trip up to the Scottish Parliament. That small school could not afford the charges that are levied by commercial companies. In his recent proposed regulation of bus services bill, my colleague Charlie Gordon wanted to strengthen support for community transport by making older and disabled people eligible to use their travel passes on it. It was shameful that no other party represented in the chamber supported the bill. Instead of supporting the fantastic community transport service, Dumfries and Galloway councillors took an axe to it.

I do not know how many signed up to it, but the bill was overwhelmingly supported by Labour members. I am not aware of a single Labour member who did not support it.  Because Dumfries and Galloway Council does not charge for parking, our civic leaders came up with a nice little surprise for disabled people—a tax on parking especially for them, by charging for blue badge applications. The result was that the only people in Dumfries and Galloway to pay for parking were the disabled, because everyone else gets it free. Both the Labour group and the Dumfries and Galloway Coalition of Disabled People challenged the measure under the Disability Discrimination Act 2005, and it has been suspended. Unfortunately, there does not seem to be much chance of the people who paid the charge getting their money back. Council staff wages have also been reduced. As a result of the single status agreement, community wardens have seen their wages cut. I find that extraordinary, because I thought that people whose jobs were red circled would be kept where they were while everyone else caught up with them. In fact, people in an important service, who assist the police and the public, have seen their wages cut. Members may ask whether Labour councillors proposed alternatives. They did. Sadly, proposals to cut councillors' salaries, to reduce the use of consultants on council business and to cut the number of trips, conferences and other junkets enjoyed by councillors and officials were thrown out. Members might also ask what SNP councillors did. I am sorry to tell them that, as usual, SNP councillors voted with the Tories. In fact, they proposed cuts that were even greater than those that the Conservative and Liberal Democrat administration proposed. I commend the committee's report, which makes an important, valuable contribution. I condemn the cuts that have been inflicted on the people of Dumfries and Galloway by the Con-Dems on the council.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to speak in this stage 1 debate on the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill. The process to get to this stage has been fascinating, not least because of the opportunities that there have been to take evidence and visit the crofting counties. Those visits were an eye-opener to a softie from the warm south-west of the country. I thank the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee clerks and advisers, and the crofters for their hospitality and for contributing to my crofting education. As Maureen Watt said, our trips took place in February and March. That enabled us to see at first hand crofting work in some of the most difficult agricultural areas of Scotland by people who, in general, have full-time or part-time employment elsewhere. I was extremely impressed by the real commitment that the crofters showed to maintaining a traditional form of agriculture, despite the pressures of 21st century life and the harshness and length of winters in the north of Scotland. Labour members share the aspiration to create a stable and sustainable future for crofting. However, as other members have said, it is not just regulation that is important in ensuring the future of crofting; economic development and opportunities and financial support are also important. It has been said that we have significant reservations about aspects of the proposed legislation. I will add to what Sarah Boyack and Peter Peacock said in outlining those reservations. In addition to the financial implications for crofters of the map-based register that is to be held by the Registers of Scotland, which Peter Peacock described, we believe that, as it stands, the financial memorandum to the bill does not address the resource implications for the commission, with its new and more onerous duties. Under the bill, any application for entry in the crofting register must first be considered by the crofting commission. Moreover, the commission's approval is required for many of the trigger points. The commission will have to weed out defective applications and ensure that any application that goes to the keeper of the register contains the appropriate and relevant information. The financial memorandum suggests that no additional  resource will be required to cope with that, whereas the Crofters Commission has suggested that two new full-time posts may be required to process and check applications at the pre-registration stage. The bill places a duty on crofters to be ordinarily resident within 16km of their croft and not to neglect it. Some of our financial concerns result from the bill as it stands. I appreciate what the minister said about extension of the distance to 32km perhaps addressing some of our concerns, but I want to rehearse briefly what our concerns about that were. Under the current legislation, the Crofters Commission has discretion to take action. Indeed, as the minister said, it was allocated £100,000 last year for a separate initiative to write to some 600 crofters who were known to live more than 16km from their croft. However, the Crofters Commission told us in supplementary evidence that around 10 per cent of tenant crofters live outwith that distance. The exact figures for owner-occupiers are not known, but the commission has estimated that around 4,000 crofts are not occupied in the sense that the person who works the croft does not live within 10 miles of it. The commission stated in its evidence that, without additional resources, it could process around 100 applications to be absent from a croft per year. Given the criteria, it could take around 40 years to deal with 4,000 applications if there was no further funding. I know that the minister argues that the staff resource that was allocated last year to deal with the initiative that I mentioned could be used in future years to deal with absenteeism applications. That might reduce the time in question, but it would still be 12 to 15 years before applications could be processed. Obviously, a change to 32km could change matters, as fewer crofters would be involved in the process, but we have not considered the financing of the crofting commission for its duties in relation to neglect—we have not considered what the costs and burden on it may be as a result of those. The issue of how far crofters live from crofts is difficult. It can be argued that a distance of 10 miles is inappropriate at a time when most people have a car and can travel 10 miles in a fairly short period of time. On the other hand, those of us who represent rural constituencies know how diverse and different communities that are 10 miles apart can be, never mind communities that are 20 miles apart. A decision on the correct distance is a difficult one to ponder. As we go into stage 2, we will need to reflect further on the best point at which to trigger the absenteeism qualification.

In theory, there is an attraction to that argument, but questions arise. How practical would it be? Would it add further to the bureaucracy of operating the trigger? The issue is difficult. Labour members are supportive of the proposals for a partially elected crofting commission. My colleague Karen Gillon, who cannot attend the debate because of her duties today as a Scottish Parliament member of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, has consistently raised the issue of equal opportunities to the point at which she became notorious among committee members for doing so, with people looking out for what she would say on the issue. Her concerns arise from the fact that, irrespective of who works the croft, around two thirds of registered crofters are men. In some parts of the crofting counties, the imbalance is much greater. If only registered crofters can vote and stand for election, clear gender equality issues arise. We believe that they can be addressed by extending the franchise to the registered crofter's spouse, civil partner or cohabitant. They would appear on the register, just as they appear on the electoral register for parliamentary and council elections, and could then elect members of the crofting commission and nominate people to stand for election. We are disappointed that thus far the minister has rejected the proposal. The committee as a whole would like to see a consultation on constituency boundaries before a decision is taken between the two alternatives. As other members have said, Labour members themselves were divided on whether first past the post or AV should be the preferred electoral method. Peter Peacock came down on the side of AV. The minister is indicating that she has done the same. Do I have a little extra time, Presiding Officer?

Thank you. The cabinet secretary is no longer in the chamber to moan and groan. I have just two brief points to make. Labour members are concerned about the removal of Crown immunity from the crofting commission under schedule 1 to the bill. Evidence to the committee was that the commission acts as a tribunal and that the loss of Crown immunity would create uncertainty over the status of its hearings. I note that the Government has not accepted the point. In its response to our report, the Government did not comment on the possibility of the commission being sued in the civil courts, which could have budgetary  implications or implications for the manner in which decisions are made. The bill gives Scottish ministers the power to change by order the functions of the commission. During stage 1, the Minister for Environment assured the committee that she had no intention of using that power. However, Labour members have serous reservations about the power, albeit that it may have been made redundant by provisions, which we opposed, in the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Act 2010. We believe that the power should be removed from the bill or at least made subject to the super-affirmative procedure. Labour members will support the bill's continuation to stage 2. Our view thereafter will depend on our discussions at stage 2 and amendments to the bill.

I was asking not for additional funding, but for clarification of the Scottish Futures Trust and how it might provide funding for infrastructure, and about the role of the Parliament.

Notwithstanding my preference for debating a published plan and how it would be taken forward, this has been an interesting debate, in which we have talked about rubbish rather than talked rubbish. A number of important points were made about waste reduction and prevention, improving recycling, community recycling and the problems of differential recycling rates. Michael McMahon and Elaine Smith referred to some local authorities becoming dumping grounds because others do not take seriously their responsibilities for the disposal of their own waste. Several members referred to the sometimes contentious issue of energy from waste. Robin Harper and Elaine Smith spoke about pyrolysis, and Chris Harvie referred to other techniques that are perhaps environmentally preferable. Dumfries and Galloway Council had the first energy-from-waste plant in Scotland to use the batch gasification technique. It uses solid recovered fuel from the Ecodeco plant nearby, and it has helped address the problem, which Jim Hume referred to, of the likelihood of landfill fines for the local authority. The plant can produce up to 6.2MW of energy, enough to heat 15,000 homes, and it supplies that to the national grid. On the other side, only 15,000 of the potential 60,000 tonnes of fuel are likely to be produced by the mechanical biological treatment plant. The remainder will come from other sources, including hazardous materials such as food waste, tyres, inks, rubber and heavily contaminated food packaging. COSLA states in its briefing that energy from waste has an essential part to play in local authority strategies. It argues that the approach should not be rigid and that the 25 per cent cap needs to be clarified. I am interested to hear that there has been a change of view from the Government, that the 25 per cent cap is now not  likely to be implemented and that it will be replaced by regulation. That is to be welcomed, and I look forward to hearing more about it. When we consider energy from waste, we must remember that it should be considered in the waste hierarchy, which is that waste that is used to produce energy must be waste that cannot reasonably be reused or recycled. Moreover, it should be coupled with efficient energy recovery and, if linked to efficient combined heat and power systems, it can be eligible for renewables obligation certificates and can contribute to meeting our climate change targets. However, we should not use the techniques if there is any other possible use for the waste that has been produced. John Scott referred to the opportunities for employment in the new technologies and the possibility of 2,000 green jobs. Scotland must take advantage of the opportunities that are presented and the market development that is possible in new technologies for dealing with waste. In my constituency, one possible use for the former Chapelcross nuclear power plant is as a site for the development of green jobs in reuse and recycling. Several members, including Robin Harper, mentioned waste prevention. Last year, WRAP—the Waste and Resources Action Programme—reported that £1 billion of food is needlessly thrown away at a cost of £430 to every household, rising to £550 to families with children. That is 570,000 tonnes of food, decaying to 1.7 million tonnes of CO2, which is a scandal when so much of the world is without adequate food. It is an environmental problem, and it is a waste of money to individual families. The issue needs to be tackled. Rob Gibson and Nanette Milne referred to supermarket BOGOFs and multiple deals, but there is also an issue of food being available only in large packs, which is not particularly handy for single or elderly people. It is true that most families probably have no idea how much food and money they are wasting, which is why educating people about waste prevention is important. Cathy Peattie and Friends of the Earth have made an important point in raising concerns that insufficient emphasis and money are put on prevention rather than on recycling and reuse. Cathy Peattie described to us the role of the INCREASE III project in educating volunteers and the time that it takes to train those volunteers and to educate the public. It is a great pity that that project was terminated in its last year of funding, because it had an important role to play. Waste prevention—domestic, commercial or industrial—is at the top of the hierarchy and needs to be incentivised. We need to look at the ways in which we do that.  I am pleased to note the progress that is being made. There is cross-party support for the approach and that will remain stable in the long term, given that the issue will exist for many generations in the Parliament and we will have to continue to work towards achieving zero waste. We have done a lot of talking over the past three years, so let us get cracking, implement the zero waste plan and look at the way in which we will resource it in the future.

I am, of course, pleased to see progress being made towards a zero waste plan. The history of the development of the plan shows that the cabinet secretary announced a review of the national waste strategy in a statement to the chamber in January 2008. We had another debate on the national waste strategy on 11 June last year, before the consultation document was launched. During that debate, we were invited to present our views on what should be in the consultation document. Eleven months later, we are having another debate, which is our final opportunity to influence the plan that will be published in a few weeks' time. It has taken some time to be produced, so I hope that it will be of good quality. The European revised water framework directive must be transposed into Scots law by 12 December this year. It is regrettable that the development of the plan has taken so long. To be honest, I would have preferred to have seen the plan and debated how it will be implemented. I doubt that any radical changes will be made as a result of this debate, although I expect that there will be general agreement on the principles and the way forward. To be positive, I welcome the creation of a single Scottish programme under zero waste Scotland to deliver the zero waste plan. A similar approach was taken by the previous United Kingdom Government, which gave the Waste and Resources Action Programme responsibility as the overarching delivery body for business and household waste management. There are many players in waste management, and the creation of a single programme is a sensible move that will foster the coherence to which the Government's motion refers. The Labour Party's amendment refers to the concerns that were expressed in Audit Scotland's report, "Protecting and improving Scotland's environment", which was published in January this year. The report noted that, although Scotland was meeting the 2010 European targets for landfill and preventing an increase in the production of municipal waste, local authorities would struggle to meet targets beyond this year. SEPA has voiced similar concerns, which have been reported in the press today. By 2025, councils will have to collect, recycle and compost 70 per cent of municipal waste. That will require additional waste management facilities. I understand that those facilities will be identified in the final plan, but wonder whether the means of funding the new facilities will also be identified. In particular, I would like to know what the role of the Scottish Futures Trust will be in funding them. Last week, the cabinet secretary advised me in an  answer to a written question on the role of the SFT in delivering the zero waste strategy that it is working with COSLA to collect data and supporting local authorities in securing value for money, and that it had initiated a waste procurement forum to disseminate best practice. That is all very laudable, but members should remember what happened on 20 May 2008, when the Scottish Government launched the business case for the SFT. The SFT was lauded as "the way forward for infrastructure investment". Ministers also promised a Scotland-wide municipal bond. The SFT was supposed to be about funding and investment as well as about advice, data collection and value for money. Perhaps the cabinet secretary can clarify whether he supports waste management facilities being funded in future under a non-profit-distributing public-private partnership model. Ministers will no doubt wish to remind members of the zero waste fund of £152 million over three years, of which local authorities have received £80 million. That money is not ring fenced, but it is intended that it be used to deliver the waste management targets in councils' single outcome agreements. I will make two points about that. First, Audit Scotland has stated that those targets are unlikely to be sufficient to meet European targets for reducing biodegradable municipal waste that is sent to landfill beyond this year. Secondly, is the funding that has been made available enough? Dumfries and Galloway Council, which is a fairly small local authority, secured funding from the former strategic waste fund for a private finance initiative agreement with Shanks to construct and operate an Ecodeco mechanical biological treatment plant for its municipal solid waste. The contract is worth £270 million over 25 years, which is more than £10 million a year. That has enabled Dumfries and Galloway Council to leap from the bottom of the recycling and recovery league tables to somewhere near the top. Irrespective of the pros and cons of the means of treatment—it does not, for example, separate different colours of glass and therefore glass cannot be recycled as glass; rather, it has to be used as a replacement for aggregate—or the method of financing, the project demonstrates the scale of investment that is needed in waste management. At the moment, I do not see where that investment will come from. I also wonder how local authorities are to be encouraged to work together on joint projects without the up-front carrot of levering in funding above and beyond their somewhat pressured council budgets. There is a genuine issue here. We all aspire to zero waste and I am sure that we all want a long-term strategy that must be longer term than single  periods of government. We need to understand and tackle how the strategy will be funded and that means that we need to understand how we work with the private sector. There is difficulty with council budgets, so we need to consider how to lever in funding from elsewhere in order to fund some of the projects. I was pleased to note the agreement last week between the cabinet secretary and the Labour Party's shadow cabinet secretary that there is a pressing need to tackle commercial and industrial waste in Scotland. The cabinet secretary reiterated that today. Household waste accounts for only 15 per cent of the waste produced in Scotland. The reduction of domestic and non-domestic waste needs to be considered jointly. I understand that that is also in the plan and I look forward to finding out more about it. The amendments of Liam McArthur and John Scott—the new best friends—both express sentiments that we share. I understand that there is a problem with the wording of the Liberal Democrat motion in that it mentions the publication of the document rather than the process, but I look forward to Liam McArthur's explanation of that in his contribution. I am pleased to move amendment S3M-6275.1, to insert at end: "and to address the concerns raised in the Audit Scotland report, Protecting and improving Scotland's environment , that councils need additional waste management facilities to meet national landfill and recycling targets."

To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the use of public money in its appeal to the Court of Session regarding the Scottish Information Commissioner's access to Government documents. (S3O-10092)

In November last year, one of my researchers requested, under FOI, information relating to a ministerial visit to my constituency. Despite the advice of the Scottish Information Commissioner on how to make his request, he became embroiled in a bizarre exchange of correspondence with the minister's private secretary in which increased focus was demanded before information could be released. It now transpires that others, including the commissioner himself, have had similar experiences. The minister's party voted for the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002, and the Scottish Government's website states that it is committed to open government and freedom of information. Why, then, is the minister's Government trying to thwart the intentions of that act by not releasing information that would previously have been released by other Administrations?

The cabinet secretary is aware that Dumfries and Galloway Council applied for an exemption last year and was rejected. Will he comment on why events such as common ridings are considered to be so disruptive that they are dealt with in the same manner as sectarian parades such as Orange order marches? If he is not prepared to reconsider the issue now, when will he reconsider it?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Can you confirm that, if our amendment is agreed to, the Conservative amendment will amend the motion as amended by our amendment and that the amendments are not incompatible? The wording is similar.

This is our third debate on the important topic of aquaculture in less than 18 months. We debated the topic in November 2008 and again in May 2009, on the day that the strategy was launched. On that  occasion, I expressed disappointment that the document was not available until the day of the debate, which meant that members did not have the opportunity to study the strategy or to receive representations from stakeholders. If my memory is correct, Robin Harper did not receive a copy of the strategy before he spoke in the debate. I am therefore disappointed that the document "Delivering Planning Reform for Aquaculture" also appeared at short notice and that there has been little chance to speak to the industry, local authorities or other stakeholders. I appreciate that people outwith Government are involved in the aquaculture task force, so it might have been their timescales that determined the date of publication. However, it would have been useful to have been able to be briefed in advance by a wider section of interests. The debate could have been scheduled for next week or the following one to give members more time to consider the contents of the document and to receive representations. I suspect that, given the minister's long session at the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee this morning she, too, might have appreciated a different timescale. I appreciate the minister's apology to Parliament on behalf of the Scottish Government. I hope that her colleagues will bear the issue in mind in future. I turn to the subject of the debate. Since the previous debate on the issue, I have had the opportunity to visit, along with Nanette Milne, freshwater and seawater fish farms in the Fort William area and the Marine Harvest processing plant. That was during the summer recess. I draw members' attention to my voluntary entry in the register of member's interests in connection with that visit, which was extremely useful in improving my knowledge of the industry. Gutted fish is packed in ice and distributed for further processing to companies such as the St James Smokehouse in Annan in my constituency, which is a specialist producer of hand-carved smoked salmon that employs about 20 people, and the Seafood Company, which took over Pinneys of Scotland in the same town and which employs more than 500 people. It is Marks and Spencer's leading supplier of seafood dishes. I am fortunate in having managed to observe the chain of salmon farming from the introduction of smolts to their new home in a freshwater loch to enjoying the final product. Two weeks ago we debated Brian Pack's interim report on the future of support for agriculture in Scotland and how we can encourage a vibrant industry that supplies healthy and environmentally sustainable food, produced as locally as possible. Like agriculture, aquaculture contributes to the Scottish economy and sustains employment in remote rural areas. Last week the Rural Affairs  and Environment Committee visited Shetland to take evidence on the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill. The employment provided by aquaculture and the oil and gas industry on the island helps to sustain a fairly healthy crofting tradition. In many parts of Scotland, aquaculture is part of the complex mix of activity that retains communities in rural locations. Indeed, although there is not a great deal of aquaculture in my constituency at the moment, downstream processing is a very important contributor to the local economy. Pinneys of Scotland, for example, is probably the largest private sector employer in my constituency. In common with agriculture, aquaculture supplies healthy food produced here in Scotland. One of the challenges is to ensure that the industry is environmentally sustainable and does not impact adversely on other interests, such as wild fishing, which uses the same locations and is also important to the Scottish economy. In its briefing, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds raised concerns that the planning document seems concerned only with economic growth based on the principles of sustainable development. It is important that reassurance is provided by the Government on that important issue. I am aware that other groups are considering the issues of animal health, disease control and containment, and that they too will report to the ministerial group, although I am not sure how their work feeds into the work of the aquaculture planning task force. My colleague Richard Simpson will discuss issues of health and disease control. I apologise on Richard Simpson's behalf—he has a school visit that has prevented him from being present at the beginning of the debate. I am unsure about how the planning framework fits with the ecosystem objectives that must be contained in all marine plans or the duty to create an ecologically coherent network of marine protected areas. Much of the work on the planning framework was undertaken before the Marine (Scotland) Bill was passed and I would therefore like to know what will be done to ensure compatibility with that bill, as amended at stage 3. Although I am happy to welcome the work that the task force has undertaken on improving planning procedures in relation to aquaculture, I continue to regret that the Scottish Government did not take the opportunity offered by the Marine (Scotland) Bill to include aquaculture in the same marine licensing system as other marine activities. Page 19 of "A Fresh Start" identified as an issue the simplification of procedures and links with the Marine (Scotland) Bill and Marine Scotland with a desired outcome of having a  "Clear indication of how freshwater and marine aquaculture will be dealt with including maximising opportunities for linkage to other marine industries." I guess that that is the intention of the document that we are discussing today, but the Scottish Government and the Parliament did not take the opportunity to further achieve that outcome afforded by the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010. I remain of the opinion that the results of our failure to do so will become more apparent with the passage of time and the development of mixed marine applications. On the contents of the planning document, I note that there is a commitment that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities will work with the Scottish Government to ensure that planning services within local authorities are adequately resourced to meet the challenges of improving the planning system for aquaculture. Given the pressures that council planning departments already experience, I wonder whether the minister can advise whether additional funding might be allocated to councils for that purpose and whether the matter will be considered in the next spending review. On pages 6 to 8 of the document a series of actions to be completed by defined dates are listed. All those on page 6 should be complete already. Will the minister advise whether they have all been achieved and, if not, which actions are still outstanding and when they are expected to be completed? The final paragraph of the document states that progress on specific actions will be reported to the ministerial group on aquaculture through the licensing sub-group on a six-monthly basis. Will the minister advise whether progress will also be reported to Parliament, perhaps through correspondence with the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee or through publication on the Scottish Government website? We have heard much about undeveloped sites in the past and I was surprised to note that the sub-group on improved systems for licensing aquaculture developments found that the assumptions regarding undeveloped leases on which the strategic framework was developed were incorrect. The industry data analysis shows limited unused but usable capacity—only 4.4 per cent of farm sites were found to be inactive with potential use and 2.4 per cent were inactive with uncertain potential. Stakeholders had advised that an issue to address was the "large number of undeveloped leases". It would now appear that that was a perception, rather than a fact. It is hoped that other misconceptions have not found their way into the  five key themes and that, if they have done so, they are identified and rectified, as that one was. The Liberal Democrat amendment makes important points about skills and training, which David Whitton will discuss in his speech. The points about protected geographical status are also important. At present, eggs and smolts can be imported from countries with lower environmental and inspection standards and the final product can still be marketed as Scottish farmed salmon. Peter Peacock will develop that theme in his speech. We are happy to support the Liberal Democrat amendment. The Conservative amendment causes me some concern, because it seems to take a gung-ho approach. It refers to removing barriers to the development and growth of the industry without any mention of sustainability or growth within environmental limits. As it stands, it is not compatible with the sentiments of the Marine (Scotland) Bill, which we passed so recently. I look forward to hearing clarification of that during the debate. Despite my reservations about the lack of reference to environmental factors in John Scott's amendment, we heartily concur with his position on affordable housing. The Green amendment refers to replacing "net farming with closed containment systems as soon as possible." I have discussed that issue with industry representatives, who believe that, at the moment, the energy requirement and the carbon footprint of the technology required to keep cages clean would probably be prohibitive. They also said that in the heavy seas of the north of Scotland the tides are such that sea lice do not proliferate on farmed fish. However, the improved containment sub-group suggests that closed containment might have future potential, to which the minister referred in her speech. Presumably that could involve combined renewables and aquaculture projects. I would welcome the minister's views on any timescale for that to be progressed. Closed containment could provide opportunities for aquaculture in environmentally sensitive locations if the technological problems can be overcome. However, it is premature to demand that freshwater and seawater net farming be replaced by closed containment. Scotland is now the second-biggest exporter of fresh salmon—which is due in part to the problems of the industry in Chile. However, it is important to encourage consumption in Scotland of this good, healthy, local product. The industry is increasingly important to our economy, but we must also bear in mind that it must not expand at the expense of our environment or other important users of our  fresh and sea waters or to the detriment of other industries that depend on those locations. I welcome the opportunity to discuss aquaculture again, because it is an important industry in Scotland. We must bear in mind its contribution to health and our food security as well as to the economy. We must always bear in mind the need to develop the industry within safe environmental limits. I move amendment S3M-5908.2, to leave out from second "notes" to end and insert: "; also recognises the potential of the industry to increase the availability of healthy, environmentally sustainable, locally-produced food; notes the considerable work being carried out under the auspices of A Fresh Start - the renewed Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture , published on 21 May 2009, and notes the continuing commitment to dialogue on the future of the industry in Scotland; regrets, however, the late publication of Delivering Planning Reform for Aquaculture on the Scottish Government website on the day before this debate, and urges the Scottish Government, in future, to ensure that sufficient time is allowed between publication of government documents and their debate in Parliament to enable stakeholders and MSPs to adequately consider their contents."

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is monitoring the progress of local authorities' single outcome agreements. (S3O-9725)

The cabinet secretary is aware of Scottish Environment LINK's concerns about the lack of environmental targets in single outcome agreements—for example, only four out of 32 local authorities mention biodiversity. How will he respond to its suggestion that a strategic environmental assessment be done on all SOAs?

The Pack inquiry's interim report rightly recognises the role of agriculture in providing solutions to global challenges such as food security, the need to tackle climate change, the mitigation of extreme events such as flooding, the need to provide sources of renewable energy and the need to enhance biodiversity; it has already been recognised that the goal to stop the loss of biodiversity across Europe by 2010 will not be achieved. Agriculture is entitled to public financial support for a number of reasons. EU legislation imposes burdens on farming—generally for good reasons, such as animal welfare or environmental sustainability—which increase costs to the producers. Subsidies should promote the production of healthy, environmentally sustainable, locally produced food and, hopefully, should reduce costs to the consumer. Agriculture delivers public benefits in addition to healthy local food. It contributes to the economy nationally and locally in rural areas, it sustains the economies of some remote rural areas and it is essential to managing the countryside in an environmentally sustainable manner. The decline in numbers of sheep and cattle on Scotland's uplands, for example, has seriously compromised some valuable but fragile habitats. There is general agreement that the current basis for direct support is well out of date. It is based, of course, on the annual average payments to each farm between 2000 and 2003 and—as others have said—it has continued to provide subsidy for some land that is no longer producing. In considering how to move on from that model of support, difficult choices will need to be made regarding priorities, some of which have already been flagged up.  The interim report suggests that there will be an on-going need for direct payments in Scotland—a conclusion with which I fully agree. The report further argues that an area-based system of direct subsidy should be developed post 2013, with a top-up fund to support practices that improve competitiveness and sustainability, and a continuation of the SRPD and LFASS. The definition of the type of land that qualifies for the LFASS may well change as a result of discussions elsewhere, but it is debatable—as others have suggested—that 85 per cent of Scottish agricultural areas would qualify for the LFASS, which would suggest that it is perhaps too blunt an instrument. I would be interested to hear how Brian Pack and other stakeholders respond to the suggestion from some environmental non-governmental organisations that the LFASS should be replaced with a high nature-value payment. I am not quite sure how those organisations envisage such a system operating, but that will be an interesting discussion. The report contains an example of a possible area-based system for direct payments, which is based on the Macaulay land capability for agriculture classification, annual qualifying requirements of good agricultural and environmental condition and minimum cultivation and stocking rates. That example is included "as a basis for discussion only", but, as John Scott said, it has opened a can of worms that has, to a certain extent, obscured some of the other content in the report. There is discussion on how the top-up fund could be used in addition to the rural development programme as—in the meantime—a redirected pillar 1 fund supplementary to direct payments; for example, to provide transitional support while sectors adjust to area-based payments. There seems to be general support for the idea of area-based payments, but there are a number of areas of disagreement with regard to how and when such a system should be achieved. NFUS would prefer the updating of the historic model in the short term, and a more gradual transition to an area-based system. The Scottish Tenant Farmers Association is concerned that an area-based system with a high base payment would discourage the letting of land, and suggests that payments should be no more than 10 per cent of the average SFP, with top-up payments linked to a rebasing of the historical payment, which the association argues should be given to the producer rather than the landowner. RSPB Scotland, however, would like progress towards area-based payments to start as soon as possible, rather than being left until after 2013.  It is rather disappointing that, although the section on meeting Scotland's objectives links agriculture to several environmental objectives including climate change policy, land use strategy, water supply, biodiversity, flood risk management and renewable energy production, there is little discussion of funding support for those benefits in the interim report. In contrast to the detail of a possible mechanism for direct support, there is little discussion on the future of other funding streams. The rural development programme is envisaged as continuing to be the "prime delivery mechanism for public good benefits from agriculture", and there is a suggestion that in the future, all the funds that are currently modulated from Scotland's pillar 1 payments should be redirected to the SRDP. However, there is little discussion about its possible shape. I understand that that may be fleshed out in the final report, but we need further discussion on it, as we need it on improving cross-compliance and on how the environmental challenges that face Scottish agriculture might best be tackled. Today's debate is part of the consultation, which closes on 5 March. I suggest that we further consider how agriculture is supported in the round in its contribution to public benefit. The report is currently a bit asymmetric. The principal purpose of agriculture must be the production "of healthy, affordable food produced as locally as possible", as our amendment states. There is a clear case for supporting efficient and productive agriculture, provided that it is environmentally sustainable, and every effort should be made to reduce its carbon footprint as much as possible. There is also, as others have said, a strong case for supporting agriculture where it sustains remote communities and rewards farmers and crofters for good management of ecosystems. I urge that in future considerations with stakeholders, some of the areas that have been less considered and less fully debated in the interim report should move to centre stage so that we get a fuller view of the totality of support for agriculture in the future.

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will wish to congratulate Dumfries and Galloway Council, too, on exceeding the 40 per cent target. However, a recent report from Audit Scotland states: "Councils do not have adequate plans to meet landfill and recycling targets beyond 2010". It goes on to say that they "need additional waste management facilities to meet national landfill and recycling targets". I would be grateful if the cabinet secretary responded to those statements from the Audit Scotland report in relation to how targets beyond 2010 might be met.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making on reforming the jury system. (S3O-9609)

Will the cabinet secretary respond to a concern that a constituent of mine expressed? My constituent was recently called to jury service and discovered that some 50 people had been called to form a jury of 15 on a fairly minor case of affray. My constituent thought that that represented an excessive loss of working time to the local economy. Was that issue considered in the review? Does the cabinet secretary intend to make changes in that regard?

I speak as a dog lover who has had the pleasure of owning several dogs over the course of my life. I also speak as someone who has twice received hospital treatment due to attacks by dogs—not my own dogs. I was a signatory to the bill, and I have watched its progress with interest. The principles of the bill have received support from a range of organisations: the Dogs Trust, the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, Advocates for Animals, the Kennel Club, the British Veterinary Association and the Communication Workers Union. One of the first questions I was asked when I visited local sorting offices before Christmas was, "What's happening with Christine Grahame's bill?" The Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 makes it an offence to allow a dog to be dangerously out of control in a public place or in a private place where the dog is not permitted to be. In most instances when postal workers are attacked—indeed, in the two instances when I was attacked—the dog is in its own territory. Some 70 per cent of the 6,000 attacks by dogs on postal workers in the UK take place on private property where the dog's presence is permitted, and the extension in the bill of liability for a dog that is out of control to its behaviour in all places would help to protect those workers. The bill rightly recognises the behaviour of dog owners as the primary cause of attacks by dogs. There are two principal reasons for that. The first  is ownership of dogs by people who do not understand how to train and control them—if a human being is not in control, a dog may become aggressive because it is nervous or feels that it has to take control itself. The other reason, which David McLetchie and Mike Pringle referred to, is the deliberate encouragement of aggressive canine behaviour as part of the owner's more general antisocial behaviour. Dogs were used in warfare in many early civilisations, and unfortunately some are still obtained and used deliberately for the purposes of intimidation. While I support Christine Grahame's bill, I believe that, as it stands, there is an anomaly in it. The bill concentrates on deed not breed, but the list of prohibited dogs—pit bulls, Japanese tosa, fila brasileiro and dogo argentino, which sound a bit like cartoon characters but are actually large US mastiff-type dogs—will remain. Only pit bulls have been an issue in Britain; the others are virtually unknown here. The Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 was, in part, a response to the tragic killing of an 11-year-old girl in Dunoon by two Rottweilers. Other breeds, including Staffordshire bull terriers and one of my favourite breeds, the Jack Russell terrier, have been known to attack people. Indeed, Jack Russells have a bad record of on occasion killing young babies. Pit bulls also have a bad reputation, but the pit bull is not actually a breed of dog. It is a type of dog that is defined by the characteristics of the American pit bull. It is therefore defined by physique and conformation, and not by lineage. A Staffordshire bull terrier crossed with a Labrador could produce a pit bull terrier type dog, and anyone who obtains a pup that grows up into that type of dog is in theory committing an offence if they do not have it destroyed. The law is unworkable in practice, which we know as there are many pit bull type dogs still living in the UK, some of which are dangerous but most of which are probably not. The Kennel Club, which also submitted evidence on behalf of the dangerous dogs act study group, states in its own submission that "it may not be practical in the current political climate to remove the list of banned breeds". However, if the argument really is about deed not breed, that is a bit of a cop-out. Owners who have out-of-control, aggressive pit bull type dogs should be prosecuted; owners who have well-disciplined and well-behaved pit bull type dogs should not be forced to have them destroyed if the dog's only offence is the way that it looks. My preference would be the repeal of sections 1 and 2 of the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991, although I understand that that may be difficult at the  moment. If that is not acceptable, I believe that the index of exempted dogs should be reopened to owner-led applications, which would enable the responsible owners of pit bull type dogs to apply for exemption and to register them if certain requirements are met, such as muzzling. I therefore suggest that the Scottish ministers invoke their powers under subsections (5) and (6) of section 1 of the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 to reopen the index of exempted dogs to owner-led applications.

The Marine (Scotland) Bill is vital and its significance should not be underestimated. The marine area is essential to biodiversity, to food supply, to energy generation and to sequestering carbon—the seas dissolve CO 2 , so they are an extremely important carbon sink. It is no exaggeration to say that the health of the marine environment is essential to the future of our planet. It is our duty to ensure that future generations inherit a marine environment that is biodiverse, that continues to supply healthy local food, whose power can be harnessed to supply renewable energy, and which continues to act as a carbon sink—if it is to do that, its temperature and pH must be retained. It is a great pity that the most recent exposé in the saga of our Westminster colleagues' expenses will doubtless ensure that the media today pays little attention to the passage of the bill. It is unfortunate that the repercussions of the shenanigans of a few Westminster MPs are much more interesting to the national media than the passage of important legislation in the Scottish Parliament.  I thank everyone who was involved in the evolution of the bill, from drafting and scrutiny to amendment. That includes the cabinet secretary and his bill team, as well as his predecessor ministers Sarah Boyack and Rhona Brankin, who worked on defining the scope of the bill. Thanks are due, as ever, to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee clerks, who worked beyond the call of duty on hundreds of amendments and what must have been about 16 hours of stage 1 consideration. On behalf of Labour members, I also thank the witnesses and representative organisations who submitted evidence. I also thank Scottish Environment LINK, the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, the Scottish Salmon Producers Organisation, Advocates for Animals, Scottish Renewables, ScottishPower Renewables, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the bill team, who all made efforts to meet me and colleagues prior to stage 3 to discuss our amendments. I am grateful to them for that. In the course of the bill's progress through Parliament we have made considerable improvements to what was already a good bill. That is not to say that every consultee or contributor will have achieved everything that they wanted to achieve. That would not be possible. Marine planning partnership will necessarily mean compromise. It will be necessary to understand partners' concerns and aspirations. There are many and varied interests in the marine environment and the challenges of working in partnership will remain when the bill is on the statute book. Nevertheless, I have been encouraged by the way in which the bill progressed, which bodes well for marine partnership working. The vast majority of contributors to the scrutiny process approached the issues in a spirit of consensus and partnership. I hope that such an attitude will be replicated when the regional marine planning partnerships are established, because it is essential to the successful implementation of the bill. I am pleased that marine planning partnerships will not be able to consist of a single public authority and must at least include a representative of the Scottish ministers, as a result of my amendment 24. I remain sorry that the intention behind my amendments 41 and 22 was misunderstood, particularly by Tavish Scott, and I suspect that John Scott and I will be proved right in time, as joint fish farming and renewables projects are rolled out. Of course, there can still be amendment in that regard, if necessary. I am very pleased that amendments in the names of Peter Peacock and Liam McArthur on climate change adaptation and mitigation were agreed to, because they have strengthened the  bill. I am pleased that amendments that I and Peter Peacock lodged on the protection and enhancement of the marine area and the linking of planning and marine protection in regional plans were agreed to. I am also delighted by the progress that has been made on the welfare of seals. I know that those who lobbied us to prevent any killing or taking of seals will be disappointed, but we have come a long way from the current situation, in which seals can be used almost as target practice. When the bill is enacted, the killing and taking of seals will be permitted only as a last resort, when all other forms of deterrent do not work. Moreover, any seal licence will contain strict conditions to minimise suffering should a seal have to be taken or killed. Peter Peacock reiterated my request to the cabinet secretary that guidance on the siting of fish farms should be supplied to planning authorities, and I am pleased that the cabinet secretary will consider that. The bill came to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee last summer, and following its passage has been an interesting experience, which has included a number of visits to different parts of the country. I am lucky to live near the banks of the Solway, which is an extremely important marine area. As the Presiding Officer knows, it is well-known for its habitats, wildlife, recreation, angling, fishing and potential renewable energy. The Solway Firth Partnership has provided one model for the way in which marine planning partnerships can work together. Indeed, it has a good record of working within the Solway Firth area in Scotland as well across the border with representative organisations in Cumbria. I am pleased that the bill, and the memorandum of understanding with the UK and its bill, will continue to allow that. I agree with the cabinet secretary that today is one of the Parliament's proudest moments. It ranks alongside the passing of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill and I find it an honour to have been involved with the Marine (Scotland) Bill.

At stage 1, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee invited the cabinet secretary to consider the inclusion in the bill of an offence of intentionally or recklessly harassing seals. Other species are currently protected from disturbance and harassment: the list of European protected species includes citations for other marine animals such as sturgeon; dolphins, porpoises and otters are protected under the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c) Regulations 1994; and section 9 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 makes the disturbance of specific animals an offence. Seals are not currently protected in that way. I lodged an amendment at stage 2 on the offence of disturbance and harassment. The committee was concerned, however, that the interpretation of disturbance could be too wide, and might include people or their dogs who inadvertently disturbed seal colonies while walking on the beach and thereby committed an offence. I therefore did not press that amendment. Instead, I lodged amendment 79. It refers only to "harassment", which is a better-defined term, and it must be done "intentionally or recklessly ... at a haul-out site". The term "haul-out site" is widely recognised by those who are cognisant of seals and their behaviour. Haul-out sites are areas on land that seals use for breeding, pupping or resting. When seals perceive a threat, they race into the water, which can result in mothers and pups becoming separated and aggressive behaviour among mothers when trying to return to their pups. However, "haul-out site" requires to be defined in a legal sense, so the amendment defines it as a place that is designated as such by the Scottish  ministers consequent on consultation with the Natural Environment Research Council. Amendment 79 would not prevent the use of any non-lethal method of deterring seals, which was another of the committee's concerns at stage 2. The committee was concerned that the use of acoustic devices, for example, might be considered as harassment of seals. However, amendment 79 would not cause the use of such devices to be considered to be harassment because it refers only to haul-out sites and not to parts of the marine area around fisheries or fish farms. Amendments 80 and 83 are consequential to amendment 79. I move amendment 79.

I will respond briefly. I recognise the situation that John Scott describes; it is the case that, although common seal numbers are in decline, grey seal numbers are fairly constant in Scottish waters, and worldwide they are increasing. Amendment 79 specifically refers to established haul-out sites. Those sites would be designated with reference to the advice of NERC and would not, for example, be designated at the whim of the minister. I think that if, for example, seals were attempting to create a haul-out site near an existing fish farm, deterring them from doing so would not be interpreted as intentional or reckless harassment, because the site was not already established. However, there are opportunities through the dialogue between ministers and NERC to keep that issue under review and to establish whether it causes problems. I am grateful to colleagues for their indications of support for my amendments.  Amendment 79 agreed to.

I will say one or two things that result from what Robin Harper said. As a result of an amendment that I lodged being disagreed to this morning, fish farms will not come within the marine licensing system; they will remain within the terrestrial planning system. Therefore, will the cabinet secretary consider issuing guidance to planners on the siting of fish farms to overcome issues relating to the potential for fish farms to be sited in the vicinity of haul-out sites or other sites? Robin Harper's amendment 120 allows—as my amendment 122 attempts to allow—for the shooting of seals in extremis when severe environmental concerns surround a possible escape of fish. Although it is clearly undesirable to  shoot a pregnant seal or a seal with young pups, we do not have a close season for foxes, which can be shot during the breeding season even if they have young pups that are left without food. We behave in that way towards other predators on land, and I do not think that we should treat seals differently. I note that the cabinet secretary will review the situation. We will be interested in the results of that review and how the bill works in practice. The cabinet secretary says that I have failed to lodge the amendments that would be required as a consequence of amendment 122 being agreed to. Amendment 122 was intended to supply a degree of comfort to the aquaculture industry in that, if an extreme situation arose in which a seal attacked a fish farm within a prescribed period, an application could be made for the prohibition to be lifted to deal with the situation before there was a mass escape of fish, for example. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has accepted my amendment 77. I hope that, when the prohibition conditions are being laid on a licence, some thought will be given to how things will be managed should an extreme situation arise in which the prohibition may no longer be appropriate. For example, a fish farm could be attacked by a rogue seal during the breeding season, with possible environmental consequences. The Scottish aquaculture industry has had great success in driving down the number of escapes over the years. There are far fewer escapes than there used to be, and we do not want the unintended consequence of any legislation to be an increase in the number of escapes from fish farms in the future.  Amendment 72 agreed to.  Amendment 120 moved—[Robin Harper].

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Scottish ministers would decide—on the advice of Marine Scotland and other bodies such as the sea mammal research unit and the Natural Environment Research Council—what conditions on close seasons were appropriate for a licence. Amendment 122 would enable exemptions from any period of prohibition to be applied for if no other way of preventing an escape that would seriously damage the environment, for example, was satisfactory. I warmly welcome the amendments in the cabinet secretary's name. At stage 2, I lodged amendments that would have required seal licences to specify the marksmanship skills that were required to avoid unnecessary suffering, the type of firearm that was to be used, the proximity to the seal before it could be shot and the appropriate weather conditions, and to prohibit shooting from an unstable platform. I also lodged amendments on carcase recovery and on the regular reporting of numbers of seals that were taken under licence. I did not press those amendments, because the cabinet secretary felt that they could be improved. He agreed to revise them and to bring them back at stage 3. I am delighted that he has done that in amendments 73 to 76, 78, 81 and 82. I have considerable sympathy for the policy intention behind Robin Harper's amendment 121. It is difficult to imagine why an application would be lodged to locate a fish farm close to a seal haul-out site. Apart from placing temptation in the way of seals, I imagine that such proximity would cause stress to the fish. However, I understand that some fish farms are located in such places. I have two problems with amendment 121. What does the phrase "a site important to seals" mean? I appreciate that the amendment requires ministers to consult NERC, but that phrase is not defined and could be open to wide interpretation. I am concerned about the consequences of amendment 121 in practice. For example, a fish farm might be located close to a haul-out site for  common seals. Common seals are smaller, have less powerful jaws and can be more easily deterred by anti-predator nets. The fish farm and the common seals might happily exist side by side, but what would happen if a rogue grey seal that could not be deterred by any non-lethal methods targeted the fish farm? The amendment would prevent the fish farm from applying for a seal licence. For that reason, I feel—again with great regret—unable to support Robin Harper's amendment 121. I move amendment 72.

As a member of the Parliament who represents a rural constituency, I understand that predator behaviour and, in some cases, numbers must be controlled. Seals are predators. They are also intelligent animals, and a seal that chances upon a large concentration of salmon in a fishery or fish farm will be attracted to what appears to be a captive food source. Thirty six per cent of the world's grey seal population lives in UK waters and 90 per cent of those are in the Scottish marine area; 7 per cent of the world's common seal population lives in UK waters, with 85 per cent of those in Scottish waters. The Scottish marine area is clearly important to those species. Moreover, seals are one of Scotland's iconic native species. On the other hand, aquaculture and salmon fishing are important contributors to the Scottish economy. Equally important, fish farming provides a source of nutritious, quality local food. Seals and fish farms need to co-exist in Scotland's marine area, but the Conservation of Seals Act 1970, which was passed before fish farming became important to Scotland, is not appropriate; neither is the act's title a correct description of the legislation that it contains. Seals can be shot without reason outwith the close season and, in the close season, the netsmen's  defence can be invoked as legal protection if someone is caught shooting seals. Therefore, the provisions in the Marine (Scotland) Bill were widely welcomed. They were improved at stage 2 and, I believe, will be further improved today. Amendment 72 is a variant of an amendment that I lodged at stage 2. Labour members firmly believe that lethal methods of controlling seals should be a last resort when other methods, such as anti-predator nets and acoustic devices, have been tried and failed. [ Interruption. ]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Amendment 72 would require ministers, before they issue a licence to kill seals, to consider the damage that the animals had done to a fishery or fish farm, or to a similar facility in the vicinity. They would also have to consider the effectiveness of non-lethal methods of deterrence at that farm or fishery or at a similar facility in the vicinity. The amendment would also permit ministers to require the applicant to supply information so that, in determining the licence application, they would be able to judge whether any non-lethal alternative was possible before they issued a licence.  My amendments 77 and 122 are alternatives to Robin Harper's amendment 120. My colleagues and I have carefully considered amendment 120 and we are sympathetic to the policy intention behind it. The taking or killing of a seal that is at an advanced stage of pregnancy or has dependent pups, which would starve to death, is highly undesirable and should be permissible only in extreme circumstances—for example, when a mass escape of farmed fish would pose a significant threat to the environment and could be prevented by no means other than taking or killing the seal concerned. The provisions in amendment 120 are broad. It could set in the bill a period of seven months when seals could not be taken or killed. Section 100(3) permits but does not require the species of seal to be specified on a seal licence, so some licences that are issued might apply to grey and common seals. If amendment 120 were agreed to, such licences would be inoperable for seven months each year. Moreover, determining which species of seal is threatening a fish farm can be difficult when the seal is in the water. We therefore feel—with great regret and after much reflection—unable to support amendment 120.  My alternative—amendment 77—would enable ministers to include as a condition of a seal licence any period when seals could not be taken or killed but would not specify those periods in primary legislation. Such a period would be appropriate to the licence and the circumstances of the application.

I support the cabinet secretary's amendments 61 and 63, which, as he says, tidy up an amendment that was lodged at stage 2. It is always worth having the advice of the Government's draftspeople on such issues to ensure that provisions are placed appropriately in the bill. I was amused to see amendments 62, 64 and 65, which replace "Scottish National Heritage" with Scottish Natural Heritage. I do not know what crossed the minds of the draftspeople when they were writing the bill, but it has been put right now.  Amendment 61 agreed to.  Amendments 62 to 64 moved—[Richard Lochhead]—and agreed to.

As the cabinet secretary said, amendment 55 would require ministers to make periodic assessments of the success of a nature conservation MPA in achieving the objectives for which it was designated. As the cabinet secretary also said, I lodged a similar amendment at stage 2 but withdrew it because of an issue with conflicting timescales. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary confirmed that amendment 55 conforms with the provisions of section 91, which requires ministers to lay before Parliament a report that sets out "the extent to which in the opinion of the Scottish Ministers the stated conservation objectives have been achieved". I believe that it is important that there is a process of assessment. Amendment 21 is another that had a forerunner at stage 2, which was one of a series of amendments that sought to alter the designation period for an urgent MPA. Since lodging the amendment, I have become aware that, like the bill, the UK Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 includes a maximum period of two years for the designation of an urgent MPA. I think that it makes sense to maintain consistency between the bill and the UK act, so I will not move amendment 21. I support the cabinet secretary's amendments 51 and 53. Amendment 51 seeks to move wording that was introduced in the bill by an amendment that I lodged at stage 2 slightly further up the section, and to reintroduce wording that was deleted by my amendment at stage 2. This is an example of the sort of problem that Liam McArthur encountered with amendment 32, whereby the sponsors of the amendment negotiate on behalf of the member who lodged it without communicating with them. Unfortunately, a phrase was missed out of the amendment, and I am glad that the minister has reintroduced it. I was interested by the cabinet secretary's views on Robin Harper's amendments 115 and 59. We, too, wondered whether amendment 115 was necessary, but if the cabinet secretary is content to accept it, we should be content with that. We had some concerns about amendment 59 and whether it would mean that if the designation of an MPA that had been urgently designated ceased and the reasons for that urgent designation reappeared, urgent redesignation could not take place. If Robin Harper or Richard Lochhead could clarify that, it would give us some comfort.

If what Bill Wilson said in his intervention on John Scott is the case, why on earth did he sign up to the committee's report? We are not talking about what was discussed thereafter.

I will not, because we are short of time. Tavish Scott's comments were impassioned but deeply uninformed. It is clear that he did not listen to me or John Scott and that he has not read the bill or the policy memorandum. The bill is about streamlining the licensing system, not centralising it. The bill also provides for delegation to regional planning partnerships and licensing authorities. If Tavish Scott checks the Official Report , he will find that I did not mention "the industry"—I talked about the Scottish Salmon Producers Organisation, from which the amendments originally came.  The amendments are not about centralisation. The bill allows the powers to be passed back to Shetland Islands Council, Western Isles Council and Highland Council, with additional powers for licensing activity elsewhere. The amendments would make the bill logical and would bring all marine licensing activity within the same legislative framework. Given that, I will press amendment 41.

Amendment 113 would require the Scottish ministers, when—and only when—they sought to use the power in section 27 to require an application for a marine licence and an application under the Electricity Act 1989 to be treated jointly, to give any planning authority adjacent to the offshore site the right to object and thereby trigger a public inquiry. As members know, a terrestrial planning application for energy generation of more than 50MW will be referred to the Scottish ministers for determination. The planning authority or authorities are statutory consultees and an objection from them will trigger a public inquiry. That happened in my constituency in the case of the Harestanes wind farm application, which was approved by ministers in 2007 after a public  inquiry was triggered by the objections of Dumfries and Galloway Council. Schedule 8 to the 1989 act, which deals with section 36 and section 37 applications, requires marine applications above 1MW to be referred to ministers. However, the definition of "relevant planning authority" under schedule 8 is more difficult in the marine area. Referral applies only if the marine area is within the area of jurisdiction of the authority rather than in relation to the area's geographical relevance to a local authority. In the case of the Robin Rigg development in the Solway Firth, Cumbria County Council and SNH objected to the application, but the application was determined without a public inquiry being held. The 1989 act is United Kingdom legislation and cannot be amended by the Scottish Parliament. Hence amendment 113 would apply only when ministers had determined that a marine licensing application to them was being considered jointly with an application referred to them under the 1989 act. Amendment 113 would provide that in such cases the relevant planning authority to be consulted would be any local authority or national park authority "whose area is adjacent to any part of the Scottish marine area where the generating station (or any part of it) is, or is proposed to be, situated". Amendment 113 has the support of the Royal Town Planning Institute and I understand that it also has the support of local authorities. I move amendment 113.

I seek assurance from the cabinet secretary that we can be updated on the progress of his discussions. On the basis of what he said I am content not to press amendment 113, but the issue is important and I would like to be kept informed as it evolves.  Amendment 113, by agreement, withdrawn.

This area of the bill is a little contentious. I hope to be able to give an explanation of the intention behind amendments 41 and 22 and provide reassurance to the local authorities that have expressed concern about them. The amendments were prompted by the majority conclusion of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee at stage 1 and the policy intention of  the bill as expressed in the policy memorandum. The bill aims to provide a simplified and streamlined way of getting a licence for a marine activity and provides powers for ministers to deliver a single consent to each renewable energy project. However, unfortunately, marine fish farming is excluded from the bill. It alone among licensable activities remains under terrestrial planning legislation within the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 as amended by the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003 and the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006. The bill enables local authorities to transfer responsibility for granting and refusing marine fish farming consents to the Scottish ministers should they wish to do so. The majority view of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee—disagreed with only by Liam McArthur at stage 1—was that that was the wrong way round and that marine fish farming should be treated in the same way, and dealt with under the same legislative planning framework, as every other licensable marine activity. Provisions already exist in section 42(1) for the delegation of marine licensing functions to public authorities and other partners. The subsection that amendment 41 would insert after subsection (1) makes it explicit that that would include the function of approving or refusing a licence for a licensable activity, such as fish farming if it were transferred under the bill, as would happen if amendment 22 was agreed to. Amendment 22 would remove fish farming from the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 as amended and thereby bring it under the bill. I am aware that the proposal has been opposed by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. I have met COSLA representatives and spoken with officials from a number of councils that, historically, have had key roles in the determination of marine fish farming applications, such as Orkney Islands Council, Shetland Islands Council, Western Isles Council, Highland Council and Argyll and Bute Council. Those councils are concerned that a power will be removed from them but, with their long experience, they should and could apply to ministers to have the licensing function devolved to their marine licensing authorities. Furthermore, under the amendments to the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 that were made by the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006, decisions on marine fish farm applications are deemed to be local and, therefore, are made by planning officials, not a council's planning committee. Licensing authorities, which would assume responsibility for such decisions if these amendments were passed, would probably include  councillors. Therefore, the arrangement under my amendments would be not only more logical but, potentially, more democratic. The Scottish Salmon Producers Organisation has also advised me that it is likely that combined renewable energy and marine fish farming proposals will be developed within the next five years. As the bill stands, such applications would have to be determined under two legislative regimes: the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 for the fish farming side and the bill for the renewables side. Amendment 22 would enable such applications to be determined under one system and, potentially, by the local licensing authority. Amendments 41 and 22 are supported by the Scottish Fishermen's Federation and the SSPO. I understand that Scottish Environment LINK is also in favour, although that has not been included in its briefing on today's amendments. I move amendment 41.

I actually said that the Scottish Salmon Producers Organisation supports the amendments, which it does.

The amendments in this group relate to activities that are deemed to have a sufficiently low impact on the environment that they do not require to be licensed but will be registered instead. At stage 2, I lodged an amendment that would have required ministers to make regulations for those activities that will be registered rather than licensed. That amendment was resisted by the cabinet secretary and rejected by the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee on the convener's casting vote, and I have not lodged the same amendment at this stage. I still believe, however, that if ministers make regulations providing for licensable marine activities that fall below a specified environmental threshold, there are certain matters that should be covered by those regulations. Amendments 16 and 17 would require definitions of what being registered means, what the specific environmental threshold is and what falling below that threshold means. If the bill is to provide a mechanism by which licensable activities are not to require a licence, clarity about the criteria used to assess whether the activity should be registered is essential.  Amendment 19 would replace the requirement for the Scottish ministers to "consult such persons as they consider appropriate" with a requirement to consult persons who represent conservation and commercial interests. Scottish Natural Heritage would also have to be consulted, as would other persons that the Scottish ministers considered appropriate. At stage 2, I lodged but did not move a similar amendment, which the cabinet secretary said was unnecessary because he would consult such groups anyway. That might be so, but there is no harm in making such a requirement clear in the bill, as other amendments that we have agreed to today will do. The bill team expressed concern that amendments 16 to 18 would require the regulations to be rewritten every time a minor amendment was made. I do not think that that is a problem. If the definitions do not change, all that will be needed will be to cut and paste the appropriate part from one regulation to another. Committees consider many statutory instruments that involve minor variations to general text that does not change from one year to another. I do not think that there is an insurmountable problem in that regard. I have been advised that consequential amendments might be required as a result of amendment 19. If the minister advises what should have been included I will decide whether to move the amendment. I move amendment 16.

The meaning of "fall below" is not necessarily obvious and will depend on the "specified threshold of environmental impact", which could be 1 per cent, 5 per cent or 10 per cent. The issue is not straightforward; it will depend on the criteria that are used. The issue is important because, as we discussed in committee, a number of small registrable activities could have a cumulative effect. We need to understand what is meant by the terms that are used in section 25. Amendment 19 was not intended to be unhelpful. I heard what the cabinet secretary said, but surely the same argument could be made against the many provisions in the bill that require representatives of recreational, commercial or environmental protection and enhancement interests to be consulted or involved in partnership. The specification of such groups could lead to disputes between different representatives. I do not see why the argument that applies to amendment 19 should be different from the argument that applies to other provisions in the bill. I press amendment 16.

To clarify, in the situation that the cabinet secretary describes, a partnership could be a single public authority plus a representative of Marine Scotland. That is not ideal, but that is all that amendments 24 and 42 would require. I do not think that there can be a partnership of one—I have never heard of that—and it is important that Marine Scotland be involved in all the regional marine planning partnerships. The statutory instrument to which I referred affects all acts of the Scottish Parliament and applies in all cases, including the bill. I have come  up against the issue previously when I have complained about something being expressed in the singular and been advised that that includes the plural. The clerks have checked the amendments and discussed them with a senior draftsperson, so I am confident that they would not restrict partnerships to two people plus one local authority. I therefore press my amendment 24. The Labour Party supports amendments 104 to 106 in the name of Robin Harper.

The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee stage 1 report expressed concerns that functions relating to regional marine plans could, under the present wording of the bill, be delegated to one public authority acting on its own without any other partners. At stage 2, I introduced a similar amendment to amendment 24 that, surprisingly—considering the committee's view at stage 1—was defeated on the convener's casting vote. Amendment 24 would require delegation of functions in relation to regional marine plans to "a person nominated by Scottish ministers" plus a public authority and/or a person who is "nominated by a public authority with an interest in the ... marine region". The requirement to include a person who is nominated by Scottish ministers as a delegate reflects the committee's stage 1 recommendation: "the Committee considers that Marine Scotland's experience and expertise will be crucial for the effective running of all MPPs. The Committee would expect that  Marine Scotland would take the lead role in administering MPPs." The inclusion of a representative from Marine Scotland would ensure that national priorities be appropriately reflected in regional plans. Amendment 24 has the support of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation and it is the view of that organisation, and of other witnesses who gave stage 1 evidence, that Marine Scotland should chair the regional planning partnerships in order to ensure fairness and consistency. Amendment 25 is consequential on amendment 24. The intention is the same as that of section 8(3), which it would replace, and it would require ministers only to give direction with the consent of the public authority or authorities involved in the partnership, either directly or by nomination of delegates. Amendments 42 and 43 would apply the same principle to the delegation of functions relating to marine licensing, and would mean the requirement of a partnership approach to the issuing of marine licences where that has been delegated by Scottish ministers. The consent of the public authority or authorities involved will also be required if an order is made. Concerns have been raised that amendments 24 and 42 would mean that only one person who has been nominated by ministers and one person who has been nominated by the local authority or public authority could be on the planning partnership or licensing authority. However, in the amendments, as in all United Kingdom and Scottish legislation, the singular includes the plural. I refer members to The Scotland Act 1998 (Transitory and Transitional Provisions) (Publication and Interpretation etc of Acts of the Scottish Parliament) Order 1999, statutory instrument 1379, which states in schedule 1, paragraph 3, "In an Act of the Scottish Parliament, unless the contrary intention appears,- (a) words importing the masculine gender include the feminine; (b) words importing the feminine gender include the masculine; and (c) words in the singular include the plural and words in the plural include the singular." [ Applause. ] As there is no contrary intention in, for example, the use of the word "one" rather than the use of the word "a", in amendments 24 and 42, more than one person could be nominated by ministers or by the authority, and there could be more than one public authority delegate. I move amendment 24.

I lodged but did not press a similar amendment at stage 2. However, I believe that the issue is worthy of consideration by the whole Parliament as it links marine planning in part 2 of the bill with protection and enhancement in part 4. Amendment 102 would require national and regional plans to state how Government policies on nature conservation marine protection areas and other conservation sites that will also form part of the network of conservation sites that is created under section 68A, such as European marine sites, sites of special scientific interest and Ramsar sites, will contribute to conservation or improvement of the marine area. The minister resisted my amendment at stage 2 on the basis that "sustainable development policies are about using Scotland's seas in a manner that is best calculated to deliver Scotland's needs, which are protecting the marine area while allowing activity to take place."—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 18 November 2009; c 2124.] I have reflected on that response and I believe that it misses the point. The national and regional plans are the policy documents that will guide the marine planning partnerships' decisions on appropriate development in the different parts of the marine area that they cover. There will inevitably be competing interests. It is important that the policy intention of the creation of nature conservation MPAs and the network of conservation sites is explicit in the plan and is available to members of the planning partnerships, to applicants who wish to undertake activity in the marine area, and to the general public. Schedule 1 to the bill relates to the preparation, adoption and amendment of marine plans, including publication of and consultation on draft plans, and the laying before Parliament of national plans and possibly—depending on agreement to amendments that will be debated later today—regional plans. As the creation of nature conservation MPAs and the network of conservation sites will constrain some of those activities in some parts of the marine area, I think it sensible that the plans explain the policies underpinning their creation. At stage 2, Liam McArthur was concerned that there was no counterweight against climate change mitigation. I believe that that concern has been addressed in his amendment 6, his alternative pass in amendment 103 and Peter  Peacock's amendment 2, which has just been agreed to. I am happy to support whichever amendment Mr McArthur wishes to press. I am also happy to support amendments 23, 91 and 92, which are in the name of the cabinet secretary. I also point out that Scottish Environment LINK supports amendment 102. In its briefing for today's debate, it stresses the importance of a three-pillar approach to marine conservation and points out that that was also supported by the advisory group for marine and coastal strategy and the sustainable seas task force. As a result, a clear link between planning provisions and provisions for marine protection and enhancement is necessary. I move amendment 102.

I thank members for their support. I will press amendment 102.  Amendment 102 agreed to.  Amendment 6 moved—[Liam McArthur].

The cabinet secretary is aware of the Audit Scotland report, "Protecting and improving Scotland's environment", which was published this month. The report said that national recycling targets for 2010 are at risk of not being met and stated: "Collectively, councils' plans are not sufficient to meet landfill and recycling targets beyond 2010." How does the cabinet secretary intend to address that?

I congratulate Jim Hume for securing this debate on an extremely important issue. It is important to acknowledge that NHS Dumfries and Galloway's proposals are not a cost-cutting exercise. The health board is attempting to respond to demographic change, medical advances and the need to bring Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary and other community  facilities up to the standards that are expected in the 21 st century. Five options were originally considered, and the number was then reduced to three. Option A involves the least change, but would still result in the closure of Moffat and Kirkcudbright community hospitals to in-patient care, which would require capital investment of £144 million and revenue investment of £5.9 million. Under option B, the number of beds at Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary would be reduced, more care would be provided by community hospitals and one hospital in each locality would operate as a community rehabilitation unit. That would require capital investment of £144 million and revenue investment would increase to £7.4 million. The health board prefers option C, which is the most radical. It would involve the closure of five community hospitals, the creation of four larger community rehabilitation units and the development of enhanced community teams to support patients in their homes. It would require capital investment of £160 million and revenue investment of £7.8 million per annum, so it is the most expensive of the three options. The board believes that that option would give it the greatest flexibility in service provision and the most modern and flexible facilities. It is important that the board's position be understood, but for several reasons Dumfries and Galloway's geography makes option C unrealistic, as well as unpopular and possibly unworkable. All the community hospitals provide in-patient assessment of adults, rehabilitation of people after they leave DGRI and palliative care. Lochmaben community hospital also provides an eight-bed ward for treatment of dementia and mental health problems in elderly patients. The size of the local communities' responses to the proposals in option C shows how much those community hospitals are valued by the people whom they serve. For example, 400 people struggled through Arctic conditions to attend a meeting in Langholm two weeks ago. The health board is a member of the south-west of Scotland transport partnership, but the problems of travel to the new facilities, which Jim Hume described, have not been considered adequately. For example, under option C a stroke victim from Moffat or Langholm would be treated in the new facility in Annan. Moffat is 29 miles from Annan and Langholm is 20 miles from Annan along a minor route. Both journeys are a 40-minute drive by car. If friends and relatives rely on public transport, they have one direct bus from Langholm to Annan at 5 to 9 in the morning and one return bus at 20 minutes past 12. From  Moffat, one direct bus to Annan leaves at quarter to 12, but no direct service comes back. Mental state—happiness and wellbeing—is important to recovery and rehabilitation, which are not just about treatment. Patients whom friends, relatives and loved ones visit in hospital are happier than those who are not visited. The ability to be visited is probably even more important for those who are at the end of their lives and who are receiving palliative care, which is currently offered in community hospitals. My other concern about option C is that it depends on recruiting appropriately qualified specialists. Sadly, we do not have a particularly happy record on that—we have had shortages of medical specialists. I worry that that makes option C unworkable in practice. Two weeks ago, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing assured me that she would listen to local people's views, as she did in Ayr and Monklands. I hope that she will come down to meet protesters. I thank my colleague Jackie Baillie for agreeing to meet protesters in my constituency and to meet—I hope—the health board to discuss our concerns. I hope that the cabinet secretary or the Minister for Public Health and Sport will be able to do the same.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether there are plans to substantially reduce the capacity of HMP Dumfries in the next five years. (S3O-9126)

My question reflects concerns that were raised with me by members of the Prison Officers Association Scotland at HMP Dumfries regarding the construction of new prisons in Scotland, coupled with the Scottish Government's desire to abolish sentences of less than six months, which could render HMP Dumfries surplus to requirements. Given his assurance today, is the cabinet secretary prepared to meet my constituents to offer them reassurance on the matter?

I concur with Jim Hume's views on gravel removal, as gravel is also a problem in the River Nith and the River Esk. Dumfries and Galloway Council recently wrote to the Minister for Environment to request a meeting to discuss the removal of gravel. That request was refused. Will the cabinet secretary revisit the decision? Will he or the Minister for Environment meet Dumfries and Galloway Council to discuss the problem of gravel in the River Nith? As he knows, the Whitesands floods regularly, and many businesses are unable to get insurance because of that. Sadly, during the November floods many of them lost their livelihoods.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many of its posts have been relocated to rural areas since May 2007. (S3O-8797)

When the Scottish Government announced its relocation policy in January 2008, the minister indicated that small unit relocations would continue and that particular weight would be given to communities deemed remote, rural or fragile, of which there are many in Scotland, including in the South of Scotland. I ask the minister again, how many posts have been relocated in the past two and a half years?

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government will take to support those homes and businesses affected by flooding over the last two weeks. (S3F-2053)

I am glad to hear that the Scottish Government continues to spend the funding that was allocated by the previous Executive for flood prevention. I am aware that the Minister for Environment is in my constituency: I was advised of that by the leader of the Labour group on Dumfries and Galloway Council—I am a little surprised not to have received the normal courtesy of notification of a ministerial visit to my constituency. The United Kingdom Government and the Northwest Regional Development Agency are making £2 million available to help communities in Cumbria that were affected by last week's flooding. The Department for Transport will provide emergency funding to help to repair bridges and roads. Apart from reannouncing the passage of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009, what is the Scottish Government actually going to do to help those of  my constituents who are suffering the effects of flooding today? The UK Government has announced funding; the Scottish Government has reannounced the passing of an act—which, incidentally, was significantly improved through Labour Party amendments.

I apologise for selecting the collapsing lectern. I will broaden the discussion from the subject of history and focus on Scotland's contribution to science, engineering and technology and on our future in those subjects. Scotland has a proud record in those fields that is an important part of Scotland's history—it is much more important than battles against the English. Scots like to point out—particularly to our friends south of the border—that Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone, John Logie Baird the television, James Dewar the vacuum flask and James Watt the steam engine; that Alexander Fleming discovered antibiotics; and that Joseph Lister introduced antiseptic surgery. The great James Clerk Maxwell, who was brought up in Glenlair in Kirkcudbrightshire, founded the theory of electromagnetism from which Einstein's theories of relativity grew. Maxwell is not yet as well known in his native land as he should be, but I was pleased to attend the unveiling of an Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers plaque at Glenlair in the summer to celebrate Maxwell's equations. Thomas Telford, the famous civil engineer and builder of roads and bridges, was born at Westerkirk, just outside Langholm. He is a famous son of my constituency. Scotland has not produced only male scientists, although they predominate. The mathematician Mary Fairfax Somerville, who was born in  Jedburgh, was one of the first two women scientists to be recognised in the United Kingdom and admitted to the Royal Astronomical Society. Will Scotland's reputation for science and engineering in the 18 th , 19 th and 20 th centuries be replicated in the 21 st century?

I will touch on concerns from the scientific community about the curriculum for excellence. Scotland has achieved well in some new technologies, such as games technologies, but the concern is that we might not continue to achieve without considerable investment. Scotland will not continue to excel in science and technology if we do not get the fundamentals right. Resting on our laurels and past greatnesses will not deliver a proud record for the future. I have always believed that science has something for everyone and that, if it is presented accessibly, everyone can enjoy aspects of science, as with art and music. It is not difficult to enthuse young children about science projects, particularly if they involve going outside, getting dirty, making noises or smells and examining bugs and insects. However, a transition must be made from enjoying finding out about concepts in a rudimentary manner to developing the skills that are essential to higher-level scientific practice. Mathematics and numeracy are vital and problem-solving skills are essential but not always understood. Swotting up to remember a formula is not the same as understanding a problem and knowing how to apply the appropriate procedures to find the solution. Some such skills are generic and interdisciplinary. When I worked for the Open University, I was part of a group that taught transferable skills. However, by the time that I left the Open University, I had concluded that such skills could not be taught out of context—the context of a scientific discipline is important to developing the skill. What concerns me and many people with an interest in science education about the curriculum for excellence is that it does not recognise sufficiently the importance of developing core scientific competencies, skills and knowledge through the study of scientific disciplines. If that does not happen, we will not produce the next  generation of good Scottish scientists and engineers. I appreciate that the final version of the curriculum for excellence has clarified the scientific concepts that underpin the five areas of science that are to be taught, but concerns remain that the requirements are too vague and lack focus and fundamentals. In the view of science professionals, it remains important that discrete sciences should be taught by graduates in those subjects, as they are best able to pick up on the points that lead to students' later development in the subject. Science changes rapidly and, unless teachers are confident of their capabilities in the subjects that they teach, it will be hard for them to imbue their pupils with enthusiasm. Teachers need support through professional development. Last April, Professor Lindsay Paterson expressed dismay at the lack of subject expertise, particularly among primary teachers, and called for a fundamental reform of training to improve the situation. More recently, he has suggested an apprenticeship style of teacher training to transfer practical teacher training into schools. For many years, there have been problems with recruiting science teachers in secondary schools and the age profile of science teachers has been increasing. A cynical interpretation of the curriculum for excellence is that it tackles the problem of the shortage of science subject teachers by reducing the teaching of individual science subjects. Rather than try to avoid the issues, we must address them, even though they are difficult. Science must be made more attractive to students in the later years of secondary school. We need to get away from the prevalent view that, if someone has good grades, they should study medicine. We need some of the most able students to choose positively to study science at university. That means that the problems of career progression, pay and retention must be addressed. About 18 months ago, I spoke to a meeting of post-doctoral scientists at the University of Edinburgh. Honestly, I was horrified to discover that the issues had not moved on since I was a young scientist. I am not by any means trying to place the blame for that at the door of the Scottish Government, but we have not addressed the issue in 30 years. It needs to be discussed and tackled. I fear that the curriculum for excellence's approach to science remains somewhat expedient and that it does not totally address the fundamentals. If we do not get the curriculum right, Scotland's contribution to science will be something that we study as part of the history curriculum. I believe that Scotland will continue to have a lot to contribute and that Scottish scientists  and engineers could make a valuable contribution on many major and important problems that face the world. However, we must get the curriculum in schools right so that we can do that. I ask ministers to examine the curriculum for excellence and to talk to science professionals about their continuing concerns on some aspects of the curriculum.

I attended a fishers' memorial service at the United Reformed church in Annan last weekend to commemorate the people who have been lost at sea in the Annan area over the past 150 years. Representatives from the Fishermen's Mission drew the congregation's attention to statistics that shocked and surprised me: every 17 days, a UK-registered fishing vessel is lost at sea and every 10 days a UK fisherman either loses his life or is seriously injured in the course of his work. With the improvements in health and safety in land-based industries, fishing must be, as the cabinet secretary indicated, the most dangerous industry in the country. That is one of the reasons why fishermen deserve to occupy the place that they have in the esteem and affection of not only fishing communities but the entire Scottish people. The debate is held in the context of the annual negotiations and the consultations of the Scottish and UK Governments on CFP reform. It is widely recognised that the CFP has not been successful in fulfilling the objectives that were agreed in 2002 to achieve sustainable fisheries. Certainly, there was general agreement from the witnesses who attended this week's meeting of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee that the annual round of bickering and horse trading at the fisheries council is not the best way of determining how  stocks should be managed for long-term ecological and economic stability. I was encouraged by the degree of agreement between witnesses. Persuasive arguments were made for overall strategic objectives and general principles to be set by the Commission and for the regulatory framework to be agreed at regional level, in all likelihood not only by Scotland but by groups of member and non-member states that share seas, with the involvement of the fishing industry in developing planning and management strategies. There also seems to be a general consensus that an ecosystem-based approach is required, especially in mixed fisheries where several species depend on shared food sources. Single-species quotas do not work well for such fisheries. There is a need for reliable data and monitoring and for the rules of stock management to be agreed in advance so that they do not become part of a politicised agenda in the end-of-year negotiations. That said, it is optimistic to believe that reductions in effort will be welcomed by the sectors that are required to make those reductions, even if the rules have been agreed in advance, and there will be times when somebody has to make difficult decisions. Although there was talk of the need for a toolbox containing a range of tools appropriate to different situations, it is not yet clear what many of those tools might be. The continuing development of selective gear is clearly one of them, although it is more difficult to implement for large species that are of concern, such as cod. Bertie Armstrong of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation also pointed out that some control methods can operate in opposition to their intention. He cited the example of real-time closures of areas of sea resulting in vessels having to travel further and use up some of their days at sea, and therefore fishing more intensively when they arrive at the open fishing grounds. There will be times when sectors of the industry are required to take some short-term pain in the longer-term interests of achieving sustainable fisheries. At such times, as our amendment acknowledges, we must offer public support for communities, not just individuals. The Government motion expresses the desire that innovative methods of fisheries conservation developed by Scotland's fishermen be acknowledged. I was concerned to learn that the European Commission had stated in a news release that accompanied its proposals for TACs in 2010: "real time closures and cod-avoidance schemes have not been enough to protect the stock and have had little effect  on fishing patterns. Bringing about an improvement in this situation will mean stepping up conservation efforts still further and implementing the cod plan adopted last autumn." That is extremely worrying, because it seems to imply that, in the Commission's opinion, innovative conservation methods such as conservation credits, real-time closures and cod-avoidance schemes have not worked and suggests that the Commission may press ahead with reductions in kilowatt days. When I raised the matter with Nick Bailey of Marine Scotland at the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee meeting on 28 October, he did not seem to be aware of the statement, which had been researched by the Scottish Parliament information centre. The information that he had was that the review of alternative methods of reducing cod mortality would take place next spring. Does the Cabinet Secretary have any information that would clarify the situation? It would be a matter of grave concern if the Commission made assumptions about the efficacy of alternative methods of conservation without those methods having been reviewed. When the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee undertook a fact-finding visit to Brussels on CFP and common agricultural policy reform last spring, committee members felt that there was not the high level of recognition that they expected of the alternatives that Scottish fishermen are trialling. The cabinet secretary calls for recognition; perhaps he can tell us more about what he is doing to ensure that recognition, because I am not convinced that it is being clocked in the way that we would wish it to be. Everybody agrees that the current situation on discards is unacceptable. I wonder, however, how much progress can be made prior to the reform of the CFP, probably in 2013. Is there a real appetite in the fisheries council to address that as a matter of urgency? Will we see quotas being set for catches rather than for landing? Will fishermen who do not discard be rewarded for that by increased days at sea or increased quotas? As others have said, CCTV is not a panacea. It works in certain types of vessel, but not in others. There are also cost implications for the fishermen. Fishing faces a very tricky problem, but the fishing industry in Scotland is very important and much valued, and solutions need to be found.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Can you clarify whether it is appropriate for one member to shout "hypocrite" at another member from a sedentary position in the chamber?

The debate has been interesting and entertaining. Initially, I felt that my colleague Sarah Boyack was being rather modest in not mentioning the fact that she was the minister who introduced the national parks legislation, although other members have referred to that fact. I remember the National Parks (Scotland) Bill well, as it was the first bill that I dealt with in depth after becoming an MSP, when we considered it in the Rural Affairs Committee. We spent a lot of time on the bill—indeed, in those days I was so enthusiastic about having a bill to consider that when it was published I read it on the train on the way home. Unfortunately I am not quite as enthusiastic now, after all these years. The legislation was a long time in coming—Scotland's first national park was established some 51 years after the first one was created in England and Wales, and I doubt whether we would have any national parks yet if it had not been for devolution. The minister reminded us of the four aims of the 2000 act. I must say that I was a little concerned when I first read the Government's motion, because it appeared to commend the parks for their contribution to the Government's agenda. The national parks were not established to promote the priorities of the first Scottish Executive, nor should their purpose now be to promote this Government's agenda. The parks' contribution to conservation and to promoting biodiversity and environmental benefit is as important as their contribution to social and economic development. I was reassured, however, after hearing the minister's speech, in which she highlighted the fourth plank of the 2000 act, which is unique to Scotland—I am happy to accept that. Christopher Harvie's contribution was entertaining as always, although I am not sure that it was always relevant to the topics under discussion. It is certainly true, as other members have said, that our two national parks are remarkable and contribute greatly to their regions. Peter Peacock mentioned that the parks strengthened the identity of their respective areas, and Jackie Baillie spoke about the ways in which the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park had worked to meet various challenges, and its success in dealing with matters such as the revision of the byelaws. Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park is within an hour's drive of 50 per cent of Scotland's population, which probably includes the people of  Glasgow North East, so it is not irrelevant to them. The park has 22 larger lochs, and around 50 rivers. The Cairngorms national park has perhaps a smaller cohort of people around it, but it contains some 25 per cent of Britain's threatened species. Those are tremendous areas, and there are, of course, great challenges for the national park authorities—to which they rise—in maintaining those areas and facilities. I am sure that Loch Lomond and the Trossachs rose to the challenge of dealing with the unmentionable acts that Gil Paterson confessed to committing in the park. There was some disappointment at the time of the Government's announcement in August that the review, which was supposed to be in two stages, would be undertaken only in one stage, and that the report seemed to concentrate on governance issues. I am pleased that the national park authorities were not sacrificed on the bonfire of the NDPBs. The report focused on things such as changes to and reductions in board membership. Many of us believe that there are other strategic issues that should be reviewed. In August, the Government announced its proposal to establish a national parks strategy group. We welcome that, but we believe that its remit is rather constrained. It focuses on how the work of the national parks contributes to the Government's agenda, which sounds a bit like a justification for retaining them. I hope that that is not the case. Also, the membership of the group seems rather worthy and governmental. It includes the chairs of the park authorities, the Scottish Government's rural director, SNH, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, one other NDPB and one independent member. I hope that it will be a bit wider than that, going beyond local and central Government to encompass a wider agenda. Peter Peacock made a number of interesting suggestions about what that wider agenda could be. Seven years into the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park and six years into the Cairngorms national park, there are surely more extensive and informative issues that could be discussed. For example, is additional support required to enable the parks to fulfil their potential? Jackie Baillie made a bid for resources for her local park. We could look at what has been learned about partnership working and consider whether that can be translated into other aspects of rural development planning. How do our national parks compare with those in other countries? Sarah Boyack mentioned the international recognition of our parks. Are we marketing them well enough through VisitScotland? Rob Gibson asked about the effect on the bits between the parks. What has been the effect on  other areas that are not part of a national park? For example, have the jet-skis and power boats descended on them? Has the concentration on sustainability and conservation reduced in non-park areas or have the parks acted as examples of good practice? Our amendment raises the crucial question of whether we are going to stop at having two national parks. We believe that Scotland has the potential to have more national parks. We do not suggest, as I think one member did, that loads of national parks should be created willy-nilly. That is not the purpose of our amendment. However, two years ago, when the review was announced, the Scottish Council for National Parks urged the Government to set up a family of land and marine-based national parks throughout Scotland. If we look further back to 1945, the Ramsay committee, which Linda Fabiani mentioned, recommended the creation of five national parks and three reserve areas in Scotland. Sixty years later, we still have a fair way to go. The previous Scottish Executive consulted on the establishment of a coastal and marine national park, but the idea was shelved by the current Government. That was disappointing to the many people, including me, who supported the Solway Firth's bid. The Scottish Wildlife Trust argues in its briefing for today's debate: "the case for Scottish Coastal and Marine National Parks is compelling and one or more CMNPs should be identified once marine legislation has completed its passage through the Scottish Parliament." In response to a question that I asked, the minister's predecessor told the chamber that the matter might be reconsidered after the Marine (Scotland) Bill has completed its passage, if there is sufficient community support. I believe that such support already exists. I hope that the minister will confirm that that is still the Government's intention and that she will tell us whether she intends to reopen consultation on the matter. I am pleased that the minister confirmed that the criteria for new national parks will be part of the strategy group's considerations. I am pleased that John Scott supports the creation of additional national parks, although I did note some splits in the Conservative party. John Scott was a lot more enthusiastic about national parks than Jamie McGrigor was, and Nanette Milne seemed to have rather different views from John Scott on the size of the boards. Perhaps they need to speak to one another about the issues. I welcome the fact that Liam McArthur said that the Liberal Democrats support the proposal. I turn to the other amendments. As Sarah Boyack said, we have reservations about them. I am not convinced that they are necessary. The Conservative amendment suggests that the  reason for the review and the changes to the boards was to save money. Efficiency is always to be welcomed, but the focus of any change should be the effective running of the national parks. Moreover, the cost of running the boards is small compared with the cost of running and policing the parks. An effective board will do what the boards of our two national parks have done and lever in significant external funding.

I am sorry, but I have only 15 seconds left and I must talk about the other amendment. When I saw the Liberal Democrat amendment, I suspected that it was an opportunity for Mike Rumbles to get out his trumpet, and I was not disappointed. Like the Liberal Democrats, we welcome the parks' success in involving local people. As the minister pointed out, the changes to the structures of the boards will increase the proportion of directly elected members. However, I think that we all agree—including Liam McArthur, given what he said in his speech—that there is still a need for expertise from local authorities and Governments because the parks are national and not regional parks. Although I am sympathetic to the sentiments that are expressed in the Liberal Democrat amendment, I am not sure that it is absolutely necessary. That said, I hope that, having heard Labour members' contributions, the minister now feels that the Government can accept our amendment to its motion.

We remember it well.

Scottish Labour supports the principles of the Marine (Scotland) Bill and welcomes many of its provisions. However, in our view, the bill could be improved and strengthened in parts by amendment at stage 2. As Maureen Watt said, that is also the view of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. I was slightly disappointed that we did not receive the Scottish Government's response to the committee's report until last night, but I appreciate that this morning the cabinet secretary has gone through much of it in detail. He and Maureen Watt mentioned the competing interests of stakeholders in the marine area. There is a huge marine area in Scotland, which has an estimated coastline of 16,500km and a territorial sea of around 88,600km 2 . A report published at the beginning of this month for Scottish Environment LINK by David Hughes and Thom Nickell of the Scottish Association for Marine Science advises that "Scotland's marine environment is in a far from pristine state and is in real need of recovery."  It goes on to say that the "Marine Bill as it stands will only manage the status quo. It will not bring about any improvement in the wider seas outside marine protected areas". The report cites evidence of declining stocks of a number of species in the North Sea. During stage 1 consideration of the bill, we heard similar evidence from the Community of Arran Seabed Trust and the Scottish Sea Angling Conservation Network. Ian Burrett told the committee: "on the west coast of Scotland, 20 species either have disappeared or are now found only as juveniles."—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 10 June 2009; c 1753.] Howard Wood of the Community of Arran Seabed Trust said of the Clyde: "Having dived in it for 36 years, my experience is that it is in a dire state. The fish that I saw as a teenager diving in the Clyde no longer exist. They are ecologically extinct."—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 9 September 2009; c 1869.] The committee recommended unanimously that a duty be placed on ministers and all public bodies to have regard to the need to maintain and improve the health of the Scottish marine area in the exercise of their functions. I am sorry that the Scottish Government's response to the recommendation is a bit lukewarm, but I am sure that the matter will be discussed further at stage 2. Improving the health of the marine environment is in the interests of all stakeholders and should be a key objective of the bill. We support the committee's recommendation that climate change mitigation and adaptation be included in the list of objectives of the national marine plan under section 3(3). We agree that, because the plan is of considerable significance, the draft plan needs to be properly scrutinised by Parliament; a minimum period for consideration of 40 days should be stipulated. Other members have mentioned the boundaries of the marine planning regions, which will vary from one marine area to another but should encompass single ecosystems. It makes sense for the firths to be single marine planning areas. As other members have said, that is a little more tricky when the firth spans the border, as the Solway does. The Solway Firth Partnership pointed out to the committee that the Marine (Scotland) Bill enables ministers to delegate planning responsibility to a third party but that that provision does not exist in the UK Marine and Coastal Access Bill. The SFP had proposed an amendment to the UK bill but, after a meeting a couple of weeks ago with Huw Irranca-Davies, organised by my colleague Russell Brown MP, it is satisfied that appropriate memorandums of  understanding can be put in place to allow a single planning process for the Solway, resulting in the production of a single plan document that will be agreed by both ministers. Legally, there will be two plans, but they will be identical. I am pleased that there has been a resolution of some of the concerns that have been aired. Inshore fisheries groups are being set up in Scotland; two have already been established, and others are planned. However, the groups include only commercial fishing interests. The committee questioned the need for such groups to be established, given that they may be overtaken by the proposals in the bill. If they remain, there is a strong case for other fishing interests, such as sea anglers, to be members, as their industry is also dependent on the condition of the marine environment. Like commercial fishing, sea angling contributes significantly to the economy, especially in rural areas. That was demonstrated in the Scottish Government's recent report "Economic Impact of Recreational Sea Angling in Scotland", which stated that recreational sea angling contributed almost £141 million annually to the economy and sustained 3,148 jobs. The bill does not require ministers to create any marine protected areas, but the committee received advice indicating that the European Union marine directive does. Scottish Labour supported the committee's recommendation that the bill impose a duty on ministers to create a network of MPAs, which should be regularly monitored and reviewed. Other members have mentioned the repeal of the Conservation of Seals Act 1970, which is probably the most contentious part of the bill. More than half of the more than 8,000 replies to the bill to which the cabinet secretary referred were on that topic. Despite the contentious nature of the provisions, the oral evidence session on them was positive and suggested that a compromise could be reached. Such a compromise might not be ideal for the different sides of the argument, but it would provide a reasonably satisfactory way forward. During a previous debate, I said that I understand that there are circumstances in which seals must be shot; the sea mammal research unit agrees. However, lethal methods of seal control should be used only as a last resort. Statutory conditions should be placed on the issue of licences, covering, for example, the skills requirements of the marksman, the weapons that can be used and the distance from which a seal can be shot. Applicants should be required to demonstrate that other, non-lethal methods of control have been tried and have failed. The number of seals that are shot should be reported,  perhaps not on an individual basis, but certainly regularly. Labour is pleased to support the general principles of the bill. However, as was the case with the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill and the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, we believe that cross-party work by the committee and ministers at stage 2 will result in improvements to it. I am sure that by the time we reach the end of stage 3 we will have a bill of which we can all be proud.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth had with local authorities in relation to zero waste in finalising the single outcome agreements. (S3O-8154)

The cabinet secretary is aware that £25.3 million was transferred from the environmental protection, sustainable development and climate change budget to local government in the current financial year and that there are plans to transfer a further £26.3 million next year. However, the Government's consultation on its zero-waste strategy does not close until 13 November and we do not yet know when the finalised strategy will be published. The cabinet secretary is responsible for signing off local authorities' single outcome agreements. How many local authorities have waste reduction outcomes in their SOAs; do those outcomes relate to the implementation of the waste hierarchy or simply to reductions in landfill; and who is ultimately responsible for ensuring that Scotland's waste reduction responsibilities are met—is it Mr Swinney, is it the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment or will the buck be passed to local authorities?

I became a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee on 8 October last year and attended only the final two evidence sessions of the inquiry. Therefore I am, just as some other current members of the committee are, at a disadvantage relative to others, having heard only a small number of the witnesses and having attended none of the visits. I therefore commend the convener, who joined the committee after I did and who was involved in the inquiry for less time than I was, on her presentation of the arguments. My constituency has a large rural component to it, so rural housing is very important to me; indeed, housing is probably the issue on which I receive the most representations from individual constituents. Many of the housing issues that are pertinent to rural areas are also relevant to urban areas. The intense pressure on the supply of housing that is owned by housing associations in Dumfries and Galloway is felt at least as keenly in urban Dumfries as it is in the smaller towns and villages in Nithsdale, Annandale and Eskdale. At times, it is difficult to separate rural housing issues from more general housing issues. The issues' dimensions, rather than the issues themselves, differ between rural and urban areas. As a latecomer to the inquiry, I will concentrate on two areas in the committee's report that have also come to my attention in the course of my constituency activities. The first has been referred to by several members—the need to change the rural planning culture, which is the fourth of the committee's recommendations. The report notes that  "there is an over-cautious planning culture in much of rural Scotland that has effectively entrenched a presumption against development, including housing development in many areas." Many prospective developers in my constituency would certainly agree with that, and I suspect that the same is true in other rural local authority areas. A private sector landlord has described to me his experience of trying to get planning permission for eight carbon-neutral affordable houses that he wanted to build for long-term rent of at least 30 years. I cite his case not in order to throw bricks at the planning department in Dumfries and Galloway Council, but to illustrate a nationwide problem with planning and development in rural areas. The greenfield site that the landlord selected was half a mile from the nearest village and 5 miles from the nearest town. His application was supported by the community council, by Dumfries and Galloway Small Communities Housing Trust and by the council's own housing services department. He was advised by the planning department that the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984 requires access to be up to adoptable road standards and to have pavements and street lighting, which he therefore included in the plans. The planning department then recommended refusal because there were to be more than two houses—a recommendation that was rejected by the councillors on the area committee. However, they did not like the attached conditions—in particular, the need for street lighting in a development that would be out in the country. The landlord attempted to address that by agreeing to a new access from the public road and a new lay-by, which meant that he was allowed to drop the streetlights. The planning department then objected to the layout of the houses and insisted on a courtyard layout, to which the landlord agreed. Eventually, he got planning permission and secured funding from the rural homes for rent pilot grant scheme. However, he was the only applicant to that scheme in the whole of Dumfries and Galloway. At first, I thought that the fact that Dumfries and Galloway got only eight affordable houses under that pilot scheme was somehow due to the minister not being generous towards Dumfries and Galloway; unfortunately, it was due to developers not feeling that the planning process would allow them to apply to the scheme. Other people have used stronger language. A partner in a local architecture and design company expressed her view forcefully to me last week—although I do not mean to say that she was swearing. I am afraid that the quotations in my speech are not quite as illustrious as the quotes in Dr Wilson's speech. My constituent said: "We have many clients who have been appalled and, sadly, in some cases, beaten, by the labyrinthine and  suspect planning process. Some of our clients have withdrawn planning applications rather than persist with the negativity and 'can't do' approach of planners. ... This moribund and visionless planning system is crippling energy and enterprise. It has to be causing serious harm to the local economy and to our local communities." There we have it. The other parts of the report that I wish to refer to are sections 20 and 21 of the recommendations, which concern the lack of supply of social rented housing, the consequences of that on communities and the effect of homelessness legislation. The committee noted concerns in rural communities that local people—especially young people—find it difficult to obtain accommodation in the social rented sector. That often results in people moving away from their communities and families, which leads to fragmentation of communities and isolation among older people. Of course, that can happen in urban communities as well, but the shortage of affordable rented housing, the low rates of turnover and the dispersed nature of rural populations makes the problem even more pressing in them. Sadly, the problem has been exacerbated by an unintended consequence of the homelessness legislation that was passed by this Parliament with my support and, probably, that of most members at the time. It might well be further exacerbated should the current intention to abolish the local connection criteria not be suspended. There are no council houses in Dumfries and Galloway, which means that all eligible homelessness applications are referred by the council to the local housing associations, which are obliged by law to give preference to those applicants, above all others, whatever their housing need. Dumfries and Galloway Housing Partnership, which is the largest housing association in the area and which received council stock, will allocate 20 points for care and support, which includes family needs or managing child care arrangements. That is great, and it ought to help people to remain in the communities with their families. Unfortunately, however, a section 5 referral can be allocated 999 points. In that situation, what chance does the family with 20 points have or, indeed, the person who has a severe medical incapacity and who is given 75 points? Rural communities see young people moving away to be housed elsewhere while people with no apparent links to the area move in through the homelessness route. As members can imagine, that leads to resentment and, at times, to intolerance. Of course, the root cause is the lack of housing supply. I agree with Shelter, which says that there would be no problem with implementing the homelessness legislation if there were enough  homes available. The reasons behind that are complex, however. I also agree that the private sector could play a greater role in accommodating people from the homelessness lists, but the matter of the tenancy is a stumbling block, in that under the current legislation most private landlords currently offer short Scottish secure tenancies for six months in the first instance, which is not an acceptable period. I am certainly not arguing that development without regulation should be permitted in the countryside. However, we must recognise the pressures on rural communities and acknowledge that a supply of affordable homes is necessary to sustain communities. We need changes to the planning system in order to ensure that development can take place more quickly and more effectively, and we need an increase in investment in housing and in our efforts to address the hurdles in the path of development. I commend to Parliament the recommendations of the report.

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the pressure that the very recent increase in meat inspection charges is having on Scottish abattoirs. Could he outline to us how he intends to support the existence and expansion of a network of local abattoirs, which is desirable on animal health, economic and environmental grounds?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has received recommendations from the Scottish Court Service regarding the future location of the justice of the peace courts in the sheriffdom of South Strathclyde, Dumfries and Galloway and, if so, what those recommendations are. (S3O-7935)

The original communication from the Scottish Court Service suggested that the order would be laid in early September. Given that that same proposal was rejected soundly by the Justice Committee in May this year, I entreat the cabinet secretary not to resubmit the order, since it is very unlikely to get through the committee or Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is concerned about the uptake of school meals. (S3O-7881)

I thank the minister for his answer, which demonstrates how statistics can say different things. The minister might be aware that the percentage of secondary school pupils in Dumfries and Galloway who take school meals fell from 63 per cent in 2000 to 31 per cent in 2008. Officers in the council's catering service are concerned that full compliance with the Scottish Government's nutritional standards, which were introduced to secondary schools in August, will have a significant adverse impact on uptake and income. Given that most secondary schools are within walking distance of alternative food outlets, does the minister agree that instructions, for example, to keep condiments such as salad dressings out of sight of pupils so that they have to be requested are somewhat draconian and will deter rather than encourage the uptake of healthy school meals?

I was happy to sign the motion when it was lodged in February. We have had a family membership of the RSPB since my children were very young, and I always do what I can by feeding and carrying out habitat management—or perhaps non-management—to support populations of passerines and other small birds in my garden, for which they reward me by messing up my garden furniture and not showing up on the RSPB's big garden birdwatch day. I have to admit that I had not heard of the organisation Songbird Survival, and I was quite unaware of its activities until a constituent who noticed that this debate had been scheduled got in touch with me, because they were rather annoyed that I had signed the motion. The lesson is perhaps that I should google organisations that I have not heard of before I sign motions that mention them. Although I share the concerns of Songbird Survival and Mr McGrigor about the numbers of songbirds, it seems to me that Songbird Survival places undue emphasis on the role of predators and, in particular, unpopular predators such as grey squirrels, magpies and raptors, although it seems to excuse domestic and feral cats. I have been a cat keeper and cat lover for many years, but I am aware that some cats are extremely predatory when it comes to songbirds—I had one that was the very devil—while others are not. I should say to Mr McGrigor that red kites are carrion eaters, like vultures; they are not predators, so I do not think that they are responsible for taking out songbirds. My constituent, who, incidentally, gave evidence during the passage of the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Bill, as well as to a United Kingdom parliamentary inquiry, stated in his e-mail: "Songbird Survival is a very thinly disguised anti-raptor/pro-hunting lobby which repeatedly attempts to put forward the deeply prejudiced case against birds such as sparrowhawks, buzzards, peregrines and hen harriers ... with the idea of obtaining licences to kill such birds". I hope that that is not actually the purpose of Songbird Survival.  The case for blaming raptors for the decrease in songbird numbers is not proven. In its briefing for the debate, the RSPB refers to an analysis of the common bird census between the 1960s and 2000. The evidence suggested that it was extremely unlikely that the presence of predators such as magpies or sparrowhawks contributes to songbird population decline. Many other factors play a part, including agricultural intensification, pesticide use, reduction in habitat and food sources and climate change. Although I am sure that Songbird Survival would not condone the illegal poisoning of birds of prey—Mr McGrigor has made it clear that he abhors that—the case that is argued against predators to some extent plays into the hands of those people who do. The motivation for obtaining licences to kill raptors is, I would argue, as much to do with the interests of sporting estates as it is with the survival of songbirds. In that regard, and like Mr McGrigor, I draw members' attention to the Langholm moor demonstration project, which the minister and I had the pleasure of visiting recently—although I do not know whether the minister had as much time as I did to go out on to the moor and have a picnic.

Good. The project is a partnership between Scottish Natural Heritage, Buccleuch Estates, the Game and Wildlife Conservation Trust, the RSPB and Natural England. It will run for 10 years, and it aims to demonstrate that raptors and grouse can coexist if the estate is properly managed for the needs of both. Obviously, the commercial interest will be an important factor for the estate. However, other ground-nesting birds as well as grouse also benefit from good management techniques. Although the Langholm project is not specifically about songbirds, I commend its approach in using science rather than prejudice in analysing the problem and assessing the solution.

The Justice of the Peace Courts (Sheriffdom of South Strathclyde, Dumfries and Galloway) Order 2009, which proposed the closure of the district courts at Annan, Cumnock and Girvan, was rejected by the Scottish Parliament's Justice Committee only in May this year. Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is somewhat arrogant of the Scottish Court Service to reintroduce exactly the same proposal after only four months?

As the cabinet secretary may be aware, last month, the convicted rapist and former police officer Adam Carruthers lost his appeal against the removal of employer contributions to his police pension. It has been estimated that the appeal cost the taxpayer more than £100,000 in legal aid fees. Moreover, he received legal aid for his appeals against sentence, at least one of which was abandoned. Will the cabinet secretary give an assurance that he will consider curtailing the use of legal aid for repetitive or vexatious appeals? On some occasions, including the example that I have raised, such appeals are tantamount to harassment of the victims of crime.

The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 enables ministers to regulate on a number of waste prevention issues. A draft statutory instrument on data collection on waste is required to be laid within 12 months of the enactment of the relevant section. Is the cabinet secretary considering making further regulations during this session of the Parliament?

The Government motion concludes by stating that the decision to release Mr al-Megrahi on compassionate grounds was "consistent with the principles of Scottish justice." On 15 January, the First Minister stated on the topic of possible release: "On the questions of conditional or compassionate release ... on every occasion I have emphasised the critical importance of upholding the integrity of the Scottish judicial system".— [ Official Report , 15 January 2009; c 14061.]  That is the point of the debate. Did the decision and the process by which it was taken uphold the integrity of the Scottish judicial system? Was it consistent with the principles of Scottish justice? Was releasing Mr al-Megrahi to Libya, to be fêted on his return to his homeland, the correct decision? Was it compassionate to all those affected by the atrocity that took place in the skies over Lockerbie on 21 December 1988? I turn first to the cabinet secretary's meeting with Mr al-Megrahi on 6 August in Greenock prison. From earlier statements that Mr MacAskill made, I received the impression that the prisoner had approached him with a request for a meeting. The acceptance of such a meeting would, in itself, be highly unusual, although the case was exceptional. However, I was astonished when the documents that were published yesterday revealed that the deputy director of the criminal justice directorate, Mr George Burgess, wrote to Mr al-Megrahi on 7 July 2009—ironically, on notepaper with the slogan "Homecoming Scotland 2009"—stating that, as part of the process of consideration of prisoner transfer release, Mr al-Megrahi had "the opportunity to put forward" his "own representations either in writing or personally to Mr MacAskill." Mr Burgess then requested that Mr al-Megrahi let him know whether he wished to meet Mr MacAskill. So, in fact, the cabinet secretary offered to meet Mr al-Megrahi, initially, apparently, to discuss prisoner transfer, despite that not being possible at the time because of the two outstanding appeals against his sentence. The offer was made on the basis that Mr MacAskill had received direct representations from other parties. Therefore, on 6 August, the cabinet secretary met a terminally ill man—a man who was missing his family and desperate to return to his homeland in time for Islam's most important festival, and probably his last opportunity to celebrate Ramadan. We know that the possibility of Mr al-Megrahi dropping his appeal was referred  to at the meeting. The application for compassionate release had already been lodged, on 24 July, and Mr al-Megrahi made several references to his terminal illness and his desire to see his family, as well as protestations of innocence. Prisoner transfer and compassionate release appear to have been conflated. In contrast, the videoconference with members of the families of only nine of the 180 American victims discussed their views only on prisoner transfer. The same is true of the face-to-face meetings with relatives of three of the British victims, the one Spanish victim and one Lockerbie family. The views of the Libyan Government were sought. Was any consideration given to trying to ascertain the range of views of the community of Lockerbie or the victims' families on compassionate release to Libya? Let us remember that, prior to the night of 21 December 1988, the relatives of 270 people had been looking forward to celebrating an important religious and cultural festival with them, and those people were wiped off the face of the earth. Mr MacAskill has said that some wounds will never heal, but did he not realise that the sight of a convicted terrorist being fêted on his return to the country that had admitted responsibility for organising the atrocity would reopen those wounds? It was not only those people who lost their loved ones who were affected, although of course their loss was the greatest. The people of Lockerbie who witnessed the descent of Pan Am flight 103 and subsequently looked after the remains and comforted relatives demonstrated compassion in the greatest degree. The events also affected members of the emergency and rescue services and the police officers who searched meticulously for evidence. Incidentally, all but one of the investigating officers who have contacted me are firmly convinced of Mr al-Megrahi's guilt. All those people were affected and suffered to varying extents. One lady described in a recent letter to me her experience that night of hiding under a table with her three-month-old baby, seeing the light from the unexplained explosion and the fire and breathing the fumes, convinced that they were going to die. She did not express a view on the decision, but she wanted to tell me how it felt then and afterwards, as she struggled to cope with the psychological aftermath. Even today, the town struggles under the yoke of being associated solely with the bombing.

No, I will not. Has the decision upheld the principles of Scottish justice? Has that justice been extended  proportionately to the relatives of the victims and the residents of Lockerbie as well as to Mr al-Megrahi? Was real consideration given to the alternative of releasing al-Megrahi to secure accommodation in Scotland where his family could be with him in his final days? Although the Libyan Government knew on 10 August that compassionate release was under consideration, Strathclyde Police was not asked for an assessment of the security issues of release to a Scottish address for another four days.

No. The prison social work department was not asked to assess that possibility. Make no mistake: Strathclyde Police would have stepped up to the mark, whatever it was asked to do, as the police always do. Much has been made of Bill Rammell's statement that the Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary did not want al-Megrahi to die in jail. That is not the same as wanting him to return to Libya. There were alternatives to releasing him to Libya. The documents that were released yesterday do not convince me that those alternatives were investigated properly before being ruled out.

I cannot agree that the decision was consistent with the principles of Scottish justice. I therefore support all three amendments.

In the weeks following the horror of the bombing of Pan Am flight 103, the people of Lockerbie offered support and succour to the families of the victims. That was particularly appreciated by the relatives of the 180 Americans who died in the skies over Scotland, and a relationship of trust and friendship has continued for more than 20 years. How many of the families of the American victims did the Cabinet Secretary for Justice consult as he was making his decision to release Abdelbaset Ali al-Megrahi on compassionate grounds and what account did he take of their  views? Other than speaking to the Deputy Chief Constable of Strathclyde constabulary, what advice did he receive on compassionate alternatives? Did he fully explore those alternatives, which would have enabled those families to feel that the promise to them that al-Megrahi would remain in Scotland for the duration of his sentence had been honoured?

The major festivals such as the Edinburgh International Festival, T in the Park, Celtic Connections, the St Magnus Festival and so on are all hugely important to Scotland's culture and economy. I was slightly surprised to learn that the minister had made his festival debut only within the past year. My festival debut preceded his by almost 10 years. In 1999, I and a number of other MSPs including Mr McGrigor took part in the Edinburgh fringe festival, where Mr McGrigor's rendition of "Hairy Mary" was a stunning success, possibly because it starred the Presiding Officer wearing fishnet tights. He will probably never call me again at First Minister's question time now that I have divulged that information. Like other colleagues such as Karen Gillon and Alasdair Allan, I want to highlight the contribution of local festivals to the wellbeing, identity, confidence and economy of the area in which they take place. I place on record my gratitude to the volunteers in my constituency who, year after year, invest time, effort, and commitment into making such events a success. As Alasdair Allan said, the common ridings and ridings of the marches in the Borders and elsewhere in the south of Scotland are famous.  The origins of many festivals date back to the time of the Border reivers, when the young men of the community would ride round the burgh boundaries to check that its landmarks had not been tampered with—either by marauding English people or, indeed, by other families trying to gain advantage over the warring factions in the Borders. None of the ridings events is a single-day celebration. Each is preceded by a week or a fortnight of cultural, leisure and sporting activities, which are organised to bring the community together. Such activities reinforce community identity and confidence. The first such event in my constituency—the popular Lockerbie gala and common riding—took place last Saturday. Following that, the guid nychburris festival in Dumfries has been going on all this week. The riding of the marches and the crowning of the queen of the south on Saturday celebrate the granting of royal burgh status to Dumfries by King Robert III in 1186. Indeed, my own horse will take part in the riding, although—I say this before the Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution becomes too excited about the prospect of a by-election—it will not be I who will be on his back. Annan riding of the marches, which takes places on the first Saturday in July, lays claim—as do others—to a tradition that is well over 600 years old. However, the event has developed over time and has added a gala. A more recent addition is the pipe band contest, which is an increasingly important part of the day. The contest, which now attracts more than 25 bands from across Scotland, culminates in a massed pipe bands and drums performance in Annan High Street in the evening. The closing rendition of "Highland Cathedral" cannot fail to make the hairs rise on the back of the neck of those who listen to it. Langholm common riding, like Selkirk's, may lay claim to an even more ancient heritage. The common riding, which takes place on the last Friday of July, attracts tourists from across the United Kingdom. As Karen Gillon said, the occasion is a true homecoming event, because visitors come back year after year. Langholm common riding celebrates the definition of the boundaries of the town and of the rights of the community that were granted by the Court of Session in Edinburgh. In fact, the origins of these ancient common ridings might be the Celtic Lughnasadh—or, in Anglo-Saxon, Lammas—festivals that took place around the end of July or beginning of August to mark the beginning of the harvest. Such festivals were associated with horsemanship and horse-racing in honour of the Celtic goddess Epona. Indeed, horse-racing and horsemanship are very much part of the Langholm common riding. I am  always amazed that the gallop up the narrow Kirk Wynd, lined with observers, still manages to escape the health and safety police, but long may it do so. However—as my mother is currently in the public gallery—I must confess that my decision once to invite my mother and father and all our dogs to stand at the bottom of Kirk Wynd as the cornet and the entire procession of horses passed by at full gallop was probably one of the most foolhardy decisions that I have taken. Galas also take place in Moffat, Lochmaben, Eastriggs, Brydekirk and Kirkpatrick Fleming. In each case, the gala—whether large or small—promotes a sense of community identity, attracts visitors and thereby supports the local economy. However, the organisers of such marvellous events have been subject to increased bureaucracy as a result of the Parliament passing legislation such as the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006. The relevant provisions of that act were intended to deal with the important public order issues that can arise from sectarian marches and political demonstrations. Councils now require the organisers of events to provide various bits of information, some of which are totally irrelevant to common ridings, galas or remembrance parades. When I raised the issue of the burden of such unnecessary bureaucracy on traditional galas and so on last year, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice advised me that Dumfries and Galloway Council could apply to the Scottish ministers for an exemption for certain types of procession, such as common ridings, galas or remembrance day parades. Dumfries and Galloway Council wrote to the Cabinet Secretary for Justice in November 2008 to apply for an exemption for such events. Five months later, with the common riding and gala season only weeks away, Mr MacAskill eventually responded and turned down the council's request. I understand that one of the long-standing organisers of the Langholm common riding, Stuart Thomson, has already spoken to the culture minister about that, but I, too, ask him to support Dumfries and Galloway Council's request for an exemption. Such events rely on the good will of volunteers who give up huge amounts of their time, without pay. As soon as one event is finished, the organisers start to arrange the following year's event. They do not need to be treated as if they were organisers of political demonstrations or sectarian marches. Will the minister speak to Mr MacAskill about that so that, if Dumfries and Galloway Council repeats its request next year, we can perhaps get it granted?

Our concern is that the Conservative amendment talks only about recycling, reduction and disposal and does not refer to reuse and recovery, which seem to be left out of the intention of an otherwise agreeable amendment.

The national waste management plan regulations that require  ministers to have a waste management plan and enable them to modify it were passed on 22 March 2007. On 25 January 2008, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment made a statement to Parliament in which he announced a review of the national waste strategy of 2003. That resulted in a consultation paper on potential legislative measures to implement zero waste that was issued in July last year. Some of those measures appear in the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, which was considered at stage 2 this week. Some 18 months later, we have another consultation. Why has it taken so long—from 25 January 2008 until now—to get to this stage? Why could the consultation on the waste plan not have been launched shortly after the ministerial statement at the beginning of last year and why do we have to wait until February 2010 to see the new national waste management plan?

Indeed, but the Government already had in place a fairly good national waste plan to build on, so I do not know why it has taken so long this time. I am a little disappointed that we are debating the subject without the consultation document, because we do not know what questions it asks. All that I have been able to determine about the present consultation is from a remark on the Scottish Government website, something like six layers down, which says: "The consultation will consider amongst other things, delivery options and ask what support local authorities, organisations, businesses and householders require to deliver practical actions to meet the Zero Waste vision." I wonder whether it might have been more useful to have this debate after we had the results of the consultation so that we could know what stakeholders are saying.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his reassurance that we will return to the debate. The Labour amendment notes the launch of the consultation on the waste plan, but I do not feel  that I have enough information about it at the moment to welcome it. Our amendment also proposes to leave out of the Government motion that the waste management plan "will help Scotland further along the path to becoming a zero waste society". Although I certainly hope that it will do that, until we see more of the content it is difficult to make that judgment. The Labour amendment refers to the revised EU waste framework, which requires to be transposed into law by 12 December next year. That must be taken into account in the new waste plan. Indeed, the minister referred in her statement to the waste hierarchy, which is crucial to the waste strategy. The waste hierarchy starts with prevention, which is followed by reuse, recycling, recovery and disposal. Prevention is the most desirable strategy and disposal—such as landfill or inefficient mass-burn incineration—is the least desirable strategy. The existing national waste plan of 2003 recognises that hierarchy, which will be essential to the new plan. Any strategy that describes itself as zero waste—that is of course an aspiration—must deliver a significant absolute reduction in the waste that is generated. As waste prevention is the most desirable outcome, the strategy must demonstrate success in reducing the volumes of waste that are generated. What thoughts have ministers had about targets and timescales for waste reduction? Will views on that be included in the other issues for the consultation? On Tuesday, I proposed stage 2 amendments to the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill on the basis of the situation in Flanders, which has been extremely successful in achieving a recycling level of 70 per cent—that is even better than the best Scottish councils' rates. Measures such as selective bans on incineration and landfill and waste reduction schemes have been introduced in Flanders. On Tuesday, the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change assured me that the Government has the necessary statutory powers to implement selective landfill and incineration bans. Will ministers consult on how they might use those powers? My colleague Marlyn Glen tells me that Austria, which took early action to reduce waste to landfill and to encourage the recovery of value from waste, has developed innovative methods of waste recycling and recovery. My colleague Lewis Macdonald will elaborate on examples of international good practice in his speech. Under the headline of waste reduction, several local authorities have introduced measures that have been extremely unpopular with householders. That is often because householders  suspect—perhaps rightly—that the principal motivation is reducing costs rather than waste. For example, South Ayrshire Council has introduced charges for special uplifts, as has Dumfries and Galloway Council, which refuses to empty wheelie bins whose lids are open and which removes additional refuse only if it is in special bags that have been purchased at considerable cost from the council. I believe that Fife Council proposes to have monthly bin collections. Given that people perceive bin collection as one of the most basic services for which their council tax pays and that they tend to resist penalties for using the service, another option might be to introduce rebates for people who produce less waste. Energy from waste sometimes has a bad press, partly because it is confused with mass-burn incineration. The revised EU directive makes the distinction clear. In January last year, the Government capped the generation of energy from domestic waste at 25 per cent of waste. However, the new waste plan needs to make the distinction between waste that could have a viable use other than as a fuel and waste that is at the end of its life cycle and would otherwise end up in landfill. Of course, the waste hierarchy prefers prevention. It would be most undesirable if energy recovery, recycling or reuse became an excuse for not controlling and reducing the amount of waste that is produced in the first place. As the hierarchy places reuse and recycling above recovery, waste materials that are capable of being reused or recycled should not be used for energy recovery if at all possible. The minister mentioned anaerobic digestion of food and farm waste, which is one example of energy from waste that attracts widespread interest and support. Earlier this week, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs made some £10 million available for five projects that are to be built by March 2011 to demonstrate how such technology can be developed. Wasting food should be discouraged, but when food or agricultural waste is unavoidable, we can use anaerobic digestion to derive energy from the greenhouse gas, methane. Anaerobic digestion also has the benefit of being more energy efficient than mass-burn incineration. The emphasis should therefore be not on a blanket ban on energy from waste, but on applying the waste hierarchy and on using and developing technologies that capture the maximum amount of the heat that is generated. As the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee heard when taking evidence during stage 1 consideration of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, waste recycling and reuse infrastructure urgently needs to be improved if we are to fulfil our obligations and if we are to ensure that  commercial and industrial waste is included in the waste plan and does not simply end up in landfill. The Audit Scotland report "Sustainable waste management", which was published in September 2007, noted the previous Administration's estimate that the former strategic waste fund would have to increase from £89 million per annum in 2005-06 to £289 million in 2019-20 to meet the landfill directive targets. It also noted that the cost of supporting residual waste treatment would have to grow to about £79 million per annum over the same period. I will comment briefly on the other amendments. I agree with much of the content of the Conservative amendment, but I am concerned that recovery is not included in the list and that it includes the word "disposal", an option that is at the bottom of the hierarchy along with landfill and incineration. I look forward to hearing more from the Conservatives on the interpretation of their amendment. In their amendment, the Liberal Democrats talk a lot about the issues in the Audit Scotland report. I will listen carefully to what Liberal Democrat members say about their concerns about recycling and funding. In January last year, the cabinet secretary stated that he was introducing "a new direction for waste policy in Scotland." I am disappointed that we are still only at the consultation stage. That said, I am hopeful that the delay does not reflect the lack of priority that the Government gives to this important matter. I will be very interested in the results of the consultation. I was pleased to hear the cabinet secretary say that he intends to bring back the matter to the chamber. I look forward to the development of the strategy. I move amendment S3M-4348.3, to leave out from ", and looks forward" to end and insert: "; recognises however that the provisions of the EU-revised Waste Framework Directive (2008/98/EC) are required to be transposed into Scots law by 12 December 2010; notes the forthcoming consultation on the new National Waste Management Plan, and believes that the new plan must fully address the waste hierarchy of prevention, reuse, recycling, recovery and disposal, as described in the National Waste Plan 2003 and the revised EU framework directive."

As the cabinet secretary is aware, there has been heated discussion elsewhere in the Parliament about the method of increasing forestry planting. He stated that he has accepted the McRobbie recommendations, but is he also considering giving the Forestry Commission the authority to process applications without going through a regional proposal assessment committee and fast-tracking forestry grants by bypassing the statement of intent, as suggested by the Confederation of Forest Industries, to make progress towards the target of 1,000 hectares per annum?

Will the minister and his colleagues consider supporting my amendment to the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill to enable ministers to introduce selective landfill and incineration bans, which would encourage commercial and other recycling and reuse of waste?

There is clear cross-party agreement on the importance of the aquaculture industry in many parts of rural Scotland, including my constituency. For example, the seafood company that earlier this year took over Pinneys of Scotland is probably Annan's largest employer, and I am pleased to say that it continues to process 100 per cent Scottish farmed salmon. St James Smokehouse, at the other end of the scale, is also situated in Annan. Several members have mentioned the European seafood exposition, which took place last month in Brussels. I hope that they have not given the impression that we have been on some monumental jolly, because the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee spent a fairly action-packed couple of days learning about the common fisheries policy and the common agricultural policy. However, on our whistle-stop visit to the exposition, I was very pleased to find St James Smokehouse advertising its wares on such a huge international stage. It was very gratifying to see such small companies, some of which were from Galloway, promoting their products internationally. As in many other rural constituencies, the economy of my constituency is reliant on the contribution of wild fish. Indeed, the area is well known for its angling and netting, which not only are valued leisure pursuits for local people but attract tourists to the region. We need to reconcile the difference between the two industries and find a sustainable way forward. Indeed, that is important right across the board. As I said in my opening remarks, I would have appreciated more time to study and consider the Government's renewed strategic framework for Scottish aquaculture, for the very reason that aquaculture is so important to the Scottish economy and the availability of quality local food. I was not, as Dave Thompson implied, just being grumpy; I admit, though, that I might have been slightly grumpy, given that I had leapt out of my bed early this morning and, without even so much as a cup of tea, rushed into Parliament to attempt to get a copy of the document only to be advised that it would not be available until the afternoon.  However, Robin Harper fared even worse; I understand that he did not receive a copy at all. Many stakeholders, producers, consumers, processors and environmentalists have a keen interest in the strategy, and we should have been able to find out whether it adequately addressed their concerns. As I say, I would have appreciated more time to hear the views of those stakeholders and to construct a more considered response. It might have been more useful had the minister launched the strategy in a statement and, perhaps a month later, when we had a fuller picture of the composition of the ministerial group and the task forces, how the forum would be set up and how the strategy was going to be taken forward, we could have had a more productive debate. I do not intend just to be negative, because we support the document's intentions. After all, who can disagree that the way forward lies in having healthier fish and shellfish, improved licensing systems, aquaculture developments, improved containment, better marketing and an improved image and better access to finance? As ministers in the current Government have acknowledged in previous debates, all that builds on the previous Executive's good work. Of course, what really counts is whether objectives are achieved, and we should not congratulate ourselves on achieving a good strategy until we know whether that is the case. We all know that words are reasonably easy; what matters is whether they translate into effective action. We will be judged on that. Many members, including Karen Gillon, Peter Peacock, Ross Finnie, Liam McArthur and Maureen Watt, have spoken about the importance of the aquaculture industry to the Scottish economy. The fact that Scotland is the second largest producer of farmed salmon in Europe bears repeating. It was the third largest producer of farmed salmon in the world, but I am not sure whether it is not now the second largest, given the problems that there have been in Chile. Salmon farming is worth £324 million per annum, trout farming is worth £15 million per annum, and shellfish farming is worth £5 million per annum. As members have said, there is considerable room for expansion of the latter. The Association of Scottish Shellfish Growers believes that a shellfish output of 100,000 tonnes per annum is possible. That would mean a 20-fold increase in current production. Does the Government agree that an increase of that magnitude is possible? How long would it take to develop the strategy that would be required to deliver that? The matter is significant to the Solway, for example, which has, it has been estimated, the capacity to produce 13,000 tonnes of farmed oysters or 19,000 tonnes of farmed mussels.  Liam McArthur mentioned discussions with the industry on the opportunities that arise from the collapse of the Chilean industry. Robin Harper and Ross Finnie made the point that we also need to know what lessons should be learned about the risks to the Scottish industry. It is not surprising that many members have mentioned sea lice and health and welfare issues. I was interested in Robin Harper's description—volumes 1 and 2—of possible technological solutions to sea lice and seal attacks. I would be interested in the industry's response to some of the proposals that have been made. From what Robin Harper said, it seems that technologies have been rejected. I would like to hear more from the industry about why it is not prepared to consider them further. Peter Peacock talked about the need for more details on timescales, the funding that is available to tackle the problem, and how progress will be reported to Parliament. Ross Finnie rightly reminded us of the vulnerability of the industry to disease and said that we should not be complacent, as something that has happened to somebody else could equally happen to us. Seals have been mentioned. Obviously, seals are one of the components of the Marine (Scotland) Bill. I was pleased that the Government proposes to repeal the Conservation of Seals Act 1970 in that bill, as that act is very out of date and does not conserve seals in the slightest. As thoughts develop, I would be interested to hear more about how the Government thinks that the concerns of the welfare sector will be met. I am not one of those people who believe that no seal should ever lose its life. Seals, which are intelligent animals, sometimes predate on fish farms. They learn how to swim up rivers to attack them. I think that sometimes there is no option other than to kill an animal because it has become fixated on the predation of fish farms. We should not lose sight of the fact that there are fish welfare issues if fish are being stressed and frightened by continual seal attacks. The issue is not as easy as some might think. Karen Gillon mentioned the important issue of the planning and identification of leases and sites. The Scottish Salmon Producers Organisation has expressed reservations about the capability of local authorities to provide aquaculture framework plans with a sufficient level of detail or the presumption of development guidance that is contained in Scottish planning policy 22. Will the minister expand on the relationship between SPP 22 and the proposed robust and appropriate planning and licensing schemes, which are one of the strategy's desired outcomes?  I support the development of a strategy, but it is a bit thin and a wee bit late, and perhaps it has not been presented to Parliament in the right way. However, I think that we all agree that the industry is extremely important and that it needs to proceed using a sustainable economic development approach.

I associate Labour members with the condolences that the minister offered to the families of the two gentlemen who died. It seems only a matter of weeks since the previous Minister for Environment and I, despite the best efforts of colleagues throughout the chamber to protract their speeches, had 25 minutes between us to sum up in a debate on the draft "Scottish Aquaculture: A Fresh Start". I feared that we might have the same problem today, but the Presiding Officer has assured us  that time is tight, so more members may want to speak in this debate than spoke in the previous one. Last November's debate was held shortly after the consultation on a refreshed strategy had taken place. At the time, some of us felt hampered by not being able to access responses to the consultation, as they had not yet been published. This time round we are in a marginally better position, as we have had access to the consultation responses. The Government's decision to unveil the refreshed strategy in this debate rather than before it has restricted our ability to assess whether the new strategy addresses the issues that were raised in the consultation. Prior publication would have afforded members and—this is important—stakeholders a chance to digest the strategy's contents. The whole thing smells a bit fishy, if members will excuse the pun. I suspect that the Government is trying to hide something. Why has it left things to the last minute? Is it because, although the strategy's aspirations and objectives are worthy, it is a bit thin on action? Whatever has prompted the Government's move, the opportunity for a full and frank debate on the future of Scottish aquaculture will now have to wait for another day. Crucially, stakeholders have had no chance to brief us in advance of the debate. If the Scottish Government wanted to launch the strategy in Parliament, a ministerial statement would have been the appropriate mechanism for doing so. To expect members to debate the strategy without having seen it and without having had expert input through external briefings is disrespectful. This morning, I thought of raising a point of order on why the document had not been made available to all members, including the back benchers who will speak today. It was somewhat disrespectful that that did not happen. There seems to be more of a false start than a fresh start. That said, the desired outcomes that are listed in the strategy seem to include most of the issues that the consultees raised. For example, under the key theme of health, the complex topic of the control of sea lice was a specific concern for many, including the Fish Veterinary Society, the University of Stirling's institute of aquaculture, the Scottish Association for Marine Science, the Association of Salmon Fishery Boards, Rivers and Fisheries Trusts of Scotland and the Atlantic Salmon Trust. Sea lice control was identified as a key concern by about two thirds of the respondents to the consultation. That is acknowledged in the new strategy, which states that the issue is "crucial for the long-term future"  of "farmed and wild salmonids." That is welcome, but from my brief study of the strategy, I am uncertain as to what will actually be done, other than data collection. The Association of Salmon Fishery Boards wants all escapes to be reported to district salmon fishery boards. The prevention of escapes was mentioned as a concern by 29 of the 47 respondents to the consultation, despite the previous Minister for Environment's assurances that he had reduced the number of escapes from 210,643 in 2007 to 66,471 by November last year. If the current minister has reduced that to only one, she has done remarkably well. I note that Marine Scotland is to undertake an inspection role and that the industry code of good practice is to be revised. In addition to asking for specific action on sea lice, the Atlantic Salmon Trust pointed out in its consultation response that there should be a specific link with the strategic framework for Scottish freshwater fisheries. I would appreciate clarification on how that will be achieved. The trust also suggests that freshwater smolting cages should be sited not in lochs, but in tanks on land, where pollution and escapes can be controlled better. I have observed cages of that type at Barony College, where trout and salmon are bred for the specific purpose of release into rivers and lochs for the pursuit of angling. The Scottish Salmon Producers Organisation has informed us in a briefing that, in 2008, salmon farming was worth £500 million to the Scottish economy, including £36 million directly in wages, principally to workers in remote and rural communities. The briefing also describes the success of the industry on exports, which have increased by more than 500 per cent in two decades, and in the UK market. A fresh salmon meal is consumed by almost 2 per cent of the UK population every day. The industry contributes significantly to the availability of healthy, locally produced food. Several organisations, including Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the Scottish Salmon Producers Organisation, wanted a clear indication of how aquaculture will be dealt with in marine planning. They sought assurance that the creation of Marine Scotland will not cause further uncertainty. On Tuesday, along with other members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, I met representatives of Marine Scotland and was reassured to hear that consideration of that aspect of marine planning is already well on the body's radar. Nevertheless, the concern about marine planning was the one that was mentioned by the highest number of respondents to the consultation, with 31 of the 47 respondents raising the issue.  Scottish Environment LINK pointed out in its response that the sustainability of feed ingredients is a major long-term concern. Excessive nutrients entering watercourses and the marine environment can seriously alter the ecological balance and can lead to algal blooms and other problems. Questions also arise about whether the feeding of fish-derived product to fish is sustainable. The figure of 5kg of feed to produce 1kg of fish has been referred to in briefings for previous debates. Again, that issue is reflected in the desired outcomes but, so far, without any detail. The Labour Party proposes a minor amendment to the motion. We do not in any way disagree with the content of the motion and seek only to expand the welcome reference to "high environmental standards" with a reference to "the principles of sustainable development". Those principles were detailed in the previous Executive's strategy on sustainable development, which was published in 2005, and they are acknowledged throughout the UK and internationally. I am sure that every member in the chamber recalls what they are, but I will reiterate them just in case. The principles are: living within environmental limits; ensuring a strong, healthy and just society; achieving a sustainable economy; promoting good governance; and using sound science responsibly. Although those principles are implicit in the motion and are mentioned specifically in the strategy document, we feel that it would be useful to refer explicitly to them, as they are relevant to the future of the aquaculture industry in Scotland and to the balance that must be struck between economic growth and environmental protection. John Scott's amendment makes reference to the importance of aquaculture in supporting not only employment, but the existence of many remote and rural communities. It is impossible to disagree. I have already referred to the importance of the industry in remote and rural communities. We will of course support the Conservative amendment. Liam McArthur's amendment highlights the importance of training and career opportunities to the long-term future of the industry. In our previous debate on aquaculture, I mentioned the courses that are delivered at the Barony College in my constituency, which provides higher national certificate and Scottish vocational qualifications level 2 qualifications through a variety of aquaculture-related courses. The strategy refers to the role of education and training in promoting aquaculture as a viable career. Training is vital to the future of any quality industry, which is another reason why we will support the Liberal Democrat amendment.  When I first read Robin Harper's amendment, I thought that he was being a little harsh in concentrating on the problems created within and by the industry in the past. I had hoped that study of the new strategy would reveal the way in which those issues were being addressed. However, the embargo on the document has meant that there has been no opportunity for the industry, organisations that represent anglers or any other stakeholders to comment on its contents and, therefore, it is difficult to know whether the strategy is adequate. In addition, I feel that the strategy as it stands is a little thin. As a precaution, we will support Robin Harper's amendment to retain attention on the need for the strategy to continue to address those serious issues. I agree completely that the industry is extremely valuable to the Scottish economy, but it is also important that it does not interfere with other industries and activities that are equally valuable to the Scottish economy. I hope that the strategy is able to produce a way forward that ensures the viability of the industry as well as the protection of the environment and the viability of angling and other industries that are important to Scotland. I move amendment S3M-4186.2, after "environmental standards" insert: "and the principles of sustainable development".

Last night, Jim Hume and I met chairs of children's panel advisory committees from throughout Scotland. As the minister will be aware, those are groups of highly trained volunteers who, with clerical assistance from local authorities, recruit and train children's panel members. Can the minister advise what future he envisages for CPACs? Does he intend to pass their functions to a central national body and abolish them? If so, why? CPACs have operated successfully for the past 38 years, evolving during that period to adjust to new challenges and ensure that there is local expertise in the recruitment and training of children's panel members.

I, too congratulate Peter Peacock on securing the debate during biodiversity week. I apologise that I cannot stay until the end of the debate: I have another meeting to attend. Many people might at the moment consider politicians to be a species of invertebrate, so perhaps it is appropriate that some of us are speaking out for invertebrates, which cannot speak for themselves. The humble and necessary bee that quietly buzzes about its business is a worthy discussion topic in biodiversity week. Scotland has many species of bee. I note the slight difference between the information that Peter Peacock provided and that which John Scott had, but we are advised that Scotland has more than 80 species of solitary bee. The great yellow bumble-bee, which was mentioned, is now a rare species—I appreciate that it can be found in Orkney. Apparently, an extremely rare solitary bee called Osmia uncinata is unique to Scotland. Bees are crucial to the maintenance of diverse habitats and ecosystems. As other members have said, bee populations have declined in recent years for several reasons. The varroa parasitic mite has been mentioned. It is a non-native  invasive species that originally infected Asian bees, but which has unfortunately managed to get into the British bee population, which had no resistance to it. The mite used to be treated with a pesticide, but it is now—unfortunately—becoming resistant to that, so new chemical and biotechnological solutions are being sought. As Peter Peacock's motion says, and as other members have said, it is important to preserve the status of mite-free areas such as Colonsay while other solutions are sought. As John Scott said, pesticides can be dangerous to bees: they can kill them outright or have sub-lethal effects on complex social insects, like bees. Those effects can lead to changes in behaviour, lifestyle and reproductive systems that cause populations to decline. I do not want to be unduly negative. Individuals and families who have gardens can take steps to help bees. Many people in my neighbourhood consider my garden to be overcrowded and overgrown. That could be the result of a lack of time for gardening, but I like to think that my garden is doing its bit for the environment by sequestering carbon and providing a habitat for birds, bees, butterflies and amphibians. Those creatures pay us back with hours of enjoyable observation. We all know about bird-watching, but the Bumblebee Conservation Trust will provide people who are interested with the means of identifying different types of bumble-bee. I understand that we can attract at least six types of bumble-bee, if not 10, into our gardens. Apparently, there are short-tongued and long-tongued varieties. As other members said, the traditional habitats that support bee populations, such as hedgerows and grasslands, have become scarcer. Wildlife gardens are now a stronghold for some bumble-bee populations. Of course, bees need flowers, not only in the spring and summer but into the early autumn. The Bumblebee Conservation Trust can advise on which flowers to plant in our gardens to enable a food supply for bees throughout that period. The species do not need to be exotic—many common garden plants and wild flowers will do the trick. We need only ensure a rotation of flowering plants between spring and early autumn. I also understand that the Co-op has bee boxes in which solitary bees can nest. I have not yet been successful in obtaining one, but anyone who wishes to get such a box can obtain it from that source. Bees need us to look out for them, not least because, without them, our lives would be much less sweet.

Point taken, Presiding Officer. The Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill transposes into Scots law the provisions of an European Union directive. Many members will have witnessed the distress that floods have caused our constituents. The legislation will not prevent flooding from ever happening again, but it should ensure that the relevant authorities, working together in the full knowledge of their respective responsibilities, will develop better systems of flood prevention. Consideration of the bill was enlightened by the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's earlier inquiry into flooding, and amendments at stages 2 and 3 have effected significant improvement to the original bill. The progress of the bill illustrates how effective Parliament's committee system can be in working with the Government to achieve the aims of stakeholders. I record the thanks of Labour members to RSPB Scotland and Scottish Environment LINK for their considerable and considered input at all stages of the bill. As Peter Peacock said, we thank in particular Andrea Johnstonová. I thank the minister and her officials for their constructive engagement with the committee. I also thank the committee clerks for their invaluable assistance in translating our aspirations into amendments. Through that assistance, the focus on sustainability has been strengthened. The bill now reflects a clear emphasis on the importance of natural features and characteristics in flood prevention measures, and provides the steer that is necessary to effect cultural change. The need for the agencies that are involved in flood prevention not only to co-operate but to co-ordinate their activities using an integrated approach will now be laid in statute. Local authorities will be empowered to manage flood risk  through land management, and owners will be entitled to claim compensation for work on their land that acts to prevent flooding but adversely affects their income from other uses. Local authorities will also be able to recover expenses for work that they are obliged to do on private land in the pursuance of flood prevention, whether in repairing flood defences or in clearing debris from water courses to prevent flooding of neighbouring land or properties. However, the best flood prevention schemes will not be implemented if there is insufficient funding to make them happen, which is why amendment 4, in the name of my colleague Peter Peacock, was so important. Similar amendments were debated at committee, but lost on the convener's casting vote. I am delighted that Parliament agreed to amendment 4, albeit narrowly. The benefits of the bill will be realised only if ministers allocate adequate funding to responsible authorities to enable them to undertake the prevention schemes that they have identified as being necessary. The amendment that was agreed today is not unduly restrictive; it simply requires ministers "to have regard to" flood risk management planning when allocating funding to the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and other responsible authorities. The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee felt that the current legislative requirement on Scottish Water to deliver its functions "at lowest reasonable overall cost" may not enable it to give adequate weight to issues of sustainability. It was for that reason that my colleagues Peter Peacock and Robin Harper lodged amendments to amend the relevant sections of the Water Industry (Scotland) Act 2002 on the duties of the Water Industry Commission for Scotland and Scottish Water. The aim of the amendments was to enable Scottish Water to deliver sustainable solutions to flood management. The amendments required ministers to consider the issuing of directions to Scottish Water and the WIC on their duties on sustainable flood risk management. I am sorry that we did not manage to persuade Parliament to agree to the amendments, but I hope that their spirit will be taken forward. I think that, in her responses, the minister indicated that she will progress some elements of the amendments, even without their having been agreed to. In her amendments, Karen Gillon focused on the committee's consideration of the need for flood risk assessment to be undertaken prior to planning permission being granted in areas that have been assessed as being prone to flooding. One amendment was agreed to but the other was not. At this stage, I am not quite certain what the effect of that will be; however, we must note that the  amendments reflect concerns that were brought to Parliament in the form of petition PE1207, from Gordon Sinclair, which was considered at stage 1. Similar issues were raised by our colleague Helen Eadie in her speech during the stage 1 debate. To summarise, this is a good bill that has been further strengthened by the committee process and by parliamentary consideration at stage 3. It represents a major improvement to flood risk management in Scotland and a cultural change in the approach to flood prevention—from the previous assumption that prevention required hard engineering solutions to an approach that requires that consideration be given to use of natural features and characteristics. A duty has been placed on ministers, SEPA and the responsible authorities to act to achieve the objectives that are set out in flood risk management plans. The bill, when enacted, should help to prevent the considerable distress that is caused to individuals and communities by flooding incidents. It will be a welcome addition to the statute book.

Again, the amendments in my name in this group rework an issue that I raised at stage 2, when I also highlighted the issue of the management of land for flood risk prevention. At stage 2, I moved that local authorities might be permitted to apply to Scottish ministers for a land management order for the purposes of flood prevention in a manner similar to that which applies for the management of sites of special scientific interest under the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004, and to compensate landowners for the loss of income from such land—a proposal that attracted John Scott's support in principle. However, the minister felt that my proposal would have created two parallel procedures. She suggested that the bill already contains provisions that will enable local authorities to carry out flood prevention operations. Nevertheless, all of us agreed that the bill could usefully be further amended at stage 3, so I did not press the amendments in my name at stage 2. Subsequently, I have worked with committee clerks and John Scott has worked with Government officials, so group 12 offers two sets of alternative amendments—amendments 11 and 12, in my name, and amendments 20, 21 and 22, in the name of John Scott—that have the same aim. However, I note that the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association seems to be more concerned about the effects of amendments 11 and 12, so I will be interested to hear the minister's views on the issue. Both sets of amendments would ensure that local authorities have the power to carry out land management with the aim of slowing down or storing water. Both sets of amendments would also provide for landowners to be compensated for the loss of income derived from their land when it is used for flood prevention. I think that amendments 11 and 12 are neat, but brevity might not necessarily be the best option in this case. Therefore, I am happy to listen to the minister's assessment of both sets of amendments. There may be technical reasons why amendments 20, 21 and 22 are preferable. I will move amendment 11 at this point, but I might seek Parliament's permission to withdraw it and decide not to move amendment 12 if it  transpires that amendments 20, 21 and 22 would achieve the same aim and are more competently expressed. I move amendment 11.

The intention of the two sets of amendments is to achieve the same aim. If John Scott's amendments achieve that more effectively than my amendments, I am more than happy to ask Parliament's permission to withdraw amendment 11.  Amendment 11, by agreement, withdrawn.  Amendments 20 and 21 moved—[John Scott]—and agreed to.  Amendment 48 moved—[Roseanna Cunningham]—and agreed to.  Amendment 12 not moved.  Amendment 22 moved—[John Scott]—and agreed to.

These amendments were the subject of an amendment at stage 2. The motivation behind them arose from evidence given to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee by Jim Moodie of Fife Council, who has been mentioned already today. Mr Moodie told us that although the bill contained a mechanism to allow a local authority to recover costs when it had to undertake work on privately owned land to repair or reinstate flood prevention measures, there was no similar mechanism when authorities were required to clear debris from private land to prevent flooding from occurring. Although landowners should not be responsible for the whole cost of installing flood prevention measures on their land that are devised and agreed by the responsible authorities, where landowners have been negligent in keeping watercourses or field drains free of debris, and in so doing have placed neighbouring properties in danger of flooding, the local authority should be able to reclaim the expense to the public purse of remedial work. At stage 2, the minister agreed that the situation was anomalous, but felt at that stage that any amendment should be tied in with the new requirements for local authorities to produce and implement schedules of clearance and repair work. I am grateful to her officials for subsequently suggesting a suitable form of words, now presented as amendments 23 and 24, in order to achieve that aim. I trust that the amendments will attract the support of all members. I move amendment 23.

As Peter Peacock has described, his amendment 4 places a duty on ministers just to "have regard to" flood risk plans. That indeed reflects the recommendations in the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's report on flooding and flood management, and in its stage 1 report on the bill. In fact, the amendment does not go as far as those recommendations might suggest. It does not tie ministers into reintroducing ring-fenced funding for flood prevention, which many of us would like to see. The amendment says that, especially in spending review years, ministers should take into account the burden that is placed on the finances of SEPA and responsible authorities if they are to be able to implement the flood risk management plans that they have drawn up. It is important that funding follows policy, and that is all that we are asking for at this point. As Peter Peacock said, amendment 4 is relatively modest, and I hope that the Government feels able to accept it.

It is a pleasure to kick off proceedings at stage 3 of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill, about which there has been a lot of discussion and agreement. Amendment 19 is a rewrite of an amendment that was lodged at stage 2. It focuses on the need for all agencies, including the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, the Scottish ministers, councils and any designated responsible authorities, to take an integrated approach to flood risk management in exercising their individual functions. As the bill stands, those authorities will be required to co-operate so far as is practicable in order to co-ordinate the exercise of their functions. Co-ordinated actions require the agencies to work in harmony whereas integration requires them to work together as a whole. Integrated working is required to ensure that all aspects of flood risk prevention are covered. All forms of flood risk—whether from surface, ground, river or coastal water—need to be addressed in an integrated way. To do that, policy must also be integrated, and the work of the many agencies that may be involved in flood prevention must fit together as much as possible. Peter Peacock's amendment 10 recognises that some issues—surface water run-off and the management of natural features, for example—will cross local authority boundaries and local plan districts and that flood risk planning needs to be integrated in such cases. It proposes that the lead authority plan should include a description of how an integrated approach will be achieved. I  encourage members to support both amendments in the group. I move amendment 19.

I am pleased that the minister intends to accept amendment 19.  Amendment 19 agreed to.

I, too, am pleased to take part in the stage 1 debate on the bill, which is widely considered to be very important. I will concentrate on waste strategy. Although the Minister for Environment stated yesterday that she assumed that the lack of major comment on the bill's proposals suggests that they have a degree of general support, there are a number of points to be considered, as Angela Constance ably demonstrated in her contribution a few minutes ago. Waste policy is important in tackling climate change. First, waste is, as a derivative of production and consumption, a strong indicator of inefficiencies at one or more points of a  commodity's useful life. Secondly, waste itself may contain greenhouse gases or, more often, it may contribute by producing greenhouse gases—frequently methane—as a product of anaerobic degradation, as happens in landfill sites. Methane is 21 times more powerful as a greenhouse gas by weight than carbon dioxide. However, with an atmospheric lifetime of around 12 years, it is reasonably short lived, and controlling its production now can therefore make a real contribution to shorter-term targets. Despite the Government's 25 per cent cap on energy from waste, waste processes such as the anaerobic digestion of agricultural or food waste, which produces methane that is used to produce power, should be encouraged, although wasting food should be discouraged as far as possible. I commend Dumfries and Galloway Council—I do not always do so, but in this instance I will—for its capping of the Locharmoss landfill site, and the use of the methane that is produced there for the generation of electricity, which contributes to the national grid. The bill does not transpose the European revised waste framework directive into Scots law, as is required by 12 December next year. In referring to recycling, the bill does not distinguish between reuse, recycling and recovery, as the directive requires. The directive also requires 50 per cent of household waste and 70 per cent of construction and demolition waste to be recycled or reused by 2020. Those may appear to be challenging targets but, back in 2005, Flanders, whose population of 6 million is only slightly higher than Scotland's, achieved 70 per cent recycling, reuse or composting of household waste. The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee heard evidence on the need to subject commercial and industrial waste to the same requirements as domestic waste. The bill requires business and public bodies to provide information to SEPA on the waste that they produce, thereby identifying opportunities for a reduction in waste management costs and a means of comparison with businesses of a similar size and sector. The committee recognised the need for internationally agreed measures of carbon accounting across the life-cycle of a commodity. At times, it seems as if the evidence is counterintuitive: what one thinks of as low carbon can turn out to be high carbon, and vice versa. Many small businesses want to recycle their waste, but find it hard to do so because of a lack of infrastructure. In evidence to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, Susan Love, of the Federation of Small Businesses, stated that "It will not be remotely possible to implement many of the bill's measures unless we make progress with facilities",  and Dirk Hazell, of the Scottish Environment Services Association, advised that "There is nowhere near enough waste infrastructure ... to comply with existing European obligations."—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 28 January 2009; c 1362, 1361.] However, it is highly unlikely that local authorities can fund the development of such infrastructure. They are already struggling, as their current funding regime allows them to address only their existing obligations. The duty must rest on producer responsibilities, coupled with increases in landfill cost and—in certain cases—a ban on certain materials going to landfill. A duty on producers would encourage them to decrease waste and its toxicity and promote recycling and reuse. Both SEPA and WRAP suggested that some forms of industrial and commercial waste should be banned from being sent to landfill. Stop Climate Chaos Scotland is looking into the possibility of strengthening the waste provisions along the lines of the Flanders policy on selected landfill and incineration bans. Friends of the Earth has suggested that penalties for sending waste to landfill could be differentiated between small and larger businesses, perhaps by way of a link to turnover. In its response to the consultation on the bill, SEPA expressed disappointment that the suggestion that it had made in 2006 that direct variable charging should be made the subject of further consultation appears to have been withdrawn. The bill addresses the six greenhouse gases that are mentioned in the Kyoto treaty, which includes action on hydrofluorocarbons but not chlorofluorocarbons and hydrochlorofluorocarbons, both of which are often referred to as ozone-depleting substances—ODS—because of the damage that they can do to the ozone layer. They are used in refrigerators and require careful end-of-life-cycle disposal. Prior to 2004, those compounds were also widely used in plastic foam insulation as the blowing agents that formed the core of insulating sandwich panels in industrial steel-clad buildings. As the law stands, when such buildings are demolished, those materials have to be disposed of as hazardous waste and only in hazardous waste landfill. However, those gases are also significant greenhouse gases. As such, their carbon footprint is some 300 million to 400 million times that of carbon dioxide. It is unfortunate that similar care is not required with ODS-containing materials in the construction industry. Albeit that they are put to hazardous landfill, those gases can leach into the atmosphere, wreaking damage on the ozone layer, adding to atmospheric  greenhouse gases and contributing to Scotland's carbon footprint. A strong case can be made for those compounds to be included in the list of greenhouse gases in section 9. On this subject, Scotland has the opportunity to lead the rest of the world. The waste provisions in the bill are enabling provisions, but that does not mean that they are not controversial. I therefore support the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's suggestion of the use of the super-affirmative procedure.

To ask the First Minister what consideration the Scottish Government has given to the possible transfer of Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed Al Megrahi to a prison in Libya. (S3F-1678)

On 2 February 2008, the First Minister told the BBC news: "it would be appropriate if anyone connected with the Lockerbie atrocity was excluded specifically from any prisoner transfer agreement." That sentiment was repeated by a spokesman for the First Minister on 16 February 2008. On 15 January this year, the First Minister advised the Parliament that he believed that it was critical that the integrity of the Scottish judicial system be upheld, and he has repeated that today. His views on the matter seem clear. Do those statements indicate that the Scottish ministers had predetermined their response to a request from the Libyan Government? If so, would that enable the Libyans to seek judicial review if the request was turned down?

I actually have some sympathy for the Liberal Democrat motion. Many of my constituents, and people across Dumfries and Galloway, are almost totally dependent on private cars for access to employment and services. As Liam McArthur said, in many rural communities a car is a necessity rather than a luxury. Coupled with that, wages in rural areas tend to be below average and housing is often difficult to obtain: there are long waiting lists for social housing and house purchase is impossible as prices are above what is affordable to local people. Fuel prices are higher at rural petrol stations for the very reasons that David Stewart explained. Deprivation in rural areas might not be as large scale or as visible as in urban areas, but such deprivation exists and is endemic. Therefore, I sympathise with the motivation behind the Liberal Democrat motion. However, there are questions about how the system that the Liberal Democrats propose would operate in practice throughout the UK. For example, in France—which was referred to by both Mr McArthur and the minister—variable excise duty is part of a decentralisation agenda,  under which excise duty collection and some powers to reduce excise duty have been devolved to the regions. In the context of the UK, the proposed derogation would presumably be applied by the four nations rather than by local councils. Is it the Liberal Democrats' intention that there should be further devolution to local authority level? Would that be possible under EU law? Moreover, as David Stewart said in his intervention, the system in France requires the total excise duty take to be constant so, in effect, any reduction of excise duty in some areas must be cross-subsidised by other areas. In addition, I am not quite sure whether any part of Dumfries and Galloway would be on the minister's list of areas that are a 60-minute drive from a major town, but I suspect that those constituents who did not qualify might be a little miffed if they ended up paying more in excise duty to subsidise people in other rural areas who would benefit from lower duty. Given the difficulties of defining remote and rural areas, some places with real problems might well be missed out. Is the motivation behind the proposal to stimulate the local economy, or is it to benefit private individuals? In France, only petrol for domestic users is subject to the derogation. Under a similar regime in Scotland, local freight businesses in rural areas would not benefit.

I thank the minister for clarifying his definitions. However, it is more fundamental that we address the other part of the equation. According to a written answer by Paul Clark, the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Transport, to a question on transport costs that Norman Baker MP asked in March this year, the real cost of transport by private car declined by 13 per cent between 1997 and 2008, whereas there were real-terms increases in bus and coach fares of 17 per cent and in rail fares of 7 per cent over the same period. Over the past 30 years, the cost of motoring has declined by 17 per cent in real terms, whereas bus and coach fares and the cost of rail travel have increased by 55 per cent and 49 per cent, respectively, in real terms. In rural areas in particular, public transport is expensive and infrequent. As of last December, for  example, the frequency of buses in Dumfries, which is a town of significant size, was reduced—it is now an hourly service—and routes were curtailed. Residents who live west of the River Nith can no longer access the hospital using one bus. If that is how bad the situation has become in the town of Dumfries, I am sure that members can imagine how poor bus services are in the more rural parts of the region. Fuel excise duty is only a green tax when there is a genuine alternative to the use of private transport. In the absence of such an alternative, it is solely an income generator. Why is public transport in much of the UK so poor in comparison with other parts of Europe? That is the case, I would argue, for the same reason that bus fares rose by 42 per cent in real terms and rail fares by 41 per cent in real terms between 1979 and 1997—it is down to privatisation and deregulation during the 18 years of Conservative rule. That is why my colleague Charlie Gordon's proposed member's bill on the reregulation of bus services is so welcome. The chancellor will be able to exercise his discretion later this year. If fuel prices, and therefore the VAT take, remain high, he will be able to decide whether to implement the proposed increase. In the meantime, as my colleagues have said, the Scottish ministers need to consider what action they can take to help the situation. They should consider the proposal to hold an oil and gas summit, which could examine issues such as what the devolved Administration could do. However, in my view, the real challenge is first to reverse the decline in, and thereafter to improve, public transport in rural areas so that people in those areas will be able to make the green choice of leaving their car at home.

When the motion was lodged, we had not had the announcement that the Scottish Government was to abandon its plans to lease out 25 per cent of the Forestry Commission's estate, even though, as Helen Eadie pointed out, the Government had the opportunity to make the announcement in Parliament last Thursday. Roseanna Cunningham said nothing new and was remarkably churlish, given that the motion congratulates her. We have argued for the alternatives to the SNP's proposal all along, and I am pleased that the Government is now pursuing them. An extraordinary grumpiness pervaded all the speeches of SNP members, and they made little in the way of positive suggestions. The expression "sore losers" comes to mind. Most members of the Parliament were genuinely pleased by last Friday's announcement, which meant that today's debate has given us an opportunity to explore alternative ways of increasing forest cover and to examine the role of forestry in mitigating climate change. As Rhoda Grant said, it is heartening to learn how highly the Forestry Commission's work is regarded. Congratulations are due to the Forestry Commission trade unions, the timber industry representatives, such as ConFor and the UK Forest Products Association, the environmental non-governmental organisations, the tourism and leisure interests, and the political parties—the Labour Party, the Scottish Liberal Democrats, the Green party and, latterly, even the Tory party. We welcome their campaign and last Friday's decision.

I am sorry—my time is limited.  I am not sure that Roseanna Cunningham's predecessor would have been as able to make the sensible decision, give the sometimes arrogant way in which he dismissed genuine concerns as "scaremongering". The spirit of Mr Russell seems to live on in his colleagues. In December, in answer to an oral question, Mr Russell stated: "Labour members will be judged on their inability to engage with forestry and climate change or to think constructively."— [ Official Report , 11 December 2008; c 13367.]  In January, in response to another oral question on the issue, he said: "There are members in the chamber whose behaviour has been disgraceful."— [ Official Report , 22 January 2009; c 14321.]  On that occasion, I think that he was referring to Jim Hume and me. In February, Mr Russell told the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee: "I believe that the leasing proposal is worthy of the committee's support ... and ... needs to proceed."—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 11 February 2009; c 1449.] Time has told whether it was Labour members or Mr Russell who engaged most effectively with the forestry sector. David Stewart described the problems that Mr Russell's pet project would have caused. Let us all be grateful for a fresh pair of eyes at the ministerial desk, however ill-natured those eyes seem to be this morning. Contributions to the debate have brought positive, thoughtful suggestions for alternatives to leasing out the forestry estate and have reflected on the wider issues of land use, and other action that can be taken to reduce carbon emissions and to sequestrate carbon. There has been strong support among members for joint ventures, and for renewable energy projects such as small-scale hydro, biomass and wind generation. However, I sound a note of caution with regard to some of the major large-scale wind turbine developments in forests, which require the felling of trees on a large scale. Sometimes, those trees cannot be used by the timber industry because they have not been certified. In addition, there is major soil disturbance when the concrete bases are inserted. The projects that take place on the forest estate must be the right ones. The Scottish Government could provide a budget for the purpose of forestry planting, should it wish to do so. After all, £70 million has been allocated every year to freezing the council tax, and the small business bonus scheme cost £73 million in 2008-09. If the Scottish Government really wanted to allocate a budget, it could do so. However, in the absence of additional Government funding, a recent review of options suggested that  increased funding could be generated by the repositioning of the estate. I am pleased to learn that ministers are pursuing that. Whatever Rob Gibson thinks, such a policy was brought in by the previous Labour Administration. Woodland creation on private land is supported through the rural development programme, which is another area that Labour believes needs to be considered. I welcome the fact that the minister is talking to Brussels about increasing the amount of funding that is available for forestry planting. However, an element of caution needs to be applied. As other members have said, planting woodland is not a magic wand for mitigating climate change. Although 33 per cent of the land of Scotland is considered appropriate for woodlands, there are other competing demands; as John Scott said, agriculture and food production is one such demand. As he also said, the science of carbon sequestration is very complex, and woodland expansion must be environmentally sensitive. We need to avoid the mistakes of the past. The land use review is an opportunity for a strategic examination of the competing requirements for land. We believe that plans for increasing woodland cover must be balanced with the demands for food production, flood prevention and nature conservation. As others have said, afforestation is not the only answer. Several alternatives are proposed in the consultation responses. I have mentioned them previously, but since the SNP seemed unable to listen, I will mention them again. First, restoration of conservation of peatlands and wetlands to maintain and increase carbon sequestered in soil is vital. Secondly, longer crop rotation cycles would allow trees to reach maturity and maximise their role in sequestration. The third option is the appropriate use of native woodlands and broadleaved trees, and the fourth is the use of wood for construction instead of concrete. I was interested in Robin Harper's contribution regarding the way in which wood construction techniques can produce energy-efficient buildings. That is well worth considering. The slogan, "the right tree in the right place at the right time" has been repeated during our consideration of the forestry proposals in the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. The decision to drop the leasing proposals may not have been made at the right time, and it may not have been made in the right place, but it was the right decision. I give the minister that, despite the rather grumpy nature of her contribution.

This is an important topic for debate. It has come to Parliament early in the process; both Liam McArthur and Jim Hume made the point that members have not yet seen the Government's response to its consultation, still less the draft bill. However, this being environment week, it is appropriate for us to discuss a subject as important as the conservation and enhancement of the marine environment around Scotland. Labour is broadly supportive of the Scottish Government's proposals. Indeed, the UK counterpart of those proposals, the Marine and Coastal Access Bill, was a Labour Party commitment in the 2005 elections. The bill commenced its committee stage last month. Both the UK bill and the Scottish bill will transpose the EU marine directive into international law, a process that must be completed by 15 July next year. However, we have some concerns about the Scottish Government's proposals, which we have highlighted in our amendment and today's debate. We have no wish to delay the proposed marine bill, which is important, and we support the establishment of marine Scotland, but the decision to establish it as a Government directorate runs counter to some of the representations that were made during the consultation. I have no knowledge of telephone conversations between the cabinet secretary and organisations; we are  basing our response on what is in the public domain. The proposed approach raises subsidiary issues that require to be resolved. Scottish Environment LINK, the umbrella group that represents more than 30 environmental organisations, obtained independent legal advice that marine Scotland ought to be a non-departmental public body, to ensure its independence from Government. The proposed UK marine management organisation will be an NDPB, and Scottish Environment LINK said in its submission to the consultation that it is "desirable that both bodies operate in the same way." However, the decision has been made and a number of questions require answers. Will advice to ministers be published? How will transparency be ensured? How will appeals be dealt with? Scottish Environment LINK suggested that if marine Scotland is not to be an NDPB, an environmental court should be established. Will there be a conflict if marine Scotland is responsible for economic growth and environmental protection? Will marine Scotland be responsible for the control of aquaculture? Why is it proposed that the research functions of the Fisheries Research Services will be absorbed into marine Scotland, given that there is a strong case for retaining those functions in an independent advisory body? Rhoda Grant talked about the tensions that might arise in relation to the Scottish Fisheries Protection Agency's enforcement role. I reassure Robin Harper that we support scientists working with fishermen. However, the subsuming of organisations into a Government directorate will potentially cause problems. I am sorry that Robin Harper cannot support Labour's amendment, because we support the amendment in his name. I am concerned that too much emphasis has been placed on economic growth and not enough on the five principles of sustainable development. Scottish Environment LINK pointed out in its response to the consultation: "the five guiding principles of sustainable development ... are not hierarchical but mutually supporting and do not include economic growth as a maxim." The Scottish Council for National Parks said in its submission: "we should not approach this issue by trying to balance conservation objectives with socio-economic objectives. In this case it is not just a matter of applying the Sandford Principle to deal with conflicts between conservation and socio-economic objectives, it is a matter of ensuring that we regain a fully functioning marine ecosystem which then can be cropped at a sustainable level." Like those respondents and others, we think that the purpose of the marine bill must be to ensure  the recovery of the marine ecosystem. The purpose is not simply to conserve the ecosystem's current state of health and prevent it from getting worse, or indeed to ensure that we can continue to exploit the seas as we have become accustomed to doing. In the consultation document, the Scottish Government claimed: "The seas are generally healthy and biologically diverse". The Scottish Sea Angling Conservation Network responded to that claim: "This of course is untrue when one considers the state of our inshore waters. Fish stocks around our coasts have collapsed ... Sustainable exploitation is NOT the answer, we need to REGENERATE the biodiversity of our inshore waters". Peter Peacock referred to the pressure on our seas. In its submission, Greenpeace said: "the busy seas around highly-populated areas like the UK are among the most under pressure." The Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society said: "We are not operating in a healthy environment from which we can move forward. There are considerable efforts to be made to reverse declines of populations of marine species". Under the UK Marine and Coastal Access Bill, sea fisheries committees will be replaced by inshore fisheries and conservation authorities for coastal waters out to 3 nautical miles. If the inshore fisheries group's membership in Scotland is restricted to commercial interests and the group has no input from organisations that have an interest in conservation and recreation, such as the Scottish Sea Angling Conservation Network, we will not address the local depletion of many species that has happened during the past 20 years to the extent that there is local extinction in some places. Kenny Gibson and Peter Peacock made that point. Many respondents to the consultation stressed the importance of taking an approach that is coherent with that of other legislatures. In a joint letter to the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment on 1 October 2008, the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, RSPB Scotland and WWF Scotland argued strongly for "clear, overarching arrangements". The organisations referred to the Irish Sea pilot and said: "a duty of coordination should be placed on both Marine Scotland and the UK MMO." Alasdair Allan mentioned the Solway. Of course, I have a particular interest in it. I noticed the response from Dumfries and Galloway Council, which states: "There needs to be an integrated cross-border approach for the Solway as a single Marine Region with links to both  the Scottish and UK Marine Plans." The Solway Firth Partnership stressed the need to ensure "a truly integrated management approach in and between Scottish waters, Manx waters, UK waters, 'regional seas' such as the Irish Sea and the wider oceans such as the Atlantic." The UK bill, as its title implies, proposes a coastal protection zone and the development of an English coastal path. In a members' business debate just before the February recess, we discussed a motion by the Deputy Presiding Officer, Alasdair Morgan, on the desirability of developing a Scottish coastal path. During that debate, I pointed out that, in addition to the UK proposals, Belgium, the Netherlands, France, Latvia, Norway, Spain and Sweden were among some of our European neighbours that had introduced some form of coastal protection zone. I repeat my request that the Scottish Government give serious consideration to introducing something similar in its forthcoming marine bill. I understand that the new minister is an enthusiastic walker and I am sure that she will have some sympathy for that position. I would be interested to hear her thoughts on the matter. We support all the other amendments. The proposed bill is important, but it is extremely important that we strike the right balance between economic growth and the need for not only conservation but regeneration of our marine environment. That must be the focus of the bill.

I clarify that we have no antipathy towards marine Scotland. Our query is whether it should be an arm of Government or should be independent of Government. That is the point that we make in our amendment.

Are ministers aware of the consequences in Ireland of the introduction of its plastic carrier bag tax? It has resulted in significant increases in the use of other packaging, especially for food, and an increase in sales of plastic bags of other types, such as bin liners, nappy sacks and dog excrement bags. I apologise for bringing such items to the attention of members. Will the minister bear that in mind when considering whether to proceed with the section of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill that would enable ministers to introduce a similar tax in Scotland?

I congratulate Alasdair Morgan on securing the debate and drawing Parliament's attention to the value of the coastal path network and the opportunities offered by the development of a national coastal path. I also congratulate the current and former Ministers for Environment on their new appointments. I am sorry to be left alone in the cross-party group on grammatical accuracy, although I believe that John Scott wishes to be a member. I hope that the new Minister for Environment never finds an errant apostrophe in her ministerial briefings. To the subject. Ramblers Scotland believes that, consequent to the passing of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003, Scotland now has one of the best arrangements for public access to land and inland waters in all Europe but, in its briefing for tonight's debate, it says that it is not optimistic that the first single outcome agreements will result in better path networks across the country. It takes the view that it is not yet the case that all local authorities appreciate the role that path networks can play in promoting the wider health, environment and economic development agendas.  In November last year, when I asked ministers whether the Government would consider the promotion of a coastal path, I was advised that Scottish Natural Heritage was consulting on a paths policy statement and seeking views on whether path resources needed to be improved in particular areas. A draft policy was published last October. I would be grateful if, in his summing up, the minister could give an update on the progress of that policy. I also asked for information on the estimated value to the Scottish economy of outdoor recreation on the coast and was advised that the World Wildlife Fund estimates that coastal tourism contributes £375 million to the Scottish economy as a whole. It will, of course, be of particular value to the economies of rural coastal areas such as Dumfries and Galloway. As the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds points out in its briefing for the debate, the protection of coastal and wildlife habitat is not incompatible with the development of a coastal path. Nevertheless, inappropriate development poses a threat to coastal areas, so a number of European countries have introduced coastal protection zones to ensure access for recreation, preserve habitat and biodiversity and protect against erosion as sea levels rise due to climate change. The UK Parliament is considering an access margin around the coast under the Marine and Coastal Access Bill. Belgium, the Netherlands, France, Latvia, Norway, Spain and Sweden are among our European neighbours that have introduced some form of coastal protection zone. I ask the Scottish Government to give serious consideration to introducing similar provisions in its forthcoming marine bill. National planning policy guideline 13, on coastal planning, is widely felt to provide insufficient guidance to planning authorities and, therefore, insufficient protection against inappropriate development. I hope that its successor, Scottish planning policy 13, will be a stronger instrument, although there are some concerns that that much slimmer document may not provide sufficiently detailed guidance. Therefore, a statutory underpinning via the marine bill could be beneficial. I have one request to make of the outgoing Minister for Environment—that he update us on progress with the paths policy statement—and one to make of the new minister: that she consider giving SPP 13 a statutory underpinning in the marine bill. Like Scotland as a whole, Dumfries and Galloway has a diverse and fascinating coastline that already contributes to the economy through leisure and tourism, to healthy activity through facilities for walking and cycling and to biodiversity  through the range of habitats that are to be found along the shoreline. It is a tremendous local and national asset that can be enhanced only by the development of the core path network into a Scottish coastal path.

To ask the Scottish Executive what role the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture's directorate will play in ensuring that there is a cultural legacy for Dumfries and Galloway from homecoming Scotland 2009. (S3O-5808)

I hope that the minister and her colleagues enjoyed being guests at the homecoming event in Dumfries on the 250 th anniversary of the birth of Robert Burns. Burns lived in Dumfries for the last eight years of his life, and he frequently attended the Theatre Royal. Does the minister share my concerns that theatre provision in Dumfries is now far from adequate? Will it be possible to apply the £60 million town centre turnaround fund, which was announced during the budget process and was welcomed throughout the chamber, to cultural regeneration projects?

That was an excellent example of defence by attack. Yet again, those of us who raised legitimate concerns about the proposals have been accused of scaremongering by the minister and his colleagues. Indeed, in answer to oral questions last week, the minister stated that our behaviour had been "disgraceful". Unfortunately for the minister—Jim Hume alluded to this—a diverse range of individuals, local and national organisations oppose the proposals. Trade unions, the UK Forest Products Association, Scottish Environment LINK, RSPB Scotland, NFU Scotland, the Scottish Tourism Forum, the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association, the organisers of the Merrick car rally in Galloway, Dumfries and Galloway Chamber of Commerce and Tory-controlled Dumfries and Galloway Council are just some of those who have expressed concerns. Are those organisations scaremongering? Are they behaving disgracefully? As Sarah Boyack described, the forestry trade unions are not convinced by the minister's so-called triple guarantee. Forestry workers who do not wish to be transferred to the private investor's employment have been told that the Government will "make every effort" to find them another post in the Forestry Commission. However, many forestry workers live and work in remote locations with few employment prospects and it might not be easy to find alternative employment in the same locality. My colleague Rhoda Grant illustrated the consequences for remote and rural communities of the loss of those jobs. Workers who transfer will do so under the TUPE regulations, but TUPE is in force for only three years after transfer and so will not protect them from the potential that they will be made redundant after transfer has happened. What about the effect on the Forestry Commission's income? Dumfries and Galloway Chamber of Commerce—hardly a Labour-controlled organisation—has calculated that implementation of the proposals could reduce the commission's income by £10 million a year. Other calculations have put up that loss to £17 million a year. Over 75 years, £0.75 billion that could have been spent on forestry will have been lost to the Forestry Commission. Dave Stewart described to us the reasons why even the £200 million that the Government thinks it might get will probably not be realised. Dumfries and Galloway Chamber of Commerce asks, what are the consequences of the loss of that income for the management and planning of forests? What are the consequences for mountain biking, car rallies, sled-dog competitions and a range of other activities? Those are not my fears, but those of the Dumfries and Galloway Chamber  of Commerce. What are the consequences for all the activities that have been developed so successfully in the Ae and Galloway forests? The world mountain biking championships are coming to Dumfries and Galloway this year because of that success—what are the consequences of the loss of that income? Although the biodiversity duty under the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004 would apply to land in the public forest estate that is leased to private interests, private investors will not have the same motivation to encourage and cherish biodiversity as the Forestry Commission, which is directly accountable to Scottish ministers. NFU Scotland and Scottish Environment LINK are both also seriously concerned that private investors would be eligible for grant payments under the Scottish rural development programme. That is because a large company might have expertise that would make it more likely to get those difficult grants. The lease of 25 per cent of the forestry estate is proposed—the most productive and commercial part of the estate. It is estimated that around 50 per cent of production on Forestry Commission land could be controlled by the private investor. Forestry science is complex and I would not like decisions to be made without the science being properly considered. I understand that around half of the carbon that is sequestered by trees is in the root system and therefore remains in the soil after the timber has been harvested. Early disruption of the soil can cause the carbon to be released back into the atmosphere. The Scottish Woodland Trust has therefore raised concerns about the rapid cycle of replanting. The private investor, keen to maximise the profits obtained from the land that it has leased, is more likely to replant areas shortly after harvesting, disturbing the root systems of the harvested trees and releasing carbon into the atmosphere, therefore acting in opposition to the purpose of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. A large company would be at an advantage compared to small organisations. The Scottish rural development programme is very difficult to access. The UK Forestry Products Association is concerned that small local Scottish businesses such as sawmills could be under threat if the proposals are implemented. Robin Harper explained extremely eloquently the problems in Sweden, which we cannot guarantee would not arise here. We are concerned about the future of our sawmills. Would a private investor be able to guarantee the stream of product in the way that the Forestry Commission has done? There have been no assurances that anything other than the  existing contracts of up to five years will be honoured. The Minister for Environment has stated that he is entirely open to other ideas, so I will conclude by giving him some other ideas, not just for forestry but for carbon sequestration, which is important in relation to climate change. The Government could first consider protecting and, where necessary, reinstating organic matter-rich soils, such as peat land and blanket bog, which can sequester and store carbon. Secondly, it could encourage the use of wood for fuel and construction and—thirdly—the use of local timber wherever possible in order to minimise carbon emissions from transport. Fourthly, it could extend crop rotations to maximise carbon storage and promote the use of high-quality hardwoods, Fifthly, the SRDP could be reformed to maximise support for planting woodlands, timber production and natural flood prevention schemes, which are the sort of things that we talked about last week during our discussion of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill. My sixth suggestion—in which I agree totally with John Scott—is that the Government could consider developing a comprehensive land-use policy that maximises the potential of the land to tackle climate change and its effects. That would best be achieved if Scottish ministers retained direct control of the forest estate. My seventh suggestion echoes what Sarah Boyack said. It is unfortunate that various members seemed to be deaf to what she said this morning. We could gain income from renewables through joint ventures. We welcome joint ventures and the possibility of not only increasing the amount of renewable energy but increasing the income to the forest estate. Those are seven suggestions for the minister. He should not say that we, or others, have not offered any suggestions, because we have offered seven alternatives. It is not necessary to lease out the forest. The idea has been around for a long time and it has been rejected repeatedly, even by the Conservatives—even by Margaret Thatcher and Sir Michael Forsyth. It has also been rejected by Labour politicians—it was rejected by some of my colleagues when it came over their desks. I ask the ministers to please reject it again. Let us go forward together with other suggestions for how to combat climate change.

Minister, you must agree that—

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. The minister surely agrees that he already sells forest—there is already an income stream of £15 million per annum in the budget for the Forestry Commission. It has already happened.

As Angela Constance and others have said, there can be few more distressing and frightening experiences than the serious flooding of one's home. Unfortunately, an increasing number of residents are suffering  that experience as a result of climate change, and the trend is likely to continue. Murdo Fraser referred to the frustration experienced by members who have tried to represent constituents who have suffered as a result of flooding but found that none of the agencies involved seems to have responsibility for solving the problem. In Eaglesfield, Annan and Langholm in my constituency, sewers have been unable to cope with pluvial flooding, so constituents have experienced a particularly unpleasant form of flooding. As others have mentioned, the Whitesands in Dumfries floods fairly regularly when the freshwater river, swollen by heavy rainfall, meets the tidal surge from the Solway—indeed, that happened earlier this afternoon, although it was not one of the worst floods in the area. It is extremely frustrating that action has not been taken to solve the problem and that opportunities have not been taken to secure funding to solve it, even though it has been a problem for decades, if not centuries. I hope that the Government will give us an indication of interim arrangements that can be put in place, because I do not want the necessary measures to be put off again until 2015, when the flood risk management plans come into effect. We welcome the bill, which seeks to introduce responsibility for assessing flood risk and planning for its avoidance, but believe that it would benefit from some strengthening. We welcome the fact that the Government has said that it is willing to take action in some areas but, as Rhoda Grant and Sarah Boyack stressed, we want to ensure, in particular, that plans are implemented. Roseanna Cunningham, Sarah Boyack and Peter Peacock mentioned the need to take a long-term view of priorities for investment. We would like SEPA to be tasked with looking forward over 24-year periods and planning what programmes of events need to be developed nationally. As well as helping to inform local authorities, that work could be used by ministers during spending reviews to establish how much money is needed for flood prevention. As others have said, we need to ensure that flood risk management plans are not just drawn up but implemented. The Government has indicated that it will make some changes to the bill as regards local authorities' responsibilities, but we might need to consider placing duties on SEPA and on ministers to ensure that the objectives of flood risk management plans are met. I am not saying that we should commit either SEPA or ministers to funding every flood prevention plan that is prepared in Scotland, but we must ensure that action is taken following the production of plans.  All committee members are disappointed that our recommendation on funding seems not to be regarded favourably by ministers. In its report on flooding of May last year, the committee was highly critical of the Government's approach, and it has repeated its criticism in its stage 1 report on the bill. Members of all parties have raised the same issue. Jeremy Purvis, Mary Scanlon—whose intervention during her speech Rhoda Grant agreed with—Des McNulty and Helen Eadie are just a few of the members who have concerns about funding. Funding is central to whether the bill will work. It is a matter of not just cash but other resources, such as human resources, as Roseanna Cunningham and Liam McArthur said. The bill's objectives could also be thwarted by a lack of hydrologists, whose expertise will be necessary in the production of the proposed plans. We know that the planning process in Scotland has been affected by the shortage of local authority planners, which has sometimes thwarted the intentions of legislation that the Parliament has passed. Let us learn from the problems that we have experienced as a result of a lack of appropriate professionals in local authorities and do what we can to ensure that the right people with the right skills are in our authorities to implement the bill's provisions. Several members said that they are disappointed that no progress has been made on assessment of the human and economic costs of flooding. We appreciate that those are difficult matters to assess, but authorities will need guidance from the Scottish Government so that they can factor such considerations into their assessments. They need to receive such guidance in sufficient time to allow them to take account of it when they draw up their plans. There is also a concern about the need to strengthen the bill's provisions to ensure that natural flood prevention methods are taken into account. Roseanna Cunningham discussed a presumption in favour of natural solutions, but there were concerns that that might be taken to mean that no one could use hard engineering solutions, even when it was appropriate to do so. Although we appreciate that hard engineering solutions are sometimes appropriate, we want there to be a cultural shift, as Peter Peacock and Des McNulty said, so that councils consider the use of longer-term natural solutions. I welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement that he will take on board the suggestion of some environmental non-governmental organisations that the long title should be altered to include "sustainable". Compensation was mentioned, and Murdo Fraser spoke about landowners' concerns that  they might have to pay large amounts of money for flood prevention work. The committee agreed that private landowners should not be required to pay for flood management on their land when the cost has been determined by responsible authorities, but local authorities sometimes have to go on to land in order to repair field drains or water courses that have become blocked because someone has not bothered to look after them. We feel that the local authority should be empowered to make a claim for the cost to the public purse of undertaking such work. As John Scott said, the committee felt that the duty on local authorities to cleanse and maintain watercourses should be maintained, but it should perhaps be tempered by a section that says that that should not be in conflict with their flood prevention duties. There are several issues to do with planning consent. Helen Eadie illustrated a problem with the current planning system, and there may be opportunities to address planning issues in areas that are likely to be flooded. We are happy that the cabinet secretary indicated that the Government will take on board issues that the Association of British Insurers raised about the maintenance of sustainable urban drainage systems, and we look forward to the Government's amendment on sewerage flooding at stage 2. Generally, we are happy with the bill, but we look forward to the amendments. I wish the minister success in his acting debut, and I wonder what part he is playing: is he in "The Tempest", or is he the villain in "Babes in the Wood"?

The Scottish Environment Protection Agency's "Waste Data Digest 8" states that, although the 30 per cent national target for recycling and composting was, by the end of last year, "likely to be achieved", achieving further targets "will be challenging." Does the cabinet secretary believe that the Scottish Government's national target of "70% by the end of 2025" can be achieved without setting targets for individual local authorities?

The Government motion refers to the distinctive nature of Scottish agriculture and our amendment also refers to the need to support farming and crofting in fragile, rural areas. Although this is essentially a consensual debate, we need to address the fact, to which Rob Gibson alluded, that back in 2005 in the Treasury/DEFRA paper "A Vision for a Common Agricultural Policy" there was a statement on ending all pillar 1 support for agriculture. That document argued for the removal of direct payments by the second half of the next decade and for EU spending on agriculture thereafter being supported through pillar 2. Many argue for the removal of direct subsidies during the next EU financial cycle, not least to make the EU more compliant with the demands of the World Trade Organization. The EU has been asked to cut its trade-distorting subsidies, to reduce its import tariffs and to end its export subsidies. Trade distortions hit poor farmers in the developing world hardest and are incompatible with the principles of fair trade. Statistics from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development suggest that subsidies to farmers in OECD countries amount to more than the whole of Africa's gross domestic product. Rob Gibson talked about EU issues but, to an extent, the debate is about how, at times, protectionism in the wealthier part of the world disadvantages people in poorer countries. Issues of global fairness need to be tackled. As John Scott and Sarah Boyack said, food security needs to be at the top of national and international agendas. On the other side of the argument, the distinctive situation in Scotland must be recognised. A high  proportion of our agricultural land—85 per cent—is designated as less favoured areas. The total removal of pillar 1 support from those areas could cause farming to cease in some of them. That would be disastrous for farming, for the economy and for food security. At the Oxford farming conference earlier this month, Hilary Benn said: "Farming and farmers we should cherish and celebrate as the greatest resource we have as we face the future." I am sure that that statement has cross-party support. Nevertheless, some Scottish voices call for direct support to be abolished. In "Beyond the CAP: Towards a Sustainable Land Use Policy that works for Scotland", Scottish Environment LINK argues that direct subsidies should be abolished and redistributed on the basis of the provision of public good. Of course, the public good is a woolly concept that is open to different interpretations. Like the Royal Society of Edinburgh's report on the future of Scotland's hills and islands, Scottish Environment LINK's paper makes the important point that, as we know, funding distribution throughout Europe significantly disadvantages Scotland, for historical reasons. That is particularly true of the pillar 2 rural development support programme. If we are considering changes to support, we must consider how to tackle Scotland's historical disadvantage. The opportunity exists for different sides of the debate to reach agreement, because Scottish Environment LINK says: "total reform should not happen immediately." The aim should be to make progress towards a sustainable land use policy. Public subsidy should be directed to public benefit. Local food production is a public benefit, so it deserves public subsidy. If removing direct support in Scotland would cause local food production to cease, it should not be removed. However, that does not mean that we should not be determined to make progress towards a more holistic view of how land is used and how the public benefit from it. That will probably be accompanied by changes to support for the activities that deliver public benefit. Land use strategy is essential to many of the important issues that we are discussing. For example, we will debate the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill at stage 1 tomorrow. An important facet of that is sustainable flood risk management and using natural processes such as flood plains to combat climate change and prevent flooding. Such measures will require decisions about the use of land for public benefit. For  example, the public benefit of food production could be set against the public benefit of using land to prevent floods. Some such decisions will be difficult to make. In the coming months, we will continue to discuss the role of forestry in combating climate change and the opportunities to increase woodland cover as part of our strategy to increase carbon sequestration. I will not rehearse the contentious issues, but decisions will have to be made about the public benefit of the different purposes of land use. I hope that ways will be found to bring together those three issues, such as by supporting landowners to establish woodland on flood plains. Half of Scotland is covered by peatlands, which play a tremendously important role in locking up carbon. Supporting and reinstating peatland are an important way of using land in Scotland to public benefit. Much progress was made during the CAP health check. Many new measures were added, such as those to counteract the possible deleterious effects on biodiversity of ending set-aside. We are asking Scottish ministers to work with their UK counterparts on issues such as cross-compliance. They also need to discuss the fact that set-aside was funded through pillar 1, as part of direct support, whereas funding of environmental benefit is being done through pillar 2. Such issues need to be discussed more fully.

In the minister's answer of 18 December last year to my written question S3W-18586, he confirmed that land in the public forest estate that had been leased to private interests, as envisaged in his consultation document "Climate Change and the National Forest Estate: Consultation on forestry provisions in the Scottish Climate Change Bill", would be eligible for grant payments under the Scotland rural development programme. Is the minister not concerned that, should those proposals be implemented, there will actually be less public funding available for the organisations that he mentioned in his answer to Mr Kidd, whether community groups or other landowners, to develop woodlands in urban or, indeed, rural environments?

I did not sign Jim Hume's motion because I have not been involved in the campaign to retain Greenlaw post office, which is not in my constituency. However, many similar issues arise in my constituency. I want to talk about my experiences of responding to Post Office proposals for changing postal services in my constituency and, in particular, about use of the word "consultation", which ought not to be used when there is no intention to change proposals after taking into account responses from members of the public.  I accept that there is sometimes a need for change, and that in a significant number of small post offices the transactions are so few that the operation of the service has become extremely uneconomical—for example, Westerkirk post office in my constituency averaged only two transactions per week. It is reasonable to suggest that alternative ways of offering the service ought to be introduced.

I will not take lectures from the Tories on privatisation. If Mrs Mitchell wished to speak, she should have pressed her request-to-speak button, rather than use my speech to make that intervention. In some circumstances, the overwhelming objections of local people to the closure of a popular and viable post office have been ignored totally, despite the use of the word "consultation" to describe the process. Almost exactly three years ago, on 11 January 2006, I led a members' business debate on the closure of Dumfries's Crown post office, which happened despite thousands of local objections. Lincluden post office in north-west Dumfries and the Sheuchan Street post office in Stranraer, which Jim Hume mentioned, will also close soon—again, against the will of the local communities and despite representations from local elected representatives. I want to highlight how the village of Ecclefechan has been treated. At the last census, the village had a population of 750, but it has since expanded and, with its situation by the side of the M74 and easy links to cities—particularly Carlisle, but also Glasgow and, to a lesser extent, Edinburgh—Ecclefechan has the potential to expand further. The village has a popular sub-post office and a sub-postmaster, Bryan Currie, who was appointed by Royal Mail at the end of 2007. Members will therefore imagine how disappointed he and his wife Donna were to discover only a few months later that the Post Office intended to close the branch and replace it with an outreach service at the local Costcutter store. Despite overwhelming objections and alternative suggestions from my colleague Councillor Archie Dryburgh and I, that the sub-post office should remain and operate the outreach service for other villages, the proposals remained unchanged. The only consolation for villagers, of which the Post Office made much play, was that the hours of operation would increase to 46 hours a week over six days. Members will imagine the fury of local  people when, last week, the Post Office revealed that it had changed its mind and that Ecclefechan will now be offered an outreach service for a mere 12 hours a week over four days. A letter that I received yesterday advised me that "having taken the responses to the local public consultation and all relevant factors into account Post Office Ltd has decided to carry out a further local public consultation". It is as if that was somehow a favour in response to what we have all been saying. In the next paragraph, I was advised that "the proposal to close this branch is not being re-consulted on as that decision has now been made by Post Office Ltd." I accept that there must be changes and that many ways in which we buy things have changed, which has implications for post offices. Nevertheless, that is no way to treat a small community or to consult local people.

My colleague Cathy Jamieson represents the birthplace of Robert Burns, but the bard's life ended in Dumfries, in my constituency. He and Jean Armour took over the tenancy of Ellisland farm, which is just north of Dumfries, in June 1788. He moved into Dumfries town in 1791 while he was working as an excise man and died there on 21 July 1796. He lived in Dumfriesshire for some eight years, which were extraordinarily productive, despite tragedy and his increasing ill health. Some of his best known works, including "Auld Lang Syne", "Tam o' Shanter", "Ae Fond Kiss", "The Slave's Lament", "Scots, wha hae", "A Parcel of  Rogues in a Nation", "My Love is like a Red, Red Rose", and "A Man's a Man for a' that" were published during that period. The celebration of Robert Burns's life and the year of homecoming have a particular relevance for Dumfries and Galloway, as they do for Ayrshire. The organisers of the year of homecoming events in Dumfries and Galloway have been extremely productive. The programme of events on the homecoming website runs to 58 pages. The events are varied and sometimes ingenious in their interpretation of homecoming. They include Burns suppers, lectures, exhibitions, poetry recitations, summer schools and, at Michael's church, where Burns is buried, the unveiling of a commemorative stained glass window and a wreath-laying event. Dumfries will host a mid-winter festival on 25 January, which will involve a procession of lanterns, a ceilidh and a fire show at the River Nith—I hope that the weather holds up for that. It is a little-known fact that the bicycle was invented by Kirkpatrick Macmillan in Dumfries in 1839, and in May the bike will come home to Scotland, as Dumfries hosts the world mountain bike conference. The first holding of the conference outside Canada will provide an opportunity to showcase the seven stanes mountain bike trail in Ae forest to an international audience. The Border gathering takes place at the end of July. Every year, the event attracts people from the USA whose ancestors hailed from the Scottish Borders to visit and to discover more about their family history. This year, the Border gathering will link in to the clan gathering at Holyrood park. Migrating wildlife is not forgotten. As part of the year of homecoming, the Wigtown Bay visitor centre in the Presiding Officer's constituency is promoting the observation of overwintering geese and the return of the Galloway ospreys from Africa. It is hoped that this year, some of the chicks that were born in Galloway will return there to nest. There will be a multitude of events in venues across Dumfries and Galloway for locals and visitors to enjoy throughout 2009. I wish the organisers and promoters, who have put in so much work to ensure that those events happen, every success. However, I have concerns. I hope that visitors will arrive in Dumfries in their droves to see where Robert Burns wrote so many of his finest works. I know that they will enjoy the culture, the produce, the countryside and the hospitality of the region but, sadly, I doubt that they will be at all impressed by the state of Dumfries town centre and of the high street in particular, which is full of empty shops, overgrown gutters and buildings that are in need of a facelift. Dumfries and Galloway  Council has talked a great deal about town centre regeneration for many years, and some of the responsibility for the failure to act lies at its door, but the Scottish National Party Government has also failed to take the issue seriously. In his summing-up speech in last June's debate on the small business rates relief scheme, Mr Mather said: "The regeneration of town centres is now pretty much a given, and that will have an enormous effect."— [ Official Report , 11 June 2008; c 9561.]  I am sorry, but the situation has deteriorated. We now need direct intervention and investment in the infrastructure of our towns. We all support the year of homecoming, but it and Robert Burns alone cannot save the Scottish economy. The Government needs to come forward with a programme of investment for the future of the Scottish economy beyond the end of 2009.

When a transfer window opened earlier this year and I left the Finance Committee for the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, I thought that I would not be involved in the budget debate in the week before Christmas and would instead be away in search of mince pies along with everyone else. However, I have been unable to break the habit of a lifetime. I hope that the outbreak of consensus in the Finance Committee to which members have referred is not a consequence of my departure. I do not think that I was an unconsensual member of the committee. However, I will be unconsensual and say that the budget does not do enough to support the Scottish economy in these difficult times. The Scottish Government should be investing in employment—for now and for the future—in skills and in essential infrastructure. Public spending on infrastructure would help to sustain the construction sector and keep skilled workers in employment during the contraction of the housing market. Of course, the Scottish ministers will argue that they are doing that. The trouble is that the ideological guddle into which they have got themselves as a result of their aversion to public-private partnerships, coupled with their inability to bring forward a credible model for the Scottish Futures Trust, has left them with considerably reduced options. The Finance Committee is to be commended for its report on its inquiry into  methods of funding capital investment projects, which was published this week and which urges the Government not to rule out any option. The Finance Committee took evidence on the matter while I was a member and we heard that it is a case of horses for courses and that no model should be ruled out because someone has taken an ideological dislike to it. As a result of the UK Government's measures to stimulate the economy, which were announced in the chancellor's pre-budget statement, the Scottish Government will be able to make use of an additional £260 million during the next couple of years. Decisions about how the additional spend will be allocated need to be made as soon as possible, as the Finance Committee recommended in paragraph 83 of its report on the draft budget. It is also essential that the Government articulate its plans for the £100 million that has been brought forward for affordable housing. In light of the collapse of the housing market and the additional strain on waiting lists for public sector housing, there must be no delay in getting that funding to where it is needed. More than 8,000 applicants are on the waiting lists of registered social landlords in Dumfries and Galloway. The bringing forward of spending with all due urgency would help to relieve considerable pressure on public sector rented housing in the region and throughout Scotland. I understand that, in committee, Derek Brownlee voted down a Labour amendment that would have targeted investment at commencing building work. That is disappointing, because Mr Brownlee is a regional list member for the South of Scotland, which includes Dumfries and Galloway, and I would have hoped that he was aware of the acuteness of the housing shortage in our region. I turn now to issues within the remit of the committee on which I now sit. Jeremy Purvis made reference to wise words from the Deputy Presiding Officer, and I will make further reference to his wisdom.

In committee, Mr Morgan expressed his concerns—which were shared by other members—that the efficiency delivery plans for 2008 to 2011 included as efficiency savings the sale of assets, such as the sale of Forestry Commission land to generate income of £15 million. The Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment confirmed that that was the case, and his official said that the Scottish Government was operating "on a different basis" from the UK Government in that respect.  The official then provided the committee with a rather novel explanation of why selling forest land is an efficiency saving: "The Forestry Commission's sales of assets will deliver more public benefits. The forest that is disposed of provides few public benefits, although it provides commercial benefits. The Forestry Commission is acquiring land for afforestation that is much closer to towns and cities and where people can use it. We are delivering a much greater public benefit with the same cash. That is why that scores as an efficiency measure."—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs and the Environment Committee , 8 October 2008; c 1069.] That is an admirable enough sentiment, but is it an efficiency saving? What about the loss of commercial benefits? It prompts the question: how can public benefit be quantified? I am just a simple scientist—not an economist, thankfully—and I think that I know how to calculate the efficiency of a process: the actual output expressed as a percentage of the maximum theoretical output. As such, I am comfortable with the notion of cash-releasing savings, when less money goes in but the result is the same, and the notion of time-releasing savings, when the same money goes in but more is produced. However, how are we to measure maximising the public benefit of the forests that are created and those that are sold? Are we to count the number of dogs walked per annum in each forest? Is there some measure of how healthy people feel after their forest walk? How is the public benefit to be demonstrated in the technical notes? How do ministers know that they have achieved their efficiency target, and how does the sale of assets contribute to the Government's savings target of 3 per cent? As the Rural Affairs and the Environment Committee tactfully states in its report, that is one of the "less orthodox methods of achieving efficiencies". Since the draft budget was published, ministers have come up with an even more cunning plan: leasing 25 per cent of the forestry estate to the private sector, with a possible receipt of £200 million. Will that also count as an efficiency saving? If so, why was there no mention of it in the draft budget? If it goes through, will it be mentioned in the budget revision? To return to my original theme, the budget is a vital tool to get Scotland through these difficult times in as good—

I was recently advised by wildlife crime officers from Lothian and Borders Police that because wildlife crime is classified as a group 6 crime, statistics are not recorded. Has the minister discussed or will he discuss with colleagues in the justice portfolio the  reclassification of wildlife crime, so that its extent can be properly assessed?

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has received from Dumfries and Galloway Council with regard to pressures on its education budget. (S3O-4997)

Is the cabinet secretary therefore aware that the council's education budget is forecast to be overspent by £833,000; that, on top of that, reducing class sizes in primary 1 to primary 3 to a maximum of 18 pupils will cost Dumfries and Galloway £2 million; and that providing free school meals for all pupils in P1 to P3 will cost the council £900,000? Does the cabinet secretary expect her policy priorities in Dumfries and Galloway Council to be funded by cuts elsewhere in the education budget?

I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in favour of the Labour amendment. We believe that it is important  to highlight the partnership working that we all hope will be successful in achieving progress in the December talks. It is a partnership that, of course, includes the Scottish Government but which also includes the new minister—Huw Irranca-Davies—and Bertie Armstrong and the Scottish Fishermen's Federation. It is team UK that is taking the issue forward, not team Scotland. All partners are united by the need to reduce discarding. During his evidence to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee earlier this month, the cabinet secretary stated: "The future cod recovery plan should be based on a regime that allows us to catch less but land more."—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 5 November 2008; c 1168.] In last week's debate in the House of Commons, the Minister for the Natural and Marine Environment, Wildlife and Rural Affairs, Huw Irranca-Davies, referred to the very successful conclusion to the first stage of the negotiations at the November Council and stated that "our Government's approach is to land more and to discard less."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 20 November 2008; Vol 483, c 457.] Bertie Armstrong described to the committee the "perversity of cod stocks being nearly as much bother on their way up as they were on their way down."—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs and Environment Committee , 5 November 2008; c 1148.] He also described the need for the TAC to match abundance in order to reduce the level of discarding. If the TAC is to be increased, measures must be in place—such as temporary closures and monitoring—to ensure that discarding really is being reduced and that we can prove it. During the budget discussions last year, my colleague Karen Gillon argued for assistance to be provided to fishermen to enable them to purchase new gear, such as nets that are designed to reduce the catch of unintended species. Those may be nets with larger mesh sizes that allow juveniles through or nets that are designed to enable certain fish that swim in a particular way—such as cod, which swim downwards when they are caught in a net—to escape. In January, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's report to the Finance Committee on stage 2 of the Budget (Scotland) Bill recommended that a significant proportion of the marine management budget line should be set aside in the first year of the spending review to support the fishing industry in progressing its commitment to sustainable fisheries by, for example, adopting use of the best available gear in order to reduce by-catches and discards.  When I raised the issue of funding for new gear with the cabinet secretary this month, he advised me that funding is available for trials through the Government's partnership with the SFF, and that fishermen can also qualify for grants for new gear through the European fisheries fund. Will the minister provide further information on that funding route when he sums up? I will deal now with species that are less familiar to most of the population, but which are affected by fishing practice, although they are not the main focus of the forthcoming negotiations. Sharks do not generally inspire the same level of affection as other well-known endangered species but, as the Scottish Sea Angling Conservation Network and the save our sharks campaign have demonstrated, many of our native shark species are now endangered. Commercial recreational sea anglers release their catches alive back into the sea. They recycle fish but like commercial fishermen, they also make a valuable contribution to remote and rural communities. Those fishermen have monitored dramatic reductions in the populations of sharks, skate and ray in Scottish waters. Many of the species that were once plentiful in the Solway Firth, for example, are now rarely to be found. The removal of one species from the marine environment can have unexpected consequences on other species that inhabit the same waters. Spurdog, which John Scott referred to, were targeted by commercial fisheries in the late 1980s—for the purposes of their sale as an edible fish, they were known as rock salmon. The population was decimated within five years, but as a result of the removal of that predator, whiting stocks in Luce Bay thrived. The whiting, in turn, predated on the flatfish population, which has still not recovered from that period. Tope is in the frame as a commercial species, partly because of the market for shark fins for shark fin soup. This year, the UK Government and the Welsh Assembly have regulated to prohibit commercial fishing of tope. It is disappointing that Scottish ministers have refused to give the same protection to the species in Scottish waters but instead intend to wait until ICES states that the species is at risk. The European Commission proposes to set zero TAC limits for spurdog and porbeagle and to prohibit retention of angel sharks, common sharks, ungulate rays and white skates. It is also proposed that existing skate and ray quotas be reduced by 25 per cent and that new TACs be introduced for those species in currently unregulated areas. I would like to hear Scottish ministers' views on that. Ministers have stated in answers to written questions that there should be no fisheries that are directed to commercial fishing of elasmobranchs— as rays and sharks are collectively known—but that small, unavoidable by-catches should be landed. I disagree with John Scott's view, but the issue needs to be discussed. We need to think about how "small" and "unavoidable" are to be defined, and what will happen to those by-catches. Will they be sold commercially? If so, how do we prevent the creation of a commercial market for those species and stop them being targeted, albeit that the number in Scottish waters is low? I am sure that such topics will be on the agenda of the cabinet secretary's meeting with the Scottish Sea Angling Conservation Network on 11 December. I am pleased to support the amendment in Sarah Boyack's name, and ask ministers to consider some of the points that I have raised.

This has been a useful debate and I appreciate members' attempts to be as loquacious as possible and to extend their contributions beyond six minutes to seven, eight or nine minutes to assist us poor individuals who have to sum up at the end and fill the remaining time. I do not know whether the minister and I can rise to the challenge of filling the 25 minutes that I see are left to us. The debate has been useful, despite some concerns about its early timing. I hope that we will get the opportunity in the committee or in the chamber to scrutinise the consultation results. It is the shape of the final document that will be most important. A number of contributors to the debate have linked the development of the aquaculture industry to other priorities of the Scottish economy, such as tourism. Food security is also becoming increasingly important. Another link is with the health benefits to be gained from consuming fish and, indeed, from consuming good, fresh, local produce whether it be fish, meat or vegetables—I think that we would all like that to be developed in a local food strategy. Fish products can also play a role in Scotland's reputation for high quality foodstuffs. Much as I enjoyed Dave Thompson's description of observing illegal salmon fishing—he seems to have had a career in that—I do not agree that aquaculture is a forgotten issue. The Transport and the Environment Committee in the first session of Parliament conducted an investigation into fish farming, and a strategy was published in March 2003. Now, five years on, the Scottish Government is considering the issue again and proposing a refreshed strategy. Therefore, since the start of the Scottish Parliament, awareness of the industry's importance to the Scottish economy has increased, as has the desire to address and solve the various problems that surround the industry so that it can be promoted. Various members have commented on the need to limit escapes and to monitor and trace escapes that occur. That is a difficult issue and I would be glad to hear more from the minister about how he has achieved the reductions of the past 18 months, although it has been happening for the past three years. Obviously, there will be lessons to learn from that. Members have also referred to the interaction between wild and farmed fish. Of course, the consultation document identifies the key theme of sea lice, which was also a key theme of the 2003  strategy because it is important to the health and welfare of farmed fish as well as wild fish. Unfortunately, there now appears to be evidence of sea lice resistance to some of the available treatments, so authorisation is being sought for new treatments. Exciting possibilities are being developed for non-chemical treatments, which would avoid some of the complications of chemical treatments, such as the release of chemicals into the natural environment and the build-up of resistance to treatments, which seems to be happening. One of those natural methods of control is done by cleaner fish, which are fish such as wrass that remove sea lice from the host fish rather than fish that have superior personal hygiene habits. Tackling the problem of sea lice is important to the aquaculture industry, but it is also important to wild salmonid stocks. It is worrying that the 2007 wild sea trout catch was the lowest ever, at 27,115, which was down 0.6 per cent on 2006, which was also a poor year. The Association of Salmon Fishery Boards and Rivers and Fisheries Trusts of Scotland estimate that sea lice cost their industry £30 million per annum. Although a single treatment is unlikely to be applicable in all cases, the use of non-chemical, natural treatments and the management of sites to reduce infection, as well as possible chemical treatments, need to be high on the agenda. Several members, including Rhoda Grant and Rob Gibson, mentioned planning issues. The consultation document refers to the perception that there is a lack of sites for the expansion of aquaculture in Scotland and to the fact that, historically, development was permitted on sites that would now be considered unsuitable. The Scottish Salmon Producers Organisation is concerned that the introduction of the new planning system and the provisions of the new marine bill may complicate the optimisation of sites and new site identification. However, as Rob Gibson said, there are a considerable number of unproductive sites. We need to know where those are and sanctions perhaps need to be imposed on people who continue to sit on sites year after year without using them. Unfortunately, a number of those inactive sites have Crown Estate leases. We hear that there are various reasons for that, including companies keeping leases as an asset for the future, but that all conflicts with the perception that there is a lack of sites. I appreciate that the matter is the subject of an expert group investigation; the group can perhaps consider the possibility of sanctions, should those turn out to be necessary. Scottish Environment LINK argues that it is too soon to introduce permanent site consents. It identifies concerns over the possibility of mass  escapes or increases in disease outbreak should there be a move to larger sites and larger cage diameters. The Association of Salmon Fishery Boards and Rivers and Fisheries Trusts of Scotland also have serious reservations about permanent planning consent, because of the dynamic nature of the issue and the difficulty in predicting how the industry will develop in future decades. Obviously, the marine bill provides the opportunity for a new and, I hope, clearer planning system for the marine environment. Will the minister consider at least delaying making any decisions on permanent planning permission until after the bill has been passed and we have the framework for marine planning in place? The submission from the Association of Salmon Fishery Boards and Rivers and Fisheries Trusts of Scotland disputes the statement in the consultation document about the success of the tripartite working group—that is at odds with the minister's opinion. The group was set up to promote dialogue between the wild fish and fin-fish farm sectors and the 18 area management associations. Their submission observes that, although some AMAs are working well together, others have so far failed to progress beyond problem identification to solution identification, which is more important. As always, Bill Wilson was very interesting and educational owing to his knowledge of fish. I have benefited from his knowledge of the breeding cycles of fish, which the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee found helpful in its recent discussions. I was interested to hear about Professor Bell's research at the University of Stirling into reducing the need for fish products in feedstuffs, because the issue of feed sustainability has been a concern. The issue has been raised with regard to feed ingredients that have been derived from wild fish captures; I was told in a recent conversation that it can take 5kg of wild fish to create 1kg of farmed fish. If there is another way of producing quality farmed fish that is not as dependent on wild fish stocks to feed the farmed fish, that is an important development and I am grateful to Dr Wilson for advising the chamber about it. I was also interested to hear more about the use of microalgae to reduce the release of nutrients from fish farming cages, because that has been one of the environmental concerns about fish farming. It is helpful to hear of natural ways of controlling the problem and I look forward to hearing more about that in the future. I was happy to accept Mr McArthur's reassurances that the Liberal Democrat amendment is not intended in any way to suggest a light-touch approach. Scotland is, of course,  obliged to meet international commitments under the OSPAR convention, the world summit on sustainable development, the EU marine strategy framework directive, the EU water framework directive and the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003. The new strategic framework needs to be developed in the context of meeting all those international obligations. Des McNulty referred to problems where there is a heavy concentration of sites and mentioned the map that shows how close many of those sites are to each other. The 2003 strategy included the principle of operating within the "biological, assimilative and visual carrying capacity of the environment". The current consultation document refers only to the "carrying capacity of the environment". Scottish Environment LINK suggests that, in the final document, the term "carrying capacity" needs to be more fully defined and that means of monitoring carrying capacity need to be further developed. Rob Gibson referred to the possibility of a carbon count in discussing the environmental issues of fish farms. The concern is not so much the carbon footprint but the effect on biodiversity. Liam McArthur and Rhoda Grant mentioned training. For any industry to be viable, its workforce must be appropriately trained. In my opening speech, I referred to courses that are offered by the Barony College in Dumfriesshire. They include a higher national certificate in fish farm and production management, work-based level 2 Scottish vocational qualifications in aquaculture and fisheries, and short courses in fish disease diagnosis and treatment and in something called electro-fishing—I am not quite sure what that is. Rhoda Grant made an important point about the difficulties of accessing training for people who live in remote and rural communities. The obvious answer to that is distance learning, but that is not easy if people do not have access to good broadband. The problems of broadband access in some of our remote and rural communities compound the problems for people trying to access training through distance learning. Peter Peacock and Liam McArthur also referred to unfair competition, particularly from Norway, and the unwelcome loss of the European Commission's minimum import price. I know that the minister said that the Government also regrets that.

I am not sure that that is a correct interpretation of events. As I said in my opening speech, the amendment that John Scott refers to was rejected on the advice of an expert group, which said that the chances of GS coming into the country through the mechanism in question were very low. On the minimum import price, it is important that the Government continues to monitor what is happening. If Norwegian producers face economic problems at home, the easy answer for them is to make production cuts in Scotland. If that happens, can the Scottish Government take action to protect Scottish jobs and will it work with the Scotland Office and counterparts in the UK Government? Action will need to be taken if we are to protect the jobs both of people working directly in the aquaculture industry and of those, such as my 700 constituents who work at Pinneys of Scotland in Annan, whose employment is dependent on the industry.

I will do so, Presiding Officer. I am happy to accept both the Conservative and Liberal Democrat amendments, and I am pleased to hear that others intend to accept our amendment. I am also very pleased, on behalf of the Labour Party, to say that we will support the Government motion at decision time.

I was a bit puzzled by the timing of the debate, which takes place only two short weeks after the consultation closed. Consultation responses are to be made available in the Scottish Government's library within 20 days of the closing date, which was 5 November, and they will be published on the consultation web page next month. The timing makes it a bit difficult for non-Government members to have an overview of the responses, but I trust the minister's assertion that most stakeholders supported the new strategy's five principal objectives. I have managed to obtain some responses, but not the majority, unfortunately. That is a disadvantage, because I have been unable to form an impression as to whether or not there is consensus on the various minor issues that the Government's paper raises. That said, the debate provides a useful opportunity to discuss an industry that contributes significantly and increasingly to the Scottish economy. As the minister said, Scotland is the second-largest producer of farmed Atlantic salmon in Europe and the third-largest salmon producer in the world—its global market share is about 10 per cent. Farmed salmon is estimated to be worth about £380 million a year—I would not repeat the figures unless we had a lot of time for the debate. Brown trout and sea trout are worth about £10 million a year, and shellfish are worth about £5 million a year.  As the minister said, aquaculture is particularly important to many remote rural and island communities, where it is the mainstay of employment opportunities for as much as a third of the workforce. In turn, that employment supports a range of local services and facilities. Of course, aquaculture supports employment directly. Dumfries and Galloway has several active freshwater fish and shellfish farms. Some produce fish only for food, whereas others, such as Barony College's Carse of Ae fish farm, produce fish principally to restock local lochs and rivers. That supports the local angling economy and produces some fish for consumption. Barony College also provides qualifications in fish farming, which offer students good employment opportunities and enhance the industry's attractiveness as a career. Aquaculture also supports employment indirectly through fish processing, to which the minister referred. Pinneys of Scotland in Annan, which is part of the Uniq multinational, is the largest salmon processor in Scotland. It employs 700 people, of whom 80 are temporary Christmas staff. Pinneys of Scotland is the largest single-site private sector employer in Dumfries and Galloway. I am pleased to report that I have been assured that it uses 100 per cent Scottish salmon. Incidentally, it holds the royal warrant to supply smoked salmon to Her Majesty the Queen and, unsurprisingly, it has an extensive export business. It produces a range of seafood-based products, including fish ready meals—a Marks and Spencer fish ready meal is likely to have come from Pinneys of Annan. However, the aquaculture industry has attracted criticism and concern, mainly on environmental issues. That is why a ministerial working group for aquaculture was set up during the first session of the Scottish Parliament. The working group consulted a wide group of stakeholders and issued proposals that were subject to consultation between December 2002 and February 2003. "A Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture" was published in March 2003, and all the 36 objectives in it have now been achieved. After five years, and following the achievement of those objectives, it is timely that we are examining the issues that are pertinent now and building on the lessons that have been learned. However, having examined the previous strategic framework and the proposed renewed framework, I am of the opinion that the new one is more of a refreshed start than a fresh start—although I appreciate that fresh is always a desirable word to use in conjunction with fish. The Labour Party will support the Government's motion. Our amendment is intended to be a positive addition that addresses some of the concerns that were expressed in consultation responses. One concern is that the various EU  directives that have been, or are in the process of being, transposed into Scottish legislation should become part of an integrated and holistic framework for the aquaculture industry. The water framework directive was transposed through the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003. It, the forthcoming marine bill, the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill, the proposed climate change bill and the aquaculture strategy are all part of an environmental jigsaw whose pieces need to fit together coherently. [ Interruption. ] There is a lot of muttering going on. I might have said something amusing that I have not picked up, but I can hear a lot of muttering in the background. There is no doubt that decades of ignorance and carelessness have resulted in damage to the environment from human activity. Therefore, the objective must be not simply to prevent further damage to the environment but to enable the environment to recover. That will require difficult but unavoidable decisions about policy direction. Of course, a healthy marine ecosystem is also essential for the aquaculture industry. The former Executive's sustainable development strategy, which was published in 2005, identified five guiding principles of sustainable development. Those included living within environmental limits and achieving a sustainable economy. As far as I am aware, the current Government has accepted that strategy, and I seek ministers' assurances that the renewed strategy for growing the aquaculture industry will accord with those principles. Furthermore, ministers must consider how the renewed strategy will integrate with the marine bill and developments in marine management. The foreword to the strategic framework of 2003 stated: "aquaculture must grow sustainably if it is to continue to build on its success. That means it must develop in ways which can be accommodated within the overall capacity of the environment to sustain it." That objective must lie at the heart of the renewed strategy. The Government's motion refers to "high environmental standards". Scotland will not and should not compete at the cheap and cheerful end of any market. We must aspire to the highest quality, and nowhere more so than in relation to environmental standards. The aquaculture industry's interests do not necessarily have to be in conflict with environmental concerns. Like animal welfare, good environmental practice can be a positive sales attribute and can contribute to marketing and to the industry's image and attractiveness as a career. The Conservative amendment rightly identifies potential conflict between the interests of the aquaculture industry and those of the angling  industry, as well as the potential problems with interaction between farmed and wild fish stocks. The danger that Gyrodactylus salaris poses cannot be denied. Tackling it was a key part of the previous strategy, and measures that reduce the threat of the parasite's introduction to Scotland clearly need to be given serious consideration. However, if the amendment is a rehash of the arguments that were made during the stage 3 debate on the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill—and Jamie McGrigor's intervention during the non-native species debate makes me suspicious that it might be—I remind members that the then Minister for Environment and Rural Development rejected a statutory obligation to declare fishing and water sports equipment at customs points because expert assessment was that the risk of Gyrodactylus salaris entering the United Kingdom via such equipment was extremely low. The Liberal Democrat amendment, which identifies training and retention issues in the aquaculture industry, also has value. Its references to the "current rapid expansion" of the industry and to streamlining the regulatory burden might imply a tipping of the balance in favour of the aquaculture industry, overriding the potential effects on wild fish or the environment. As RSPB Scotland states in its briefing: "the Renewed Strategic Framework should not have the objective of securing unabated economic growth, but instead should aim for sustainable development". We agree that there is considerable potential for expansion—Rhoda Grant will elaborate on that in her speech—but it must be within environmental capacity. We will listen very carefully to the arguments that are made in favour of the Liberal Democrat amendment. The consultation document is structured around five themes. The first is health, including the vital issues of sea lice control, water quality and—although it is not mentioned specifically—Gyrodactylus salaris. The second is planning and identification of sites, and the number of registered sites, including inactive Crown Estate leases. The third is containment and the prevention of escapes. I was trying to work out how the minister had personally prevented escapes from happening, but perhaps he has been swimming around with a net, trying to persuade the fish to go back. I am pleased to hear that he is doing his bit. The fourth is markets and careers and training in aquaculture. The fifth and final theme is financial investment in the industry. I look forward to further discussion of those issues during the debate. Before I move the amendment in my name, I should say that whatever is buzzing under my desk is not mine; I will try and find out what it is.  I move amendment S3M-2921.2, to insert at end: "and believes that the renewed strategy for Scottish aquaculture must be consistent with the provisions of the forthcoming Marine Bill and the EU Water Framework Directive."

Presiding Officer, the breeding seabirds problem extends to your constituency, given the kittiwake population in the Mull of Galloway. The minister mentioned sand eels. We have expressed concern in the past about the effect of commercial fishing on sand eel stocks. Has research been done into whether commercial fishing might also affect breeding seabird populations? If so, are discussions on the issue going on at European level?

I am of course pleased to support the motion in the name of my colleague Sarah Boyack, who is to be congratulated on having done much in the Scottish Parliament over the years to promote microgeneration. We have heard much from Scottish ministers about the importance of renewables technologies to tackling climate change and their potential contribution to the Scottish economy. Much of that has focused on large-scale developments, such as offshore wind farms. However, that is only one side of the story. It would be wrong for any of us to underestimate the contribution to tackling climate change and fuel poverty that small-scale individual efforts can make. One third of the total energy demand and of CO 2 emissions in Scotland is attributable to the residential sector. It is therefore a key sector in which the Government can encourage and facilitate action by individuals, families and microbusinesses to install measures to reduce energy loss and to generate power from Scotland's natural resources. It is obvious that enabling households to generate their own power can address fuel poverty problems. According to a recent survey by the now-defunct Communities Scotland, a 5 per cent increase in energy prices pushes an additional 30,000 households into fuel poverty. That can be a particular problem in rural areas where properties have no access to the gas network and rely on more expensive electric or oil-fired systems. For the 30 per cent of the Scottish population that are in that situation, renewables technologies such as ground-source and air-source pumps and solar panels can offer a welcome addition to their facilities, so I welcome the recent announcement by the secretary of state, Ed Miliband, that the UK Government is to table an amendment to the Energy Bill to complement the renewables obligation with a guaranteed price for small-scale energy generation that feeds into the national grid. The barriers for individual households to participating in microgeneration are financial and bureaucratic. The bill proposal that Sarah Boyack lodged in the previous session and again in June 2007 presents several strategic actions and financial incentives, some of which the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has already accepted, and others of which I hope that ministers will accept as discussions continue. The SNP's rhetoric in opposition needs to be matched by action in government. Like Liam McArthur, I would like to know the status of the Government's energy action plan, which was  promised last year but is still unpublished, 18 months after the SNP took office. Alex Johnstone referred to planning. Households are discouraged from microgeneration installation not only by the cost of technologies, but by the planning system. The previous Scottish Executive commissioned research from Heriot-Watt University on the developments that the general permitted development order should cover. In early 2007, that review advised that the GPDO should be extended to a range of microrenewables technologies. We are still waiting for a response from ministers—I hope that it will be timeous. As Robin Harper said, we also need to look at energy efficiency measures. We have heard today that the Government is considering adopting the Sullivan report's recommendations, but will it follow the UK Government's lead by agreeing to procure only buildings that are in the top quartile of energy performance? How will ministers respond to the concerns expressed by Energy Action Scotland about the condition of existing housing stock, particularly in the private, owner-occupier and rented sectors? Can the Government answer the Association for the Conservation of Energy's concerns about whether Scotland is sufficiently prepared to meet the European deadline on energy performance certificates? Even if it is, how are we to address the fact that owners are under no obligation to act on the information contained in the certificates? In October 2004, Richard Lochhead accused Scottish ministers of paying lip service on those issues. Of course, we refuted those allegations at the time. By addressing microgeneration and efficiency measures, the present Scottish Government can prove that its commitment is more than just lip service.

At the beginning of debates such as this, I often wonder whether I ought to declare that, many years ago, we took out a family membership of the RSPB. Of course, that involved our giving it money—not the other way round—and it does not mean that I necessarily adhere to all its points of view. The debate started out generally consensual, and it was interesting and informative throughout, but Jamie McGrigor managed to inject a note of discord with his dissent on the reintroduction of beavers and sea eagles. I was careful how I pronounced "sea eagles", because seagulls are an entirely different matter. Although they are a native species, they can be pretty invasive, as people in  Dumfries and other areas know. I was a little confused by Jamie McGrigor's argument about the relationship between sea eagles and vultures, because vultures are not predators but scavengers, despite the fact that they are seen wheeling over the remains of various animals and indeed people.

I am not sure whether the sea eagle is related to the vulture, but vultures are not predators and the issue, to which John Farquhar Munro also referred, is predation. There is serious concern about that among some crofters and I am glad to hear that SNH and others are looking into it. I do not think that we should pre-empt the findings of those investigations. I am sorry that Kenny Gibson is not in the chamber at the moment because, on this occasion, I am in the unusual position of agreeing with him. The fact that human beings eradicated a species at some time should not militate against its reintroduction. I cite the example of the reintroduction of red kites, first in the Highlands and now in Dumfries and Galloway. Sadly, those beautiful birds are still sometimes the victims of ill-informed individuals who do not understand the difference between predators and scavengers. Red kites, like vultures, are scavengers, although they are hawks. However, this is not a debate about wildlife crime, so I shall return to the topic. Roseanna Cunningham and Peter Peacock discussed fragile island environments that can be threatened by native species migrating from the mainland. Hedgehogs, which, as we know, were introduced by humans to the island of Uist, caused a dramatic reduction in wading bird colonies by predating their eggs. They also managed to cause a dramatic public outcry when the original method of controlling their numbers—by cull—was suggested. Rhoda Grant mentioned rats on St Kilda. Liam McArthur referred to the rats that arrived on the island of Canna in the 1900s. For a long time, the rat population was controlled by harsh winters, but climate change in the form of recent mild winters brought about a population explosion and it was some time before the island was declared rat free, earlier this year. I suspect that there was less of a public outcry about the fate of the poor old rats than there was about the hedgehogs—cute animals, whether they are invaders or victims, always seem to get more public sympathy than less attractive animals. Much reference has been made to signal crayfish. As Jim Hume said, as it is amphibious, it is unfortunately able to travel over land. The species first appeared in the catchment of the  River Dee in Kirkcudbrightshire in 1995, but it has travelled as far north as Inverness-shire. A similar non-native species, the Chinese mitten crab, is also threatening the UK. It began to increase in number in the 1980s and it is possibly even more voracious and dangerous to the environment than the signal crayfish. In its native China, it has been shown to be capable of migrating up to 1,500km and it is said to be prepared to eat anything in its path. There has been recent speculation about what will happen when those two species meet—they will be fairly dangerous to the environment and possibly to each other. Plants form a fairly large part of the invasive non-native species problem. The horticulture code was launched in 2005 to provide voluntary guidance to prevent the spread into the natural environment of invasive garden species. Ian McKee and Peter Peacock referred to displays of rhododendron. It is a beautiful plant in the garden, but it has become a pest in many woodlands. Although it looks pretty in the spring, it overtakes and forces out native woodland species. Himalayan balsam—I know what it looks like but I do not know how to pronounce it—is also an attractive species, but examination of the banks of the River Nith demonstrates how invasive it is. I recently took part in a clean-up of the River Nith. The only thing that shocked me more than the quantity of that plant on the riverbank was the quantity of empty alcohol containers and plastic bags. Competition for the same habitat is not the only problem; interbreeding can also threaten diversity. The wild hyacinth, for example, while still widespread, is under increasing threat from hybridisation with garden varieties such as the Spanish bluebell and the hybrid bluebell. I think that it is the latter that has taken hold in my garden—I can confirm that it is invasive and difficult to control. Without doubt, prevention is better than cure. As other members have said, non-native species have been introduced into these islands over the centuries. Not all of them are invasive and the more invasive ones have tended to be introduced more recently. The ancient introductions have become integrated into the environment. Education and personal responsibility are important, in addition to Government action, but we must ensure that the legislative framework is coherent and underpins action by Government or individuals. That is why we have lodged our amendment. I am pleased that the Government and the other parties in the chamber have agreed to accept it.

The reaction of many people to hearing that the Scottish Parliament is spending time debating a strategy on invasive non-native species might well be to ask, "Why?" People do not overtly recognise the issue but, on further examination, most would have some knowledge and awareness of problematic invasive non-native species, such as grey squirrels, giant hogweed or North American signal crayfish. However, one issue that may not be as obvious is the cost to various agencies of trying to control invasive species, which runs into millions of pounds in the UK, as the cabinet secretary said. On plant health alone, £450,000 is spent in Scotland each year and the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs has an expenditure of £10 million throughout the UK on it. British Waterways spends £1 million every year dealing with problems that are caused by just 12 non-native species that threaten native wildlife in our rivers, including red-eared terrapins, zander, mink, signal crayfish, giant hogweed, floating  pennywort and Japanese knotweed. It is estimated that non-native species cost the Scottish economy at least £200 million annually, as Mr Lochhead said. There are strong economic as well as environmental reasons to develop a strategy for prevention and control of such species. It makes sense for the strategy to be uniform throughout the UK, because the British coast provides a natural barrier to many invasive species. Therefore, the joint strategy that has been signed off by environment ministers from the UK Government, the Scottish Government and the Welsh Assembly Government is welcome. Invasive non-native species of flora and fauna are considered to be the second-biggest threat to biodiversity after habitat destruction and are a particular threat to fragile ecosystems such as are on the islands. Many species that are currently invasive were imported many decades ago and were not invasive at the time. Climate change can alter the viability of a species and that of those that are in competition with it. One challenge is to predict which species have the potential to become invasive and which require monitoring for changes in risk. Prevention and early intervention are better solutions than trying to eradicate or control a species once it has become invasive. In the longer term, it is cheaper and more effective to invest in research and the scientific basis for risk assessment than it is to tackle the problem once it has become established. The invasive non-native species strategy arose from a comprehensive policy review in 2003 and a consultation that was published at the end of February 2008. The strategy is based on the three-stage approach that was agreed in 2002 by the parties to the "Convention on Biological Diversity". The first stage consists of raising awareness of risks and understanding of impacts to prevent the introduction of potentially invasive species; the second stage is to improve early detection and rapid response to introductions before problems escalate; and the third is to develop longer-term control programmes that are based on sound science. The aims of the strategy are to minimise risk and reduce the negative impact of non-native invasive species by improved co-ordination of the responsibilities of Government and other agencies; to increase public awareness of the problem and encourage behaviour that reduces the risk of the introduction of more such species; and to draw up contingency plans, should a species become invasive for whatever reason. The implementation of the strategy will be overseen by the Great Britain non-native species programme board, supported by the Non-native Species Secretariat. A UK consultation has also been launched on possible revisions to section 9  of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 to add non-native species to the list of species that it is an offence to release into the wild. The European Commission is developing proposals for a Europe-wide strategy. The Government's motion is correct to identify that the UK and the devolved legislatures in Scotland and Wales are at the forefront of tackling the issue in Europe. Many of the species have been introduced through human ignorance. The general public need to be aware of the possible consequences of bringing plants into the country or of releasing unwanted pets into the natural environment. Red-eared terrapins became popular during the "Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" craze of the 1990s. I had young children, so I remember it well. Many of those terrapins ended up in the wild when their young owners' interest in them waned. American mink escaped or were released from fur farms during the 1930s and are now widespread throughout Scotland and can cause major destruction to seabird colonies. Signal crayfish were introduced for aquaculture in the 1970s, but they spread and now threaten native crayfish through transmission of a fatal disease to which the non-native species is immune. In addition, they burrow into water banks in order to nest, causing damage to the habitat of other creatures, and they compete with other species such as trout and salmon by eating their food and their young. The most famous non-native invasive species in Scotland is perhaps the grey squirrel, which was introduced in the late 19 th century. It damages deciduous trees by stripping their bark and has caused the rapid decline of the red squirrel population through competition for food, and—like the signal crayfish—transmission of a fatal disease to which it is far less susceptible. On a more positive note, there is recent evidence that the reds might be developing some immunity to squirrel pox, which is certainly helpful. The giant hogweed in the plant category was—oddly enough—introduced as a decorative plant, but it has invaded river banks and is harmful to humans as well as to other plant species. The existing measures to exert control over invasive non-native species are contained primarily in the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 and the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004, although other legislation such as the European Union habitats directive and birds directive, and the "Convention on Biological Diversity", are also relevant. RSPB Scotland, in its briefing for this debate, contends that the legislative framework is not coherent, and that very few prosecutions have been brought. The Labour amendment—which I am pleased the Government will agree to—asks ministers to examine the current legislation to assess whether it acts, as has been suggested, in  a piecemeal fashion, and whether it could be strengthened. We will support the Liberal Democrat amendment, which makes it explicit that action is not solely the responsibility of Government and Government agencies. That is implicit in the Government motion and in the strategy, but there is no harm in making it clear in the amended motion that will, I hope, be passed by Parliament this afternoon. Many local organisations play a vital role in identifying species that are, or are becoming, invasive, and preventing their spread. The Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust in London is fighting an ongoing battle against the azolla fern, which could choke the wetlands and destroy the habitat of the vast range of wildlife that is dependent on them. Angling organisations around Loch Ken in Galloway have been at the forefront of the battle to control the signal crayfish. Controlling and—more importantly—preventing the spread of non-native invasive species is everybody's responsibility. I move amendment S3M-2777.2, to insert at end: "and asks the Scottish Government to review existing legislation and report back to the Parliament on whether it considers that current legislation requires to be strengthened to ensure that the issue of non-native species is addressed more effectively."

The First Minister might be aware that last Friday Shasun Pharma Solutions Ltd announced its intention to close its plant at Newbie, in Annan, with the potential loss of 86 highly skilled jobs. What will he do to assist the efforts of Scottish Development International and Scottish Enterprise to find a buyer for the site and retain valuable jobs and a facility for life sciences research and development in Annan?

When I asked the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism about the future funding of Co-operative Development Scotland on 9 October, he advised the chamber that an evaluation was under way and was likely to be completed by the end of December, and that future funding would be "an operational matter for Scottish Enterprise."— [ Official Report , 9 October 2008; c 11712.]  Given the Scottish Government's statements of support for the third sector, which are echoed by all political parties, I hope that ministers will proactively encourage Scottish Enterprise to continue to fund CDS after March next year. If the evaluation is not finished until the end of this year and Scottish Enterprise must then take on board the results of the evaluation when it decides whether to continue to provide funding for the organisation, the period between the decision being made and funding possibly running out will be very short. The setting up of CDS was positively encouraged by the previous Scottish Executive, and CDS was launched in September 2006 to promote the development of co-operative enterprises in Scotland, with a budget of £3 million. Its purpose was to provide advice on business development, to help with the start-up of co-operatives and employee-owned businesses, to advise on business ownership transfer, to commission research and to promote the co-operative sector.  With an estimated combined turnover of £4 billion, which represents about 4.25 per cent of Scottish gross domestic product, co-operatives and mutuals contribute impressively to the Scottish economy, and involve a surprisingly high proportion of the population: 20 per cent of the adult population are members of a co-operative and 25 per cent are members of a mutual. Co-operatives include housing associations, retailers, agricultural and fishing enterprises, credit unions and football supporters trusts. As well as providing advice and helping new co-operatives, CDS plays a valuable role in promoting success stories that demonstrate just how enterprising this part of the third sector can be. Examples of successes include Stewartry Care, which is the largest independent care provider in Dumfries and Galloway. Established in 1993, Stewartry Care transferred to employee ownership in 2004, with the assistance of the Baxi Partnership trust. The company now employs 170 people and looks after more than 500 people across the region. In its first year of operation as an employee-owned company, turnover increased by 16 per cent, and profitability increased by 39 per cent. In a sector where wages are traditionally low, Stewartry Care offers the highest rates of pay in the region and can offer its workforce flexible working and good-quality training. Scotmid, one of Scotland's largest co-operatives, was in the enviable position last month of announcing an increase in its operating profit from £2.8 million for the same period in the previous year to £4.5 million. Many private retail chains must be envious of such a high percentage increase during these difficult times. Scotmid is far from being a new enterprise, of course. Its origins can be traced back to the opening of the St. Cuthbert's Co-operative Society in Edinburgh in 1859. It was the major supermarket retail outlet when I was growing up in Edinburgh—not in 1859, I should add. Now rebranded as the Scotmid Co-operative, it has 251 retail outlets and 4,200 staff and includes the Scotmid food retailer, Semi-Chem, and funeral and property services. It was also an active promoter of fair trade products before many of the other retailers saw the potential for ethically traded products. On that point, in my experience, it still offers a wider selection of fair trade wines than other retailers. CDS is also actively encouraging agricultural co-operative enterprises, enabling producers to work together to achieve better prices and to add value to their products. First Milk, which is headquartered in Paisley, is the United Kingdom's largest dairy farmers co-operative, involving 3,400 farmers and producing 16 per cent of the UK's milk. Two years ago, First Milk purchased Dairy Crest's retail cheese brand and is now the largest  UK-based cheese supplier, with direct relationships with all the major supermarkets. Housing associations are increasingly important providers of social rented housing. Stock transfer from local authorities, as happened in Dumfries and Galloway, has increased the proportion of properties in the ownership of housing associations. Many other housing associations have grown up over the years from small beginnings, such as Loreburn Housing Association, which was originally set up to address housing shortages, especially for vulnerable people, in the town of Dumfries, but now owns and manages 1,700 properties across the region. Similarly, Key Housing Association provides housing for people with learning disabilities and offers support to others who are not in their accommodation. It was set up 25 years ago in response to the concerns of parents of learning disabled adults. We must not forget the contribution that football supporters trusts have made to the game in Scotland. There are 35 supporters clubs at all levels of football, with over 30,000 member fans. Nor must we forget the success of the credit union network, which we discussed a lot around the time of the Farepak incident, as credit unions offer people a way of saving small sums of money safely. These days, that is an important consideration with regard to how we lend and borrow money. CDS and Co-operatives UK have been successful in attracting the general assembly of the International Co-operative Alliance to Glasgow at the end of September next year. That organisation represents co-operatives across the globe and has 224 member organisations from 87 countries, which—amazingly—represent more than 800 million people worldwide. The event will generate something in the region of £2 million for the Scottish economy through delegate expenditure during the year of homecoming 2009, and is very much in the spirit of that year. The co-operative and mutual model clearly works—it has done since the days of St Cuthbert's Co-op. It provides an alternative to private or state ownership, one in which each employee or individual small shareholder has an equal interest and involvement. It is a model that might offer much during these troubled financial times, and I urge ministers to take a hands-on approach to ensuring that Co-operative Development Scotland is still with us in six months' time.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to fund Co-operative Development Scotland after March 2009. (S3O-4520)

I agree with Gavin Brown and Robert Brown that the voluntary sector is not simply a subsector of the social enterprise sector. I hope that the Government appreciates that and that it will put pressure on Scottish Enterprise to support a successful innovation by the previous Scottish Executive. The minister will be aware of the wide variety of co-operatives and mutuals that exist across Scotland. Does he agree that, at a time when international capitalism is in turmoil, the alternative economic and financial models of co-operation, mutualism and credit unions should enjoy a much deserved resurgence? What further action can the Government take to ensure that that happens?

I first spoke about foot-and-mouth disease in the chamber—indeed, in its predecessor up the Royal Mile—on 28 February 2001, when the results of the first two suspected cases in Scotland, both of which were in my constituency, were being anxiously awaited. Six years and seven months later, having returned to the topic on several occasions in between, here I am again. Perhaps I should apologise to the chamber for speaking about foot-and-mouth disease yet again. However, the frequency with which the topic has been discussed in the Parliament has been born out of necessity, not choice.  As the cabinet secretary has described, there has been an iterative process as we have learned how to improve our response to further outbreaks in the future. The Scudamore report on the 2007 outbreak is the most recent contribution to that process of improvement. The report rightly mentions the hard work and dedication of the staff in the Scottish Government and their delivery partners in minimising the impact of the 2007 outbreak in Scotland. It commends the Scottish agricultural community as a whole for its role in working with the Government, and I commend the cabinet secretary for his efforts during the 2007 outbreak to keep MSPs such as me informed about what was happening. I recall getting a telephone call from him as I was waiting outside the catacombs in Paris, telling me that the animal movement restrictions were going to affect the Dumfries and Lockerbie agricultural show—which, for the first time, I was not attending. The report also rightly looks at what can be learned and makes various recommendations. Like other members, I will address the issue of regionalisation. The review's conclusion is that Scottish agriculture is so closely integrated into the UK that Scotland should remain a part of the GB epidemiological unit—a phrase that I would not try to say after a couple of glasses of wine. The reasons for that are explained in chapter 3. There is no physical barrier between England and Scotland as there is between England and Northern Ireland. In the 2001 outbreak, the first cases that were detected, at the beginning of March in Dumfriesshire, originated through contact with infected animals at the markets in Hexham and Longtown. The high number of animal movements across the border makes the tracing and inspection of all animals that are moved into Scotland difficult. Indeed, the present state of our information technology systems for animal tracing in the UK makes them not really suitable for that task. However, the report suggests that we could consider regionalisation within Scotland on the basis of risk assessment, as happened to some extent in 2001. Other European Union countries are developing that approach. The Netherlands is mentioned in the report as being, like Scotland, a major exporting country that is well advanced in developing contingency plans for regionalisation in the event of an outbreak within the country, in a neighbouring country or elsewhere in the EU. It is not proximity to the origin of an outbreak that is most important, but the movement of livestock, vehicles, people and equipment between the areas of outbreak and other areas. It is those factors that would need to be assessed to ascertain the FMD status of each area. The report recommends that the Government develop and consult on a number of regionalisation scenarios.  Those could include, as Sarah Boyack said, creating a different status for the islands, which are physically separate from the mainland; for areas where there are low stocking densities and few animal movements; or for areas where there are physical barriers that discourage animal movements across the boundaries. Dr Scudamore's report states that the relationship between DEFRA and the Scottish Government worked well on balance but that there were some issues of contention between the two Administrations. The report suggests that the concordats that were drawn up in 1999 should be reviewed. As the cabinet secretary said, there were times when DEFRA failed to inform the Scottish Administration of developments. On the other hand, there were times when the Scottish Government made assumptions despite being given contrary evidence from DEFRA. The sheep welfare scheme is a contentious example of that.

Dr Scudamore goes into that in chapter 6. DEFRA informed the Scottish Government on 15 August that it was not going to implement the sheep welfare scheme, yet the Scottish Government—maybe an official—seemed to continue to believe that there would be a Great Britain-wide scheme. That, unfortunately, led to the impression that the Governments were bickering as the industry was suffering. To return to the concordats, I believe that they might be historic concordats in a different sense of the word "historic", as they should be consigned to history and reviewed, because they are no longer relevant to the current situation. As others have said, one of the issues that became apparent during the 2001 outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease was the excessive distances that animals are transported for slaughter. Of course, that is highly undesirable from the point of view of animal welfare, the environment, disease control and our efforts to develop the potential of locally sourced food in the interests of economic development and tourism in our communities. It does not make economic or environmental sense to transport animals hundreds of miles, in some instances, to be slaughtered and then to transport their carcases back for processing. In June, at the Royal Highland show, the Scottish Government announced the progress that it was making in developing its national policy for food and drink. I hope that locally sourced food will become part of that policy. In fact, we argued for that two weeks ago in the debate on less favoured area support. As others have said, progress in that  regard will require an increase in the availability of local abattoirs and local food-processing facilities. That will add value to food products in rural communities. A strategy to increase the number of abattoirs would help rural economies and contribute to the ability of Government to apply a regional strategy in the event of an animal disease outbreak. I would, therefore, be interested to hear from ministers how that approach will be progressed.

The minister will be aware that sudden and severe flooding incidents are increasingly problematic throughout Scotland—in the Highlands and Islands and in communities such as Eaglesfield, Annan and Langholm in Dumfries and Galloway. Has he approached his counterparts in the United Kingdom Government to discuss funding to ensure that the coverage that my colleague David Stewart mentioned in connection with the Highlands and Islands is also made available throughout the south of Scotland?

I note, from the minister's statement, that the responsibility for developing crofting communities will be transferred from the Crofters Commission to Highlands and Islands Enterprise at a time when HIE's funding and staffing are being substantially reduced. Will additional resource be transferred to HIE along with that responsibility? How will the growth at the edge initiative contribute towards crofting as a whole? GATE is targeted on fragile and remote areas—that definition would exclude some crofting areas in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive how much flexibility is available to GP practices with regard to the organisation of their extended opening hours. (S3O-4319)

I am pleased to hear that. I and other MSPs recently met local GPs, who advised us that they are prepared to offer extended opening hours. However, they are extremely concerned that the hours that the health board has permitted them to offer are not sufficient to meet the needs of their communities. Will the minister provide further guidance to health boards on giving individual GP practices the ability to structure extended opening hours around the needs of their patients and the size and composition of their practices?

Will the minister take an intervention?

As other members have said, the reports by the Scottish Agricultural College and the Royal Society of Edinburgh are welcome and timely contributions to this important debate—a debate that is not just about the future of the less favoured area support scheme, or indeed about the common agricultural policy, but, importantly, about how rural policy should be developed. As others have said, the reports elucidate the scale of the problem on Scotland's hills. The decline in livestock numbers, particularly sheep, has social, economic and environmental consequences. In Dumfries and Galloway, sheep numbers declined by between a quarter and a third from 1999 to 2007. At first, one might think that that was due to the consequences of the foot-and-mouth epidemic in 2001, but similar reductions have occurred in areas that did not lose stock during the outbreak. The Highlands, the Western Isles and areas in the north-west have witnessed greater reductions—up to 60 per cent—in the same period, so there is more to it than that. The decline in livestock numbers appears to have accelerated with the introduction of the single farm payment, which has tended to favour lowland farms over hill farms. Too high a stocking density causes problems for the environment, but if the pendulum swings too far in the opposite direction, the landscape and biodiversity are adversely affected. As noted by the Labour amendment, the consultation document that is published today focuses on the second interim LFASS, for the period 2010 to 2013. We reserve the welcome, though, pending further examination of the consequences of the proposals in the consultation document. It seems a little premature for the Government to ask members to welcome a document that members have had little chance to read. That was reinforced by Roseanna Cunningham, who said that she had not even had the chance to read the document before she formed her speech. Other than that, we have no difficulty with the Government's motion. What we seek with our amendment is to add constructively to its content. The Government needs to recognise and address the criticism of the bureaucracy and lack of transparency of current schemes, such as the rural development programme. The RSE report notes, for example, on agri-environmental objectives, "that there are so many options under the four axes that the targeting of resources to achieve specific environmental outcomes is likely to be very difficult ... the bureaucracy of the schemes at both application and assistance stages has  been extremely burdensome and discouraging to potential applicants." I have heard similar concerns expressed by farmers in my constituency, who say that the application process is too difficult and time consuming, and that larger farm businesses, which can afford to employ specialist consultants, have more chance of success, which disadvantages small hill farmers. Alasdair Allan made the same point in his intervention on the problems for crofters with electronic submission. For that reason, Labour has included in its amendment a call for the application process to be streamlined and for clarification on how decisions are made on applications to reassure applicants that there is a level playing field. The single farm payment, as a pillar 1 agricultural support mechanism, is attached to the land and reflects the cost to the land manager of delivering public benefit. I agree with the RSE that the Government needs to begin to plan for changes to the SFP in 2013. In doing so, public benefit needs to be defined and recognised as being broadly based rather than purely agricultural. The land is a resource that fulfils a multiplicity of functions and delivers a range of public benefits. Importantly, those include food supply and food security, but they also include biodiversity, a quality landscape, carbon sequestration, the provision of a quality water supply and support for viable communities. Gavin McCrone argues in his report that, at present, land managers are not fully reimbursed for the provision of all those public benefits. He defines that as "market failure", and argues that there therefore needs to be an integrated approach to land use policy that recognises its multifunctionality and the fact that, sometimes, the different ways in which land can be used are in competition. Land use policy must take advantage of the synergies between the different uses, and at the same time seek to resolve any conflicts.

Food production is an extremely important land benefit, but the way in which land use tackles issues such as climate change will be increasingly important. The other strand of the Labour amendment calls for an increase in the proportion of local produce and fairly traded foodstuffs that are purchased by the public sector. In our amendment, we have sought not to be prescriptive but to recognise that there is growing public demand for local produce and fairly traded produce, and that there are  moral, economic and environmental reasons for developing policy in that area. Other important issues are not mentioned in the motion or any of the amendments, for example the need to develop a network of local abattoirs. I know that John Scott has a meeting about that later today. As the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations points out in its briefing, we must not forget the need to support rural communities and the facilities that they require, such as village halls. I turn to the other amendments. I am sympathetic to the Liberal Democrat amendment, which calls on the Government to bring forward the LFASS payments to assist farmers with cash-flow problems, although I will listen to what the Government says are the problems with that. However, the Tory amendment is opportunistic and fails to recognise the important and thoughtful content of the RSE report by concentrating on a criticism—albeit a valid criticism—of the UK Government on page 68. The criticism has to a certain extent been misrepresented, because, as I understand it, the UK Government is saying that we could end pillar 1 support—SFP support—and transfer it to pillar 2 support, which is support for less favoured areas. I do not agree. I think that we must continue to have two forms of support. However, the Tories have been politically opportunistic in mentioning only that criticism and failing to mention any of the 66 recommendations. They seriously misrepresent the report and seek to politicise its important content—content that should contribute to a sensible and balanced discussion on the future of rural policy. For that reason, the Tory amendment deserves to be rejected.

On the issue of funding mechanisms, has the Scottish Government had discussions with the United Kingdom Treasury, Partnerships UK or any other agency regarding revenue support for public sector borrowing under the Scottish Futures Trust? Local authorities are concerned that the existing 80 per cent revenue support for public-private partnership projects will not be replicated under the new system.

The Scottish Futures Trust's memorandum of association states that it will fund, procure and deliver assets. I will give the cabinet secretary another opportunity to clarify the issue: will he advise how much funding will be available through the SFT as opposed to existing funding streams? When will it start to provide funding for public infrastructure? Will it be before May 2011?

It is unfortunate that, on a Thursday evening, the issue of planning does not detain many members in the chamber. However, I congratulate Iain Smith on securing the debate. I empathise with the problem that he identifies but I did not sign the motion because I do not agree entirely with his conclusions. I, too, have encountered a number of constituency issues in which a developer has commenced a development before gaining planning approval, and has submitted the application after the commencement, meaning that planning officers are unable to enforce any prior conditions because an application is outstanding. When neighbours have objections to such a development, it can be an extremely frustrating experience that can drag on for years. In my constituency, there is an example of a lorry park on land that I think may belong to the Scottish Executive. Because the submission has been made after the commencement of the development, and because there was already development on the site, planning officers are unable to do anything about the development until the planning application has come before the committee. However, I cannot agree with a presumption against approval—that is too draconian. On occasion, an individual might make a minor alteration to their own home that does not attract any objections from neighbours, but might make that alteration without realising that planning permission is required. As a councillor many years ago, I came across the example of the erection of a hut in the garden of a flat. A presumption against approval for all such cases would be inappropriate. Another example would be somebody who installed central heating in their conservatory. They ought to get planning permission for that, although they may not realise it. It would be a bit draconian to refuse planning permission retrospectively purely on the basis that they had not sought approval in advance of constructing the conservatory. The Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006 has not yet been implemented in its entirety. On this issue, I urge the minister to implement the act in full. Perhaps he can explain why its implementation is taking so long. The act adds significant new powers to the enforcement process, such as temporary stop notices, enforcement charters and  fixed-penalty notices, which should address some of the concerns that are raised in Iain Smith's motion. For example, temporary stop notices would require an immediate 28-day stoppage at an unauthorised development or where there is breach of planning control without the need for an enforcement notice to be served. The new provisions should be implemented, and their effect should be assessed and reviewed before we rush to new regulation. I do not think that we know, at this stage, that the 2006 act will not address the problems that Iain Smith has rightly identified. One of the major problems in the planning process in Scotland is the lack of resource—in particular, the lack of human resource. The shortage of planners in local authorities results in long delays in the determination of planning applications. That can increase the temptation for applicants to anticipate the results of their applications, and it frustrates both the applicants and the objectors. Addressing the shortage of qualified planners must be a priority. Unless we have people who are able to progress the planning process in Scotland, we will never overcome the many planning issues that arise for both individuals and businesses. I look forward to hearing from the minister the Government's views on how this particularly difficult problem may be addressed.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the composition and remit of the seagull task force are and what resources the Executive has committed to the pilot project in Dumfries. (S3O-4067)

In addition to thanking the cabinet secretary for his reply, I thank his colleague Michael Russell for the flock of replies that I received this morning to the written questions that I submitted on 28 July. Is the cabinet secretary aware that, on the advice of one of Mr Russell's predecessors, Allan Wilson MSP, I wrote to Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council in 2002—at which time Mr Russell was a list member for the South of Scotland constituency—seeking information on the councils' good practice on seagull control? Six years ago almost to the day, I provided that information to Dumfries and Galloway Council. Is the cabinet secretary aware that that council's inability to identify a budget for seagull control measures has hampered its efforts ever since? Will he commit to providing funding next year to Dumfries and Galloway Council to implement the task force's recommendations? Furthermore—

Does the cabinet secretary agree that curtailing food supply for gulls is necessary and that existing anti-littering legislation should be enforced to reduce the available food supply?

Will the First Minister clarify whether the Government will introduce legislation to establish a Scottish futures trust before the next summer recess?

There is a lot of cross-party support for the bill and agreement on the importance of tartan to the Scottish economy, now and in the past, so, in closing the debate for the Labour Party, I return to the main issue of disagreement at this stage—whether a tartan must be proved to be capable of being woven in order to be registered. We have heard a variety of wovenist positions, ranging from the extreme wovenism of David Whitton to the positions of other members who had a degree of wovenism in their arguments. For good reason, I, too, am a wovenist, partly because of the history of tartan. Tartan probably originated from the French word "tiretaine", which referred to a woven part-wool, part-linen cloth rather than to any particular type of design. I am not arguing that tartan did not exist prior to the 18 th century, but it did not exist in the forms in which we know it now, which is not necessarily a bad thing. Evidence of material with a chequered design, dating from somewhere between 250 AD and 350 AD, has been found in Falkirk. It is possible that the Romans, who were in Britain at that time, observed people wearing an ancient form of tartan. Prior to the 19 th century and the development of mechanical looms that could reproduce patterns easily, each tartan would have been uniquely created by the weaver using the dyes that were available. Bright colours were used for celebratory occasions, symbolising the wealth and status of the wearer; darker colours were used when the  wearer wished to blend into the natural environment. That may be the origin of the notions of dress and hunting tartans. What is clear is that tartan was a woven material long before specific designs were allocated to particular clan names or geographical locations. During the mid-19 th century, weaving and the textile industry were the predominant manufacturing industries in Scotland. Ken Macintosh referred to the decline of the textile industry over the past century. The tartan industry in the early 21 st century accounts for around a quarter of the remaining textile jobs in Scotland. So, in supporting the wovenist position, those of us who describe ourselves as wovenists believe that we are supporting the Scottish textile industry and the retention of the skills of its designers and manufacturers. As David Whitton informed us, the Scottish Tartans World Register strongly supported that position, arguing in written evidence that, historically and culturally, tartan has been woven and that computerised tartan images could easily be produced by mathematical formulae. It argued that the inclusion of such designs in the register would trivialise tartan. As Marilyn Livingstone and Rob Gibson pointed out, a picture of tartan is very different from the actual cloth. The success of tartan worldwide is a testament to Scotland's entrepreneurialism. I recently discovered a story about a Japanese golfer called Tsuneyuki "Tommy" Nakajima. I had not heard of him before, but I do not know a great deal about golf. Apparently, while he was in Scotland, he went into a tartan shop on Princes Street to ask whether he would be entitled to wear a tartan. He received the response, "Do you want to see the hunting Nakajima or the dress Nakajima?" Let there be a hunting or a dress Nakajima; I hope that, as long as it is capable of being woven, it will be accepted into the register of tartans. The issue of wovenism notwithstanding, Labour members are pleased to support the general principles of the bill and to see it progress to stage 2. We await with interest the arguments about how to address the issue of a tartan's ability to be woven and whether a cloth sample should have to be provided to allow a tartan to be registered.

Scotland is uniquely fortunate in having a fabric that is recognised as Scottish across the world. Arguably, no other nation has as distinctive a national fabric as tartan or as distinctive a national dress as the kilt. Tartans have been created and adopted throughout the world. Canadian provinces and American states have their own tartans, and there is a Scottish Parliament tartan. There is even an Elvis Presley tartan. Earlier this year, the only Scots-born rabbi resident in Scotland created the first official Jewish tartan. Those are new tartans, but the official clan tartans are not as traditional as many people suppose. The original tartans would have depended on the dyes and materials that were available. The first industrial manufacturers of  tartan, Wilson and Sons of Bannockburn, began creating tartans in 1765, as they had the technology to create a reproducible repeat pattern. They originally allocated numbers to their designs, but later gave them place names or the names of clans to identify them and make them more saleable. In 1815, the Highland Society of London wrote to clan chiefs asking them to supply samples of their clan tartans, but most of them had no idea what their clan tartans were and either referred the inquiry to older clan members, in case anyone had a recollection, or asked Wilson's to tell them what it was. Tartan had been proscribed for 32 years after the second Jacobite rebellion—not because it represented the clans but because it was seen to represent Highland identity and rebellion. George Murray, the military adviser to bonnie Prince Charlie, would not have been wearing clan Murray tartan at the battle of Culloden, even if he was fighting on the same side as Jim Mather's and Tavish Scott's relatives. The mythology that surrounds ancient tartans does not detract from tartan's symbolism or importance. Tartan is popular, fashionable and, despite its adoption across the globe, unequivocally identified with Scotland and Scotland's heritage. Tartan-clad football supporters are recognised and welcomed as Scots wherever they travel, whether they be our own beloved national tartan army or supporters of the individual teams whose tartan-clad followers will adorn European terraces later this year. By the way, Queen of the South has its own tartan, too. Tartan not only promotes Scotland's worldwide image but contributes significantly to our economy, as Jamie McGrigor's bill recognises and as the survey undertaken by Scottish Enterprise's textile team proved. The survey indicated that approximately 3 per cent of all Scottish manufacturing jobs are in tartan-related industries, which contribute £350 million to Scotland's gross domestic product. There is strong support for the principles of the bill among businesses involved in tartan manufacture. A single publicly held online register should raise the profile of Scotland-based businesses that rely on tartan, create new marketing opportunities to promote Scotland's international brand and stimulate further interest in broader Scottish culture. The register will be kept by the National Archives of Scotland, with the keeper of the records having responsibility for its maintenance. As Jamie McGrigor said, that arrangement will overcome concerns about the creation of more public bodies.  The only controversial issue in the bill is how tartan is to be defined. As Jamie McGrigor said, there is a divergence of opinion between the wovenists and the modernists, who argue that non-woven tartans, which could be created through screen printing or ceramics or by computer, should be registrable. Labour believes that weaving is such an integral part of tartan that any design described as tartan ought to be capable of being woven. I listened to what Jamie McGrigor said about the further work that he has done on the matter. The concern is how someone can prove that a design is capable of being woven without weaving it. My Labour colleagues will expand on that issue during the debate. Labour is happy to support the passage of the bill through stage 1.

Before I start my short speech, I associate myself with Christopher Harvie's views on Jeremy Clarkson, as I agree that the deification of petrol heads as role models for our young people is not good in the current situation. On the issue of intelligent bus stops—those that tell passengers when their bus is expected—I point out that we had hoped to introduce such stops in Dumfries but, unfortunately, they have been delayed by more than a year due to the clawback of a considerable amount of funding from the south-west of Scotland transport partnership. I still need to get to the bottom of why SWESTRANS has lost out on hundreds of thousands of pounds that would have been invested in improving public transport in Dumfries and Galloway. Some of the most acute transport problems are faced by residents of rural Scotland, where public transport services are much less frequent and where, because of the low population density, a higher proportion of bus routes require subsidy—by passenger transport partnerships such as SWESTRANS—to be viable. The provision of integrated public transport is a significant challenge in rural Scotland, which results in greater reliance on the private car. However, demographic changes in rural areas mean that an increasing number of rural residents are elderly and that the private car may become untenable for financial or health reasons. The increases in the price of fuel have been mentioned. There are difficult political views on how the issue could be addressed, but I doubt that there is any disagreement about the fact that they have caused a particular problem in rural Scotland, where prices at the pump are generally higher, distances travelled are greater and traveller numbers are lower than in urban areas. In such areas, it is difficult to sustain low fuel prices. The Scottish Government's decision not to pass on the bus service operators grant to compensate for rises in fuel duty will hit rural services harder, as they have higher mileages and lower passenger numbers. Bus operators in Scotland now have the highest fuel costs in the UK. Unfortunately, there has been a huge percentage increase in fares in Dumfries  and Galloway, where, as in other parts of Scotland, many people are reliant on buses. As fares go up, the attraction of using public transport is reduced, especially to families and larger groups. Recently a lady came to a surgery to complain to me about the cost of bus services from Brydekirk to Annan and from Annan to Carlisle. Sadly, there was not much that I, as a local member, could do about that. I was encouraged by the minister's response to questions about the national concessionary travel scheme, especially as that may relate to community transport. The capping of the scheme at a time when ticket prices are rising raises concerns that it will not be possible to develop it as many of us hoped, so I am gratified by the minister's response to Alison McInnes. I, too, would like concessionary travel to be extended to community transport schemes, which provide a tremendous service in places such as Dumfries and Galloway. There is an extremely successful community transport scheme in Annandale. Transport is provided by volunteer drivers, who take elderly people to day centres and general practitioners and on supermarket trips, days out and visits to leisure facilities. Vehicles have been purchased through a variety of capital funding schemes, including the Scottish Executive's rural community transport initiative, but generally revenue costs must be met by users, many of whom are entitled to concessionary travel but are currently unable to use it on community transport buses. The previous Executive committed itself to consider extending the scheme to community transport after the first two years of its operation. I add my voice to those of Cathy Peattie and Alison McInnes and ask the minister to give careful consideration to including voluntary transport schemes such as community transport initiatives in the new concessionary travel scheme, so that those passengers, too, may access the scheme.

I congratulate Jim Hume on his motion. I will address predominantly the first few phrases of the motion, because others have expounded articulately on the complex issues around excess packaging. Before I embark on that, I refer briefly to the issue of people throwing out so much food. I wonder whether that problem is exacerbated by the use of unrealistic sell-by and use-by dates on many food products. Raspberries, to which Christine Grahame referred, often have a two-day use-by date on them, which people take seriously. It is unfortunate that people sometimes think that such foods are going to poison them if they eat them after the two days. When we bought fruit loose, we would have eaten it unless it looked dodgy. The Ecodeco plant in my constituency, which was opened officially at the end of last year—the minister was present at the ceremony—is a public-private partnership/private finance initiative project run by Shanks and Dumfries and Galloway Council, which will operate for the next 25 years. I mention that it is a PPP/PFI project only in passing, because in other discussions we have heard that the non-profit distributing model is one model that is considered not to work quite so well for waste disposal projects. I am sure that we will all look carefully at the functioning of the project. The main difference in the method of dealing with waste that the plant uses is that the waste is separated not at the kerbside but after collection, when it is dried and sorted and combustible materials are removed and converted into fuel. That has caused some discontent among householders; I have heard quite a number of complaints about the lack of recycling facilities on the doorstep. I do not think that Dumfries and Galloway Council has managed to get across the message that a different approach to recycling is being taken, whereby the waste is sorted after it is put into the bin, rather than before it is collected. According to Councillor Leaver, who asked Dumfries and Galloway Council about fuel pellets earlier this week, the pellets that the plant produces are being exported to Yorkshire, where they are being used as part of the energy mix for a cement works. However, I understand that companies in Dumfries and Galloway are interested in purchasing the fuel, which would complete the cycle and demonstrate the usefulness of the approach that is being taken. The former council tip next door at Locharmoss has been capped and restored. The methane gas  that the decomposition of its contents produces is being extracted, converted into electricity and exported to the grid. That process is estimated to be able to produce enough power for about 700 homes and, according to a press release, will cut annual CO 2 emissions by about 20,000 tonnes, which provides an environmental benefit that is equivalent to planting 30,000 mature trees. I am slightly cynical about those figures and I would like to see the calculation, because the gas is still burned, which produces CO 2 . That is not all that is being done in Dumfries and Galloway. I will mention a few other community activities. There are three community can recycling projects—in Annan, Dumfries and Stranraer. A community composting project is under development in Langholm, in partnership with the Buccleuch Estates. We have four community furniture reuse projects and numerous charity shops that resell clothes and bric-à-brac. I learned an interesting fact when I worked with Help the Aged during volunteers week this year. I have always worried about what happened to unsold clothes, but I learned that clothes that are unsold or unsuitable for sale are taken to national recycling projects, where all textiles are recycled. None of that goes to landfill, which I find reassuring.

I offer a brief correction. I said: "Tax cuts are always popular with the beneficiaries."

I ought to start by declaring an interest as one of the people who has received a small business bonus. That is probably true of many members who run offices in town centres. Tax cuts are always popular with the beneficiaries; indeed, the tax cut that we received was quite popular in our office, and I explained to  my colleagues that it was due to that nice Mr Mather and nice Mr Swinney, who made more money available for our member's allowances. However, popularity is not the sole criterion for the success of a policy. Scottish Labour is certainly not opposed to assisting small businesses through rates relief. Indeed, between 1999 and 2007, we introduced a number of different measures to assist small businesses in that manner. In January 2000, the then Minister for Finance, Jack McConnell, announced a 1p reduction on poundage rates for businesses with a rateable value of £10,000 or less. The following year, businesses that were affected by the foot-and-mouth crisis were the subject of a £3.5 million rates relief package. In December 2001, Andy Kerr announced an improved rates relief scheme for small businesses, which offered discounts of between 5 per cent and 50 per cent on small businesses with rateable values of £10,000 or less. That came into effect in April 2003. In 2005, Tom McCabe announced that the poundage rate was to be reduced to that in England.

As I was just about to explain-and as has been long rehearsed over the years—business rates comprise two factors: poundage, which at that point increased in Scotland, and rateable value. Arguably, because rateable values in Scotland were lower, despite the higher poundage the product of poundage and rateable value was the same in Scotland as in England. When, in 2005, Tom McCabe reduced the poundage rate to the same as the rate in England—at a cost of £100 million in 2006, £180 million in April 2007 and £200 million thereafter—Scottish businesses gained a competitive advantage over their English counterparts because they enjoyed the same poundage rate but lower rateable values. For the first time, businesses in Scotland had a competitive advantage, which was welcomed by members of all parties at the time. However, Scottish Labour always intended to do more. Our 2007 manifesto pledged to double the small business rates relief. At the request of the Federation of Small Businesses, we agreed that such measures would be targeted at smaller businesses. In addition to those schemes, a rural rates relief scheme has operated since 1997. The scheme allows for between 50 per cent and 100 per cent rates relief for village shops, post offices, filling  stations, pubs and small food stores in villages that have populations of fewer than 3,000. The discretionary component of relief between 50 per cent and 100 per cent is 75 per cent funded by central Government, with the remaining 25 per cent coming from local authority council tax. For farm diversification projects, rates relief of up to 50 per cent for five years has been available since April 2003. Until this year, those reliefs were additional to any entitlement to the small business rate relief scheme. Therefore, rural businesses with lower rates of relief were slightly better off—albeit not by much—under the previous scheme than they are under the small business bonus scheme. Having recapped that history, I say that we on the Labour benches have no ideological opposition to assisting small businesses and we certainly have no anti-business agenda. However, we are yet to be convinced that the small business bonus scheme is the most effective way of supporting local economic regeneration. I suspect that the scheme may be too blunt an instrument. Moreover, I argue that the effects of the scheme cannot possibly be quantified after only two months. For a Government that prides itself on an outcomes-based approach, at this stage the policy is concerned only with an input. There is no "historic concordat" here, so the outcomes appear to have been left to take care of themselves. The cost of implementing the small business bonus scheme was to have been £265 million over the three years of the spending review period—according to page 12 of "Scottish Budget Spending Review 2007"—but the acceleration to full implementation over two years rather than three years, which was forced on the Government by the Conservatives, will cost an extra £50 million on top of that. Such costs will be partially offset by the increase in the rates poundage from 44.1p to 45.8p, which the executive note to the Non-Domestic Rate (Scotland) Order 2008 confirms will bring in an additional £75 million. Moreover, businesses with rateable values of above £29,000 will be surcharged an additional 0.4p in the pound, so the rates bill for such businesses will increase by around 4 per cent this year. We do not dispute the popularity of the new scheme among small businesses, but we question whether spending a further £315 million purely on rates relief is the most effective way of stimulating either local economies or the national economy. Our contention is that funding could be better targeted to achieve longer-term growth. During the debate, some of my colleagues will expand on our alternatives. For example, for training, small businesses can find it difficult to release staff because of the cost of bringing in replacements. However, good-quality training—whether of the workforce or of an individual businessperson—can  make all the difference in whether a business thrives and grows. Given the widespread acceptance of the need to tackle climate change—many Cabinet members have referred to the importance of that task, and it is a central part of the Government's economic strategy—funding could be targeted to encourage investment in energy efficiency. That would not only deliver annual savings to individual businesses, but would contribute to the Scottish Government's target of reducing carbon emissions by 80 per cent by 2050. Of course, the Government might argue that each business is free to spend any savings that it makes from rates reduction on training and energy efficiency. However, given that the Government's economic strategy includes aspirations to make Scotland greener, and that it identifies learning, skills and wellbeing among the five strategic objectives, would not it be more logical to incentivise measures such as workforce training and energy efficiency? The strategy states that "vibrant, connected communities and businesses with good access to markets and services are key elements of a successful and dynamic economy." Who could disagree with that? However, what does the Government see as being its role in the creation of dynamic town centres where small businesses can flourish? Do ministers simply hope that small businesses will use some of the rates relief to fund business improvement districts, which were never intended to be a substitute for central or local government funding? In the present climate, Government needs to play a more interventionist role in town centre regeneration. I can provide a current local example. Recently the property development company Centros Miller withdrew from a regeneration project in Dumfries town centre. Last week, my Westminster colleague Russell Brown met representatives of the company and was told that projects of that type would continue in cities where a return on investment was still expected, but in the current climate would not, without Government financial intervention, be implemented in smaller towns. Labour recognises that town centre regeneration is less attractive to the private sector than regeneration of cities and so requires Government incentives. That was behind our manifesto commitment to a town centre turnaround fund. It is disappointing that the Conservatives, who had a similar policy in their manifesto for last year's elections, were not able to support Labour on the issue during the budget process. We will support the Liberal Democrat amendment. If the Government is so sure that business rates relief will deliver new opportunities,  employment and new ventures throughout Scotland, it should not be frightened to commission research into whether that has happened. I am less inclined to support the Conservative amendment, although I understand fully why the Conservatives want to take credit for the business rate reductions. As I said, full implementation of the scheme in 2009 will cost another £50 million. In my view, that money would have been better invested in town centre regeneration. Assistance for small businesses by means of rates relief is a valid and appropriate mechanism for providing Government support, but we would have preferred an approach that would incentivise activity that contributes directly to economic growth and tackling climate change. I move amendment S3M-2102.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the introduction of the Small Business Bonus Scheme (SBBS) on 1 April 2008; recognises that business rates relief schemes play a part in government support for small business; notes also the schemes initiated by previous administrations but believes that the allocation of a further £315 million, over the period of this spending review, to the implementation of the SBBS does not by itself represent the most effective way of stimulating local economic development or national economic growth, and further believes that government funding targeted on energy efficiency, training and town centre regeneration would benefit both small businesses and their local communities."

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to minimise the risk of an outbreak of the bluetongue virus in Scotland. (S3O-3647)

The cabinet secretary is aware that a case of bluetongue was detected in Dumfries and Galloway at the end of last year in a herd of animals that was imported from Germany. With the Scottish midge season well under way and the import of vaccinated animals into Scotland likely to increase in the next few weeks, what steps are ministers taking to ensure that all farmers are aware of their responsibility to notify the authorities of stock movements? Is the minister confident that sufficient vaccine will be available to Scottish farmers early enough should the worst happen?

On occasion, the previous Executive was accused by Opposition parties of submitting motions to the Parliament that were self-congratulatory. Although there may have been a small amount of justification for those accusations, the current Scottish Government has taken self-congratulation to new limits. The Government does not only blow its own trumpet, it has an entire brass band honking out an anthem of self praise. However, if we dampen down the joyful cacophony—it is perhaps a little unkind to refer to Kenneth Gibson and Brian Adam in that way—the melody is not so sweet. The motion trots out a shopping list of proclaimed Government achievements, but many of those claims of success are premature to say the least. For example, it refers to increases in police numbers, but as George Foulkes found out by way of a written parliamentary question, the number of police on the beat in Scotland fell by 45 during the first year of the SNP Government, so now it has to find 1,045 police officers by 2011. The reduction in rates for small businesses has come into effect. I am sure that it will be popular with those who benefit. The rates bill for my constituency office in Dumfries is significantly reduced. I assure ministers that I will use the additional allowance to the benefit of my constituents. Tax cuts are usually popular with beneficiaries but, after two months, there can be  no evidence of whether that tax cut will lead to the regeneration of Scotland's town centres as the Government has proclaimed it will. The motion also refers to "the new partnership with local government"— more often referred to as the historic concordat—which is much heralded by the Scottish ministers. Local authorities are becoming aware of the cost to them of that concordat, through which they receive the blame if the Government fails to deliver on its promises. Directors of education estimate that the Government's pledge to reduce class sizes in primaries 1 to 3 to only 18 will cost an additional £422 million to implement but, as Frank McAveety pointed out, there has been an abject failure on the part of ministers to address the cost of the pledge. Today, we read that the Government has now messed up the curriculum for excellence, too. The voluntary sector also feels the squeeze as local authorities struggle to balance the books: £900,000 was cut from the Cyrenians in Aberdeen, £86,000 was cut from Age Concern in the Highlands and £400,000 was cut from the Loch Arthur project in Dumfries and Galloway. Those are facts, not scare stories; we are not scaremongering, as we were accused of doing. One omission from the motion's roll of honour—although the cabinet secretary referred to it in her speech—is the abolition of the graduate endowment. Is that because the Government is embarrassed at abandoning its promise to ditch student debt? [ Interruption. ] As I said, the cabinet secretary mentioned it in her speech, but it is not in the motion. Or is it omitted, as Murdo Fraser and Frank McAveety pointed out, because one of the unexpected consequences of that inadequate legislation, the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Act 2008, is that postgraduates whose repayments had been deferred because they are undertaking another qualification are now receiving demands for repayment, possibly with interest? I am not saying that there is nothing to be welcomed in the Government's programme: there are several measures that the previous Executive initiated—Malcolm Chisholm referred to one—and others that travel in the same direction. James Kelly welcomed the completion of the M74.

I will give way to Margo MacDonald because I owe her a drink.

It would have been down to each local authority to decide on its own priorities, but my party would not have imposed a council tax freeze. We would not have threatened to withdraw money from councils if they did not implement a council tax freeze; it would have been encouraged but not imposed. I will be interested to learn more about the pilot projects in the environment portfolio. I hope that they will be more than just an excuse for the weekly ministerial engagements that the Minister for Environment undertakes in my constituency. There are also major issues of policy development that are not mentioned in the cheerful motion. As Murdo Fraser asked, what about the Government's much-vaunted local income tax? Not only is it not local, and not only does it take away from councils the ability to make local decisions on revenue, but expert opinion believes that it might not even be legal. Professor Alan Page believes that the proposed tax is likely to be tested in court. Professor Himsworth believes that it is in contravention of article 9.3 of the European Charter of Local Self-Government. Professor Richard Kerley stated that up to 100,000 pensioners could be worse off under the new system. As other members have asked, what about the Scottish futures trust, the business plan for which the Government tried to sneak out at a conference last week? Having read through the 50-plus pages of mainly meaningless verbiage that the business plan contains, I am not surprised that the Government did not want to draw attention to it. It looks more like a school project than a major policy document. Now that the business plan is out, the Scottish futures trust pleases neither the critics of PPP, who correctly identify it as simply another variant of private finance in the public sector, nor the business community, who are concerned about some of the anti-private sector rhetoric that has accompanied the trust's protracted birth. The motion mentions food and fuel costs—and, as always, blames Westminster. It is always the big boys that did it and ran away. As Ross Finnie asked, where is the Government's energy strategy? Is it just about turning down wind turbine developments in SNP-held constituencies? The Government congratulates itself on a list of small, easy, populist measures, but it will be judged on how it deals with major issues of policy: how the finances for Scotland's local authorities are raised; how sufficient funding for infrastructure investment is to be levered in; how a secure energy supply is to be sustained; how to ensure  that our population has the necessary skills, now and in the future, to support sustainable economic growth; and how to promote social justice and support vulnerable people in Scotland's communities. On those issues, the Government fails. The First Minister might believe that he is the greatest politician that Scotland has ever known and his ministers might be blinded by their own egos but, slowly but surely, the scales are falling from the eyes of the Scottish people. There is no evidence that, after its first year, the Government is moving Scotland in the right direction. On the issues that matter, SNP stands for "still no progress".

Cabinet secretary, you may find that it was not actually Mr Kerr who signed off Hairmyres. Perhaps you will want to revise and check your facts before going any further along that particular road. You have also stated this afternoon that you "have no doubt that the package of investment opportunities that is available in Scotland is attractive and competitive." Last Thursday, the First Minister stated that  "PFI was a disastrous mistake".— [ Official Report , 22 May 2008; c 8908.]  How do you address the concern that has been expressed by the assistant director of the Confederation of British Industry Scotland, that the more business thinks that the Scottish Government is hostile to delivering public services, the less likely it will be that investment and jobs will come to Scotland; and the warning from contractors that was reported in The Sunday Times last weekend, that Scotland could face an exodus of business and talent if your plans for SFT go ahead?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It is not the case that hard copies were made available to Finance Committee members at 8.45. The committee clerk sent an e-mail to Finance Committee members at quarter to 11 advising that they would be available the following week.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. With regard to the Minister for Parliamentary Business's point of order, the e-mail in question was not circulated to Finance Committee members until a quarter to 11 yesterday, by which time the matter had been covered on "Good Morning Scotland" and the Scottish Government's website.

Will the cabinet secretary advise the Parliament whether the regeneration of the Ravenscraig site is considered to be of national, regional or local significance and therefore whether Scottish Enterprise or North Lanarkshire Council will be responsible for providing the public sector share of the funding?

As other members have said, the sentiments in the international framework are not new; they were in the previous Executive's international strategy, which itself was underpinned by individual strategies for the United States, China and Germany. The success of the previous strategy was acknowledged by several contributors who gave evidence to the European and External Relations Committee earlier this year. As Malcolm Chisholm and Hugh O'Donnell pointed out, the framework is, if anything, less comprehensive and possibly rather less well expressed than that of the previous Executive. Like the Government's economic strategy, the framework is full of high-level aspirations with which many of us would agree, but it is short on the detail of how those aspirations might be achieved or how the framework's success will be assessed.  As the Labour amendment recognises, the framework contains little on international development and our responsibilities as a wealthy nation. International relations are not only about growing Scotland's economy; they are about how we contribute to tackling international issues such as poverty, climate change and food insecurity. The Scottish Government's international development policy, which was published today, contains welcome references, such as the continuation of Scotland's relationship with Malawi and the commitment to becoming a Fairtrade nation. I wonder why the Government feels unable to accept our amendment, which appears to be in agreement with that policy.

I assure the minister that there is no lack of understanding. The motion should refer to international development. The international framework is intended to co-ordinate the Government's international activities with the priorities of the economic strategy. We will shortly hear from the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, who I am sure will sum up for the Government in the motivational style for which he is renowned. I was beginning to think that he had been holding master classes for his colleagues. Linda Fabiani spoke of "flexible pragmatism" and "agile ways of reaching out more widely to civic society". Chris Harvie talked of "Small, acrobatic countries" and we heard Rob Gibson's revelation about Michael Russell as the dashing white sergeant leading a ceilidh in Brussels. I began to wonder whether the Government had some sort of job lot of glucosamine. Whether the Government's actions equate with the rhetoric of the framework or, indeed, the Government's economic strategy, must be examined. There sometimes appears to be a dichotomy between Government rhetoric and action on Scotland's economy. The framework refers to VisitScotland's role in promoting Scotland overseas but, at the same time, the Government is reducing VisitScotland's funding in real terms by 0.5 per cent per annum over the period of the spending review. The Government has also removed support for tourism-based modern apprenticeships.  The framework refers to encouraging investment in Scotland, but the Government proposes to make Scotland the highest taxed part of the United Kingdom—a proposal that has not found favour with business. The final sentence of the framework aspires to "influencing people to choose Scotland as a great place to live, learn, visit, work", but the Government has failed to come up with a successor to the route development fund, which developed direct air links with Europe, the United States and the middle east, benefiting both tourism and business. My colleague Irene Oldfather has raised concerns about the consequences for Glasgow Prestwick airport and presented a vision of how that airport could be used to promote Scotland overseas. The Government's draft action plan on European engagement claims—the Liberals made much reference to this—that without independence the Government is seriously limited in its ability to represent Scotland's interests in Brussels. However, despite our encouragement, and despite concern from business that the current uncertainty over Scotland's constitutional status ought to be resolved, the Government is curiously reluctant to accelerate its proposals for a referendum on independence. Reference is made in the international framework document to the successes of the financial services and life sciences sectors, but I am unclear as to how the Government intends to address the concerns that those sectors have about skills shortages at many levels—not just at undergraduate or graduate levels—in areas such as IT, science and pharmaceuticals, on which those sectors are crucially dependent. The document has, of course, the mandatory references to the arc of prosperity countries and the Celtic lion—sorry, the celtic lion. I must have my Queen of the South Football Club hat on. However, in his intervention, Jeremy Purvis illustrated the dependence of Iceland on the United States of America and the effect that that has on Iceland's economy. The same is true for Ireland. Indeed, in Ireland, house prices fell by 9 per cent in the year to February 2008 and there is disillusionment with the Euro, a significant slow-down in economic growth and even talk of a slump. The celtic tiger could be forgiven for feeling that it might be becoming an endangered species. Aside from the oft-quoted Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development statistics, there is evidence that Scotland compares well against other countries and has good prospects. The Financial Times group's fDi magazine awards for European cities and regions of the future 2008-09 rates Scotland higher than  any of the arc of prosperity regions overall. It rates Edinburgh as the top European city, Scotland as the second most business-friendly region next to London and Edinburgh as the second-best city for human resources next to London. That is not to suggest that we should be complacent, but it indicates that Scotland appears to be going in the right direction. That is partly due, of course, to Governments at all levels, past and present, but in particular to the business community in its widest sense. There have been references to other questions that require answers. For example, Irene Oldfather raised at the European and External Relations Committee the issue of the attendance of ministers at European Council meetings in the past year, and Helen Eadie raised the issue again in the debate. I could ask ministers what future they envisage for Scottish Development International. The Minister for Europe was unable to explain that to the European and External Relations Committee last week. Perhaps the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism can enlighten us. At a meeting of Co-operation Development Scotland this morning, I was particularly interested to hear that the turnover of the top 300 global co-operative enterprises in 2006-07 was equivalent to that of the world's ninth largest economy. The Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism aspires to increasing the contribution of co-operatives and social enterprises to the Scottish economy to match the contribution of such enterprises in Finland, Switzerland and Sweden. Many members in the chamber share that aspiration. I wonder whether the minister can advise what is being done to try to encourage those big global co-operatives to invest inwardly in Scotland. I am pleased that this Government is taking forward the work of the previous Executive and I am happy to support the focus on sustainable economic growth in Scotland, but that needs to be balanced by a commitment to international development.

I am in my final few seconds. Again, I ask ministers to consider accepting our amendment so that the motion that the Parliament agrees refers both to the international framework and to the commitment to international development that is shared across the Parliament.

I, too, congratulate Mary Mulligan on securing the debate, and the business community of Bathgate on its successful ballot to establish the first of the three business improvement districts that now exist in Scotland. BIDs were enabled under the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006, as Gavin Brown said, and are being piloted in six local authority areas. They are led by local businesses, which decide how the funds that are raised will be used to support the local economy. They are not a substitute for local authority services; rather, they operate through additional partnership arrangements. I hope that Mary Mulligan will keep Parliament apprised of the progress of the Bathgate BID and, as she does, I hope that other Scottish business communities—they do not have to be in town centres, but could be in rural communities—will follow Bathgate's example. I am sure that many business communities will watch the progress of Bathgate and the other two BIDs with great interest.  Although I am happy to congratulate Bathgate and to support the development of BIDs across Scotland, I remind members that many forms of investment can and should be used to regenerate towns and business communities—the Scottish Government seems to have a strategy of placing all responsibility for regeneration of our communities on the business community. The Government is relying on business rates relief and its somewhat tentative continuation of the BIDs programme. However, the scenario in the rest of Scotland is not as positive as it is in Bathgate. I will give some examples from my part of the country. Two weeks ago, Centros Miller Dumfries Ltd told Dumfries and Galloway Council that it intends to pull out of a proposed £50 million joint investment in Dumfries town centre, as a result of concerns that commercial property prices will fall. In the Presiding Officer's constituency of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, it seems that the Stranraer waterfront development is to be abandoned. Although responsibility for that regeneration project has been transferred from Scottish Enterprise to the council, the £5 million that was originally allocated to the project is no longer available and the council will not be able to find the money on its own. Dumfries town centre has been left with empty properties on the High Street, which will discourage tourists from returning, increase the likelihood of locals using out-of-town shopping malls and make it more difficult for the retail businesses that are still based in the town centre to attract customers. Stranraer might get its casino, but there will not be the additional investment that the town needs. Other members have commented on the problems of other town centres in Dumfries and Galloway—somewhat controversially in the case of Lockerbie, which needs a great injection of investment if it is to pick itself up. My plea to ministers is that they should not rely on business rates relief as the sole blunt instrument with which to tackle town centre dereliction. We need public sector investment in infrastructure to create vibrant and lively town centres in which local businesses can flourish. BIDs can contribute and I am sure that they will do so, but they were never intended as a substitute for public sector investment. National support, for example through the creation of a town centre regeneration fund, to enable co-investment with local businesses, is also necessary. I am sorry that the Tories did not feel able to support such an approach during the budget process, but I retain the hope that we can achieve cross-party consensus that such national investment is needed. As Mary Mulligan said, the Scottish Government should play a more strategic role in the regeneration of Scotland's town centres.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether guidance has been issued to local authorities regarding the payment of kinship care allowances. (S3O-2948)

Does the guidance state that kinship carers who previously applied for residency orders on the advice of social services, as was the case for Dumfries and Galloway kinship carers, are to be excluded from kinship care payments?

Will the member give way?

The draft Payments into the Olympic Lottery Distribution Fund etc Order 2007 was approved on 15 January by 357 votes to 9, so the vast majority of Conservative members of Parliament voted for it.

According to Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations statistics, there are 45,000 voluntary organisations in Scotland, 1.2 million people are involved in volunteering, and the sector employs 130,000 paid staff, three quarters of whom are women. The sector's annual income amounted to £3.87 billion in 2007. Its value to Scottish society and the economy cannot be denied. The third sector relies significantly on the public sector for income. In a report that was published in February last year for the previous Executive, half the organisations that were surveyed stated that they relied on public sector contracts for over 80 per cent of their income. Of those contracts, 53 per cent were with local authorities and 23 per cent were with central Government. The historic concordat that the Government is so proud of has changed the mechanism by which funding is allocated to the voluntary sector. In the main, ministers have relinquished responsibility to local authorities and, in doing so, have passed to them the blame for cuts. Labour members warned that there was a danger that if councils were under financial pressures, funding to external organisations would be hit first as local authorities protected their statutory obligations. Funding streams that provide services to vulnerable or disadvantaged individuals may therefore be at risk. The Government said that we are scaremongering, but let us consider some of the evidence so far. In Aberdeen, there has been a £900,000 cut in funding to the Cyrenians, which provides services to the homeless; £650,000 of revenue support has been withdrawn from the Glencraft workshop; and £120,000 a year has been withdrawn from the Richmond Fellowship, which is a mental health charity. However, voluntary sector cuts have not been confined to Aberdeen. In Edinburgh, the withdrawal of financial support from the Workers Educational Association may result in the loss of premises and staff, and consequently of adult education in the city. In the Highlands, Age Concern has lost £86,000 of council funding. In my area—Dumfries and Galloway—£90,000 of the funding of Independent Living Support, which helps people with drug and alcohol dependencies  to sustain tenancies, has been cut, and almost £400,000 has been cut from the Loch Arthur project, which supports people with learning disabilities and runs a successful social enterprise. I understand that, across Scotland, Quarriers is facing cuts this year that total £1.1 million. On 10 January, the First Minister claimed that there were "attempts to scaremonger to vulnerable groups throughout Scotland"— [ Official Report , 10 January 2008; c 4930.]  I am not making such attempts; I am talking about cuts in funding to real organisations that provide real services to real people. On top of such cuts, uncertainty exists about eligibility for new funding streams, such as the fairer Scotland fund, which will flatline at £145 million over the spending review period. That represents a real-terms cut of 8 per cent by 2010-11. Major national charities, such as the Prince's Trust, have expressed concerns about the demands that will be placed on them if they are required to apply to 32 different local authorities instead of to one national fund. There could be worse to come. In the face of the uncertainties that exist about future funding, many councils have, for the time being, rolled forward existing spending commitments, but that approach may be impossible to maintain if funding pressures build further. That is why we will support the Liberal Democrat amendment in the name of Robert Brown, which calls for a review of the operation of the concordat after its first year. The truth is that one year of Scottish National Party Government has, despite that Government's warm words, reduced the voluntary sector's funding and influence. I want to expand on the latter. The previous Scottish Executive worked with the SCVO and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities on a strategic funding review for the third sector, which examined, for example, the implementation of full cost recovery. That principle, whereby third sector organisations are fully reimbursed for provision of services, including overheads, was endorsed by Her Majesty's Treasury in 2002. I ask the ministers what the current status of that review is and what is happening with respect to the previous Executive's commitment to three-year funding for voluntary sector organisations. Voluntary sector organisations cannot survive being put on hold while details of single outcome agreements, the Scottish investment fund and the fairer Scotland fund are being worked out. The consequences of delay for them are redundancies, demoralisation of staff and, ultimately, reduction of services. Will the Government provide transitional funding for organisations that are affected to enable them to  survive until the new funding streams are in place? The Scottish Trades Union Congress has highlighted concerns about the insecurity of third sector employment contracts, lower wages and poorer conditions of employment as organisations compete to secure contracts. The practice of reverse auctions, for example, whereby authorities advertise care package requirements to attract the lowest bidder, encourages undercutting not only of the public sector, but of other third sector organisations. The third sector's voice needs to be heard, and voluntary sector interests must be represented in the single outcome agreement negotiations. How do ministers intend to ensure that voluntary sector organisations have a seat at the community planning table? Our motion urges that the funding that has been removed from Project Scotland be reinstated. Independent assessment found that that funding was worth at least £21.4 million to the Scottish economy, that it was 10 times more effective than the jobseekers scheme in getting young people into sustainable employment, and that it delivered £9 million-worth of benefits to partner organisations. If the Government's amendment indicates a rethink on its position, I welcome that, but I question whether the Government appreciates that the third sector is not only about social enterprise. Social enterprises are valuable and important, but aspects of the voluntary sector are about support and sustaining very vulnerable people—they are not really about enterprise. I am not convinced that the ministers appreciate that. Finally, the previous Executive further extended the exemption from paying water rates for the vast majority of church and village halls from 2006 to 2010. Scottish Labour's response to the Government's consultation on water charges for the next period, from 2010 to 2014, argued for a further extension. I have read the Government's amendment and am absolutely delighted that it has accepted our position. I move, That the Parliament applauds the vital contribution made to society and the economy by the voluntary sector; is concerned that pressures on local authority budgets over the period of the spending review will lead to cuts in support to voluntary sector organisations and inadequate payment for the services that they provide; recognises the role that volunteering can play in personal development and urges ministers to restore funding to Project Scotland, and believes that the exemption from payment of water rates extended by the previous administration to 2010 should be further extended.

Does the First Minister accept that the increase in taxation on spirits that was announced by the Chancellor will increase the price of an average bottle of malt whisky by just over 2 per cent but will increase the price of a cheap bottle of vodka by around 10 per cent? Does the First Minister agree with his Cabinet Secretary for Justice that alcohol taxation should be used to combat binge and underage drinking, to which cheap spirits are a significant contributor?

I disagree slightly with Kenneth Gibson's allegation that the previous Executive did absolutely nothing about our marine environment for about 96 months. I appreciate that he was absent from Parliament for 48 months during the second session, but over the past eight years, we seized the opportunity, set up the advisory group on marine and coastal strategy and held a consultation on the marine national park. It is not the case that the previous Executive took absolutely no action. It is not my intention to argue that ministers in the SNP Government are not travelling in the correct direction: they are, but they could go further and faster in protecting and promoting Scotland's marine environment. Members of all persuasions have expounded eloquently the case for the marine bill. I apologise for being totally parochial in my speech, but I will concentrate on my constituency interests in the Solway Firth, which boats a diverse and important marine environment, as it does an important terrestrial environment. The warm waters of the gulf stream bring into the Solway Firth species that are rarely seen in Scottish waters, such as the sun fish. Basking sharks are also fairly frequent visitors to the area. The extensive mudflats and sandflats are home to famous cockle beds, as they are to a wide variety of wading birds. They act as a refuge for overwintering species such as barnacle geese and hooper swans and are the stopping-off point for other migratory species. The sand dunes support many species that are of botanical interest. The Solway is the only part of Scotland to be home to all native amphibians and reptiles. The waters of the Solway Firth also are home to a wide range of micro algae. I understand that there are 800 species in UK waters, of which the Solway supports 300. It also supports many rarer seaweeds, which may be of less attraction to human visitors, but are important in attracting bird life and other wildlife to the Solway Firth, and therefore to the biodiversity of the area.  Those are some of the reasons for the previous Executive selecting the Solway Firth as a potential candidate for a marine national park. I am disappointed that the present Government appears to have ruled out further consideration of the results of the consultation on the marine park. However, I raised the matter in last month's members' business debate on recreational sea angling and was encouraged to hear the Minister for Environment say in his response to the debate that the matter might be revisited once "robust marine legislation" had been put in place. Mr Rumbles and others suggested that the marine legislation might have to have an aspect of the national park legislation within it, but that is not my understanding. My understanding is that the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000 would cover a marine national park, although there would have to be secondary legislation. I do not think that a marine national park would have to be part of a marine bill. We need to know the Government's timetable for producing robust marine legislation. Thereafter, when will we return to consideration of the previous Executive's consultation on establishing a marine national park? As I said in the debate on sea angling, there is considerable support in Dumfries and Galloway for pursuing consideration of making the Solway Firth a marine national park. Some 12 per cent of organisations that responded to the previous Scottish Executive's consultation favoured the Solway Firth as the preferred location. That is a higher percentage than supported any other proposed designation. Solway Heritage stated in its response to the consultation that a national park could provide a vehicle for bringing together the many different interests in the marine and coastal environment. It could represent the sustainable interests of the Solway as a whole and seek resolution of any conflict between those interests. In the reopening of the cockle fishery in the Solway, we have seen that such conflicts can and do arise. Dumfries and Galloway markets itself as a natural place, and becoming Scotland's first marine national park would help to reinforce the brand. It would be another strand to the region's tourism offer. The Solway Firth is accessible to visitors—be they human, animal or fish—and although many of us would argue fervently for improvements to the region's transport links, the Solway Firth is near enough to the central belt, Northern Ireland and northern England to attract visitors on short breaks and day trips. The national park would raise the region's profile as a tourist destination. There is opposition to the creation of a marine national park in some areas that might in the past have been perceived as the front runners.  However, that should not prevent fair consideration of areas where there is more agreement about the potential of marine national park designation, such as the Solway Firth. Neither I nor the Labour Party wishes to foist a marine national park on an unwilling coastal region. I am not even saying that the Solway Firth must become Scotland's first such park. What I ask is that ministers continue to keep the door open for the establishment of a marine national park on the Solway. Many organisations in Dumfries and Galloway that are concerned with the marine environment believe that the Solway Firth is a serious contender and that the case for its designation should be considered further. My plea to ministers is, first of all, to let us have sight of the promised robust marine legislation. There is an interest in and an appetite for seeing that legislation and progressing it. Thereafter, let us return to consideration of the merits of having a marine national park in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive how the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing's decision to accept the recommendations of the NHS Scotland resource allocation committee will affect the budget of NHS Dumfries and Galloway. (S3O-2733)

Obviously it is a matter of concern that, in the long run, NHS Dumfries and Galloway might lose up to £12 million from its budget as a result of the decision. Is it the case that the cabinet secretary's decision to reverse the closure of various accident and emergency departments and to invest in other health service provision in the central belt will be funded through cuts to the health service that is offered to my constituents and others in rural regions?

History is being rewritten somewhat in this debate. Other members have covered some of this ground, but I would like to recap what happened in the past. Interest in opening the line precedes the creation of this Parliament. In 1999, the then Secretary of State for Scotland, Donald Dewar, and the then Scottish industry minister, Gus Macdonald, launched the first feasibility study into reopening the Waverley line, the results of which were published in February 2000 by Sarah Boyack, who at that time had been Minister for Transport and the Environment for only nine months. The study concluded that a regular passenger service on the line could cover its operating costs. As Alex Johnstone said, on 1 June 2000, the Parliament, which was sitting in Glasgow, debated a motion on the Borders rail link that had been lodged by the Rural Affairs Committee after receiving a petition via the Transport and the Environment Committee. Parliamentary time was  requested because we all felt that the topic was sufficiently important to merit such a debate. I should mention in passing that when Mr Johnstone mentioned members who were history, he looked directly at me—that worried me slightly, as I am one of those who survived against the odds. Parliament unanimously agreed to the motion, which recognised and endorsed "the case for the establishment of a railway linking the Scottish Borders to the national network at Edinburgh and Carlisle and urges the Scottish Executive to consult with the Strategic Rail Authority and others to facilitate its establishment." However, as much as I—and indeed many of us—would love the railway line to go all the way to Carlisle, I must accept that that might have to remain an aspiration. For a start, the track has been built over in some places, which might give rise to difficulties with compulsory purchase. During that debate in 2000, Christine Grahame and Michael Russell vehemently demanded to know when the railway would be built. Eight years later, despite the fact that a minister with responsibility for transport has been in post for 10 months, we are asking the same question. Members have implied that the previous Executive somehow procrastinated. That is not the case: the Waverley railway partnership was formed in summer 2001; technical assessments continued between the end of 2001 and the summer of 2003; and in September 2003 the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill was introduced, which, as Tricia Marwick pointed out, was a private bill, not an Executive bill. That was part of the problem. As the many members who served on bill committees well know, Parliament, not the Executive, had agreed a very cumbersome and long-winded process for dealing with private bills; in the case of the Waverley Railway (Scotland) Bill, that meant that consideration of the general principles was not completed for two years. The bill was eventually passed in June 2006 and received royal assent eight months before the dissolution of the second session of Parliament. As Jeremy Purvis said, the Executive in its last stages made some investment to try to bring the project forward.

I absolutely agree. The non-profit distribution model for funding the project is actually, as Mr Neil would describe it, a  form of PPP. Private contractors make a profit at subcontractor level; the private sector is represented on the board of the contracting organisation; and the funding is borrowed from the financial markets. Argyll and Bute Council, Falkirk Council and Aberdeen City Council have used the same model to fund PFI schools projects, but it is still relatively new and there are some doubts about whether it will deliver as efficiently as conventional PPP in the operational phase. Moreover, organisations such as Unison that dislike PPP have said that the model is another form of PPP that, according to that union, retains "higher borrowing costs", ensures that private profit is taken out of public services at contractor level and results "in the same profiteering and inflexibility inherent in PFI". I do not share Unison's opposition to PPP, but the SNP has been opposed to PPP for years. One might well wonder why the SNP, after all that it has said about PPP in the past, now proposes to fund this project through some version of it. Obviously, one reason is that it is off balance sheet—for the moment. Of course, that might not remain the case. After all these years, why has the SNP performed such a U-turn on the funding of the project?

Does the minister agree that the NPD model is a form of public-private partnership?

The OECD report demonstrates that Scotland's rural areas are performing relatively well. In some cases, they are performing better than the rest of the United Kingdom or the OECD average. For example, although GDP per head remains lower for rural areas than for intermediate and urban areas, the rates of growth in most Scottish rural areas are greater than the OECD average. The report states that the Scottish rural development programme for the period up to 2013 is sound and has clear objectives. I appreciate that the cabinet secretary was good enough to acknowledge the role of the previous Executive in achieving that success. However, as Mr Lochhead  indicated, the report recommends improvements, and it is important that they are considered seriously and that complacency is avoided. For example, the report recommends replacing the traditional sector-based approach with a place-based approach. That change would see the introduction of a local, multisector, bottom-up approach that addresses the linkages between aspects of rural life, such as transportation and service needs, scarcity of land for development and affordable housing, and the need for further diversification. As the MSP for the Dumfries constituency, I am particularly interested in the comments and recommendations that relate to the south of Scotland. The report mentions the challenges that the south of Scotland faces and the need for it to learn from the experience of the Highlands and Islands—an argument that I have propounded for some years, as has the south of Scotland alliance, which the local authorities in the area, together with Scottish Enterprise in Dumfries and Galloway and the Scottish Borders, established to promote the interests of our region and raise its profile. I disagree with Jeremy Purvis on the new Scottish Enterprise structure. Under the new structure, a south of Scotland organisational entity has been created that offers opportunities to the region. I wish the organisation well. However, a change of remit will be required if we are to replicate Highlands and Islands Enterprise in the south of Scotland. That is why the Labour Party included in its manifesto for last year's election a pledge to investigate whether the HIE model could be rolled out to other areas—the obvious area being the south of Scotland. In our amendment, Labour is not being needlessly negative. We have genuine concerns that some of the Government's recent decisions might hold back or reverse the gains that were made under the previous Administration. I will highlight those that affect Dumfries and Galloway. Like other authorities throughout Scotland, Dumfries and Galloway Council is constrained by having to work in a tough financial environment. It agreed to freeze council tax, but—as far as I can see—next year it will receive some £20,000 less in aggregate external finance. If Dumfries and Galloway Council struggles to make efficiency savings, the voluntary sector organisations that make such a crucial difference to rural communities will likely be first hit by any cuts. Indeed, for some organisations, funding through the former supporting people stream has already been cut by up to 50 per cent for 2008-09. As of 1 April, Dumfries and Galloway Council will take on sole responsibility for local regeneration. However, at a meeting with the acting chief executive of Scottish Enterprise Dumfries and  Galloway on Monday, I was advised that no staff will transfer from SEDG to the council to fulfil that function. In this difficult economic climate, Dumfries and Galloway Council will somehow have to find and recruit additional staff to enable it to take up that responsibility. If it does not, local economic regeneration impetus will be lost. Moreover, there are concerns that local authorities are not being offered anything approaching the funding that they will need to undertake some of the regeneration projects that they will inherit. There are real fears about the fate of the Stranraer waterfront project in the Presiding Officer's constituency. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing's recent decision on the review of health board funding is likely to cost NHS Dumfries and Galloway some £12 million per annum as funding for remote and rural locations is diminished. I understand that NHS Borders will fare worse, given that it is likely to lose £18 million. My constituents will suspect that their health services are losing money to fund the Government's decision to reverse accident and emergency closures in the central belt. The week before last, an MSP made an unprecedented verbal attack on the town of Lockerbie, which is in my constituency. I am aware that the dereliction of town centres is a long-standing problem in Scotland, but of course I am upset that Lockerbie was singled out for attention by that MSP. I am also not too happy with the BBC's response on Sunday. In future, Scottish Enterprise will have no role in helping to regenerate town centres. I ask the Government to reconsider its approach to establishing a town centre regeneration fund that would lever in private investment to towns such as Lockerbie, Annan and Dumfries. I am sure that we will return to the subject. I hope that the Government will consider that proposal.

I congratulate John Scott on his motion and the interesting presentation that he organised for lunch time today. Everyone who took part found it very informative. Approximately 50,000 visitors to Scotland take part in sea angling, bringing something like £150 million to the Scottish economy, 30 per cent of which goes to the south of Scotland and Dumfries and Galloway. It is an important industry that provides tourism income outwith the normal season—28 per cent of sea anglers who come to Scotland to participate in recreational sea angling do so at least three times a year. Some time ago, VisitScotland undertook a survey of the hurdles that hold back the growth of sea angling. The main issues were cost, variations in accommodation and boat hiring opportunities and, most important, the quality and quantity of the fish available. That was probably the most difficult and most serious problem to address. If we do not address those issues, Scotland could continue to lose as much as £20 million per year through losing opportunities to host championships and other competitions. The greatest concern is the loss of fish stocks, which is a problem that cannot be rectified easily. We must strike a balance between recreational and commercial fisheries. It might be have to be different in different parts of Scotland. I was surprised to hear that the langoustine industry is reckoned to be discarding 15 million fish a year. It discarded 250 jobs in my area last year. I might have less sympathy for that industry than I had, but it is important to realise how the different industries affect each other. A balance must be struck between the economic needs of different industries. The importance of recreational sea angling to the small community of Drummore in your constituency, Presiding Officer, was described in the DVD that was shown at Mr Scott's presentation today. I believe that 500 people live there—you may put me right on that. The tourism income that comes from recreational sea angling supports a small, remote, rural community that might otherwise struggle to exist. DEFRA has issued a draft strategy that contains a number of actions through which recreational sea angling could be promoted. The proposals under consultation include consideration of species that can be fished for recreational purposes only, the designation of fisheries for recreation-only use, the introduction of a sea angling licence that would bring in income and help to regulate the activity, the development of a code of conduct that would promote best practice,  and the development of management bodies. The Scottish Sea Angling Conservation Network has suggested that angling centres should be promoted to conserve the sport. Does the Scottish Government have any plans to undertake a similar exercise in Scotland? We do not want to lag behind the rest of the United Kingdom. I was disappointed by the Scottish Government's decision to shelve proposals for a marine national park. I realise that the idea was not popular in other areas of Scotland but, as I am sure you will confirm, Presiding Officer, it was popular in the Solway area. I hope that the minister will reconsider, particularly in view of the interest in the Solway area and the possibility that a marine national park would help to sustain and encourage biodiversity in the firth. The forthcoming marine bill, which we are all looking forward to, must enable ministers to take rapid action when this important contribution to the economy in Scotland's remote and rural communities comes under threat. I know that much of the primary legislation will be enabling legislation, but I hope that when serious issues arise in certain parts of the country, ministers will have powers to take action, for example to impose the kind of conservation area that has now been imposed in Kenny Gibson's constituency. I understand from what Mr Gibson has said that achieving that has taken a long time. I hope that the forthcoming bill will address such matters.

As Jim Hume said, the responsibility for economic development in the south of Scotland currently rests with the enterprise network. Can the minister tell us what organisation will be—in eight weeks' time—the public sector partner in Katalyst Projects, which is the delivery vehicle that was formed to progress the economic regeneration of the Gretna-Lockerbie-Annan corridor? Will it be Dumfries and Galloway Council or the new south of Scotland regional panel?

I am delighted to speak in this debate on forestry, because the industry is so important to the economy of the south of Scotland, particularly that of Dumfries and Galloway. Forty per cent of Scottish forestry capacity is in the south of Scotland, and 60 per cent of those businesses are located in Dumfries and Galloway. Many of them are small businesses, employing fewer than five people, but they offer vital employment in rural areas. One of the challenges to forestry has always been how to add value to the felling and logging of trees. When I was first elected to the Scottish Parliament in 1999, the Steven's Croft site next to the M74 near Lockerbie was something of an embarrassment to the local enterprise company, which had invested heavily in it—from memory, I think that it invested about £1 million. The expectation had been that there would be a multimillion-pound development by the Austrian multinational firm Kronospan but, unfortunately, Kronospan shelved the plans. At that time, the investment was perceived as a terrible waste of public money, and the local enterprise company was the butt of many sarcastic floats at the local galas. Perhaps there is a lesson there about the public sector being prepared to take risks: eight years, on, Steven's Croft is perceived as being a great asset to the area. It has become established as the site of a number of forestry-based industries. Admittedly, there have been highs and lows in the narratives of the firms that have located there. There was a loss of jobs last October, when Forest Garden decided to consolidate its production nearer its market. However, a month or so later, there was an announcement of a further investment of £20 million by James Jones & Sons for sawmills on its site. David Stewart has referred to the James Jones investment in Inverness. Steven's Croft is now the site of the UK's largest biomass plant, I think. It came into production in the autumn. Totally by serendipity, I visited it a week past Monday—I was unaware at the time that this debate was to take place. E.ON's 44MW plant can supply energy to about 70,000 homes, and that is displacing about 140 tonnes of greenhouse gases. Including the supply chain, it will contribute about £12 million per annum to the local economy. It uses a mixture of fuels, including by-products from the sawmills on site. It uses logs that are the wrong size for further production, as well as branches. Increasingly, it uses short-rotation willow coppice, which is beginning to be grown locally. About 20 per cent of its fuel is recycled waste wood. It is all produced by the firm AW Jenkinson, which is in charge of  commissioning the various products to fuel the plant. There has been criticism of the plant over the failure to recycle the heat that is generated. I should say in defence of the plant that its efficiency is about 33 per cent, which compares very favourably with the efficiencies of coal-fired and oil-fired power stations. That does not mean that improvements cannot be made but, to an extent, the criticism has been unfair. The biomass market encourages the management of neglected woodlands, and willow coppice offers diversification opportunities for local farmers, and also employment opportunities. Everybody is aware of my position on a balanced energy policy—indeed, I believe that nuclear power has to be part of that. One of the good things about biomass is that it contributes towards base-load capacity, which addresses one of our concerns about other renewable energy sources. The First Minister will be officially opening the plant in March, and I urge him to take advantage of the opportunity to climb up the outside of the plant. I do not say that out of any vicious intent; there is a very good view of the surrounding countryside from there. Commercial forestry is contributing to the local economy in other ways. There has been reference to mountain biking. The 7stanes mountain biking trail through the Borders and Dumfries and Galloway is now well known, and it was awarded global superstar status by the International Mountain Bike Association in 2006. By the end of this year, the estimated annual number of visitors to 7stanes is expected to reach about 650,000. The region offers a variety of events ranging from events for novices to major competitions. As a result of the success of the 7stanes, Dumfries will host the world mountain bike conference in September. I believe that that will be the first time that the conference has been held outside Canada, so it is quite a feather in our cap in Dumfries and Galloway. The conference will attract around 400 delegates and is expected to bring £1.3 million into the local economy. Mention has been made of Eskdalemuir, which is also in my constituency. I stress the importance of the timber transport fund and the work that was done with the Eskdalemuir community over quite a long period to address the problems caused by the transport of logs through the village. The fund, which the previous Executive set up, has been extremely successful and I hope that the minister will confirm that such investment will continue in order to alleviate the problems that arise when harvested timber is taken through communities.

In the stage 1 debate on the budget bill, I outlined why the Labour Party did not believe that the budget supported the Scottish Government's stated purpose of promoting sustainable growth in the Scottish economy. I will reiterate some of those concerns this afternoon. Despite the apparent priority given to the economy, the Government's budget proposes a real terms decrease of 3 per cent in enterprise, energy and tourism funding in the coming year, and we know from the spending review that worse is to follow in 2009-10.  The Government's economic strategy sets out five strategic objectives, but my question to the chamber is whether those objectives have actually influenced the budget's direction. One objective, for example, is to make Scotland smarter by increasing "skills levels ... and better" channelling "the outputs of our universities and colleges into sustainable wealth creation". However, the budget contains no investment in skills or higher education equivalent to that proposed south of the border. We face the threat of other parts of the United Kingdom becoming smarter faster than we can. As Richard Baker has previously pointed out, the £10 million being taken out of this year's end-year flexibility will not address the issues faced by Scottish universities. In its economic strategy, the Government maintains that it wishes to "make Scotland a more attractive place to live, work and invest". However, the budget proposes a real-terms decrease in investment in affordable housing this year. We see no real investment to regenerate Scotland's town centres. Welcome though the Government's intention might be to proceed with the former Executive's plans for business improvement districts, seedcorn funding of £15,000 is in no way comparable to Labour's manifesto commitment to establish a £50 million town centre turnaround or even my more modest suggestion of a £20 million fund, which I proposed to the Finance Committee as an amendment and which, oddly enough, was not supported by the Conservatives. A more fundamental question raised by the budget relates to the very purpose of sustainable economic growth. Indeed, is this where the real dividing lines lie? For members on the Labour benches, the purpose of a successful Scottish economy is to benefit our people. Success should be shared and denied to none. If citizens are denied the opportunity to participate in that success through deprivation, ill health, ill fortune or lack of role models in employment and training, we believe that resource should be focused to remove barriers and allow potential to be fulfilled. We are prepared to target more at those who have less. In contrast, the key promise delivered by this Con-Nat tax-cutting budget is that more will be targeted at those who already have more. After all, the more council tax that people pay, the more they will benefit from a council tax freeze. People on the lowest two income deciles will not benefit, as Professor Bell pointed out in his advice to the Finance Committee. I do not deny that Glasgow  City Council or any other council has the right to make such a decision, but I object to the cabinet secretary using £70 million to force councils to make that decision, regardless of whether it is appropriate. Cuts in business rates will be welcomed by those businesses that benefit from them—the rates on my constituency office will be reduced—but small businesses that operate from domestic premises, of which there are many in rural Scotland, in tourism and other sectors, will not benefit from them. The purpose of the budget is to ensure that the SNP Government delivers on one of its manifesto promises. I fear that the budget will deliver cuts in the services that are provided by councils across Scotland. Last night, the First Minister spat out his dummy and threatened to resign if we did not do as he wished. Of course, Mr Salmond has previous as a quitter. All that he has done is confirm his lack of ability to build consensus across the Parliament. Despite his fine words when he accepted the position of First Minister, he is not prepared to build consensus with the Liberals or the Labour Party. He is interested only in consensus with the Tories, the Greens and Mrs MacDonald. The Government's economic strategy makes many references to what it describes as the "Arc of Prosperity" countries, which have very different approaches to taxation and public services. The budget clearly signals that this Administration aspires to the low taxation, poor public services Irish model. Mr Salmond will not have to rush back to his bolthole in Westminster, but the real reason why the Tories will support the budget is the right-wing nature of parts of it. Mr Brownlee confirmed that they see it as a Conservative budget. They will take the credit for increasing police numbers—indeed, they are already doing so. The budget is a Conservative budget, in which Mr Swinney is delivering on the Conservative party's manifesto commitments, if not on many of his own party's. I support the amendment in Iain Gray's name. The budget fails in many respects. We need to make progress on the real issues that our people face. We need to improve our skills—if we want a successful Scottish economy, we must continually upskill our population and provide opportunities for our young people. Our amendment asks the Government to look at how that can be done.

In answer to my colleague James Kelly, the First Minister reiterated that the package of measures that he has announced will make a significant contribution of around £25 million to efficiency gains. Can the First Minister quantify how much the Government will save annually by the abolition of the Historic Environment Advisory Council for Scotland, the Scottish Building Standards Advisory Committee, the Scottish Records Advisory Council and the Scottish Industrial Development Advisory Board? Can he reassure Parliament that the changes will not result in a reduction of independent expert advice to ministers?

The Scottish Government's purpose, according to its economic strategy, is to "achieve sustainable economic growth." That aspiration is shared by many of us in the Parliament. The cabinet secretary maintained on "Good Morning Scotland" this morning that the budget was "focused on delivering the Government's purpose". However, the budget fails to demonstrate support for that purpose. That is not just my view. The centre for public policy for regions states in its briefing of 27 November: "The Budget allocations do not appear to back up the Governments commitment to growth". According to page 23 of "The Government Economic Strategy": "The importance of learning and skills as a fundamental driver of growth is firmly established", but, as my colleague Iain Gray has demonstrated, there is no evidence in the budget of investment in the nation's skills. Liz Cameron, the chief executive of Scottish Chambers of Commerce, stated on "Good Morning Scotland" this morning that investment in  infrastructure and in upskilling the current workforce was essential to keep Scottish businesses competitive in the current global economic climate. Where is that investment in the budget? Instead, the budget proposes cuts in the budgets of Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise, even before the funding for the responsibilities that will be transferred to local government and to Skills Development Scotland has been removed. In real terms, the Scottish Enterprise budget will reduce by £66 million and the Highland and Islands Enterprise budget will reduce by £21 million by the last year of the spending review. There is also no clarity about how much local authorities will receive and whether it will be sufficient for their new local economic growth and regeneration responsibilities. In many meetings with representatives of business, the importance of the loss of the route development fund to the Scottish economy has been raised with me. I lodged an amendment to fund a European Union-compliant successor to the fund, which was also recommended by the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee. Despite the policy on page 33 of the economic strategy "To focus investment on making connections across and with Scotland better," the Scottish Government has not been prepared to agree that encouraging direct flights in and out of Scotland merits any investment. I am afraid that the cabinet secretary's obfuscation this afternoon has not made the situation any simpler. The budget offers only one solution for local economic development: cutting business rates for small businesses. Although tax cuts are always popular, there is no guarantee that the money will be reinvested in businesses or local communities. On the other hand, there is widespread agreement regarding the importance to local economies of infrastructure improvements. That is why I put forward for the Finance Committee's consideration an amendment for a £20 million town centre turnaround fund, which I expected to get some cross-party support. John Lamont was quoted in the Berwickshire News of 10 January 2008 calling for the Scottish Government to establish a £20 million town centre regeneration fund. His Westminster colleague, David Mundell, Scotland's sole Conservative member of Parliament, stated in his column, "Commons Chat for Clydesdale", of the same date: "The Scottish Conservatives have stepped up their calls for the Scottish Government to establish a £20m Town Centre Turnaround Fund". The Tory member of the Finance Committee, Derek Brownlee, was calling very quietly indeed,  as not only did he fail to support my amendment to introduce the proposal, but he did not bring forth any alternative proposals. All that the Tories could come forward with were two wee cowering, timorous amendments—so meek that people could not object to them. They asked the cabinet secretary, if he happened to find some more money in his sporran, to perhaps recruit some more police officers and maybe accelerate the small business rates relief scheme. Mr Swinney, who is not in the chamber at the moment, and his colleagues did not need much to buy the Tories' support. They did not need 30 pieces of silver—two pieces of fudge were enough. I am not exercising my right to speak as deputy convener of the Finance Committee, because I do not agree that further tax cuts, in the form of accelerating the small business rates relief scheme, are the priority for stimulating the Scottish economy, and I wished to make that point in the chamber. However, had I realised how partisan the Finance Committee convener's speech was going to be with regard to the committee's report, I might have reconsidered my position. The purpose of the budget is not to promote sustainable economic growth; it is to try to ensure that the Government manages to deliver at least one of its manifesto commitments—freezing council tax. Despite all the fine words about the historic agreement with local authorities and allowing councils to make local decisions on the expenditure of funds that formerly were ring fenced, the Government seeks to force councils to deliver on that one pledge. The cabinet secretary could award each council its share of the £70 million with the expectation that they ought to be able to freeze council tax—those that did not would have to explain themselves to the electorate. However, the Government does not trust councils in that regard; it seeks to penalise any council that does not sign up to that one election pledge. This is not a budget for economic growth. I support the amendment in the name of Iain Gray.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied that its proposals to freeze council tax do not breach any legislation. (S3O-1912)

The cabinet secretary has made much of the historic concordat with councils and of the level of his trust in local authorities. If a local authority decides not to hold council tax at its 2007-08 level in the next financial year, will he confirm that it will not receive its share of the £70 million that the Government has allocated for the council tax freeze? Why will he not allocate the £70 million on the basis that he expects councils to freeze their council tax but gives locally accountable councils the freedom to decide whether to implement the freeze?

Will the minister join me in arguing for early site clearance at Chapelcross, which would not only ensure that the site was available much sooner but retain the expertise that exists in the labour force on the site?

I will follow that, if I can. I am not sure whether I should be a kitten or a donkey but, as an animal lover, I am not too bothered about being either. I assure Mr Swinney that his colleagues on the Finance Committee will not have long to wait to find out about Labour's amendments to the budget proposals. In fact, I feel challenged to lodge even more amendments than I was thinking of lodging, so we can look forward to a long meeting on Tuesday. The consideration of the Scottish budget and spending review has been difficult for all concerned because of the compressed timetable, which I admit is not the fault of anybody in the Parliament, but an inevitable consequence of the election and other factors that delayed the United Kingdom spending review. However, scrutiny by the committees and other interested parties has been hindered further by the lack of detail in the budget, to which our motion refers. As Iain Gray and Derek Brownlee mentioned, members of all parties have asked questions and elicited further information while expressing concerns about the lack of level 3 funding detail and the grant-aided expenditure figures, which were included in previous budget documents. Concerns have also been expressed about the failure to publish real-terms level 2 data. The cabinet secretary provided the Finance Committee with information about several level 3 lines that have been merged, renamed or dropped, and he gave a commitment to make the real-terms level 2 data available through the Scottish Parliament information centre. Further, he maintained in a letter to the committee that the publication of the GAE figures was often misinterpreted, which is why it has not been done. I say to him that the additional information was not requested to be awkward or negative. In the  previous session of Parliament, Finance Committee members of all political parties commented on the difficulty of tracking decisions in the absence of baseline data and when targets were changed. I will not mention anything that is not on the record, but I will mention information that was given on the record to committees by people such as Professor Arthur Midwinter, who at the time was acting as an adviser to the Scottish Police Federation. [ Laughter. ] It is rather offensive to cast aspersions on the intellectual rigour of a person such as Arthur Midwinter because of his political opinions. He is an eminent academic in Scotland, so SNP members should behave a little more courteously towards him. He told the Justice Committee: "One of the great disappointments of the new budget document ... is the reduction in the number of budget lines".—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 27 November 2007; c 375.] He pointed out that two of the budget lines that matter most to the Justice Committee are the GAE line and the police capital grant line, both of which have disappeared, making it difficult for the committee to interpret the figures. I know that the SNP does not particularly like Professor Midwinter, but his concerns were echoed by the Institute for Public Policy Research in its briefing on the Scottish budget of 7 December. The authors noted that the supporting documents made it extremely difficult to assess how the reallocation had affected the 2007-08 baselines of the transferring budget. They also noted that the detail necessary to make an informed judgment through independent scrutiny was largely missing. I know that the cabinet secretary is proud of the concordat, but there is confusion about what it will mean. The cabinet secretary seeks to purchase a council tax freeze for the sum of £70 million, yet Councillor Pat Watters, the president of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, advised the Finance Committee on 4 December that it was not in the gift of Government to say that there would be a council tax freeze. I understand that COSLA is now seeking legal advice on whether the Government is able to withhold from local authorities that do not freeze council tax their proportion of that £70 million. The following day, Councillor Isabel Hutton advised the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee: "We have not agreed in the concordat to reduce all P1 to P3 class sizes by the end of the specified period."—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 5 December 2007; c 413.]  There was further confusion on the extent to which the Government could ensure the protection of vulnerable people. Pressed by Wendy Alexander on the issue of domestic violence, the First Minister assured Parliament on 29 November that the outcome agreements that he was negotiating with each individual local authority would "have the reduction of domestic violence as the highest priority."— [ Official Report , 29 November 2007; c 3938.]  However, just five days later, Councillor Watters, when answering a question from me on that very issue, told the Finance Committee: "the Government cannot give an assurance on behalf of 32 councils. We are independently elected to look after our communities."—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 4 December 2007; c 189.] The cabinet secretary has appeared confused on how funding for issues such as flood prevention, which previously was ring fenced, will be distributed in the future. Mr Swinney will probably recall answering my question on 10 December. He said: "There will be a number of instances in which allocations will be made on the basis of need. The flood prevention budget line is a good example of that. Work will be done in individual localities. Once that work is complete, money will no longer be needed there, so it can be reallocated to other areas. The issue forms part of the distribution discussions that we have undertaken with local authorities".—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 10 December 2007; c 225.] A few days later, he told Parliament: "funding that was previously earmarked, through local government, for deprivation, victims of domestic violence, mental health, homelessness and supporting people, or for any of the previously ring-fenced grants that are now rolled up, such as for flooding, will still be allocated to the same councils in the same way and according to the same practice as before."— [ Official Report , 13 December 2007; c 4460.]  Even the cabinet secretary is confused about the spending review and how funding is to be allocated. I therefore urge him to work with the Parliament's committees to achieve clarification and to produce a budget that promotes sustainable economic growth and also promotes social justice.

I do not claim to be doing that. Does the cabinet secretary accept that there is an opportunity at the Finance Committee next week for Labour Party amendments to the budget to be debated? Labour Party amendments to the budget will be lodged for that meeting of the Finance Committee.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Not being able to participate in the debate must be one of the disbenefits of holding your office. I congratulate John Lamont on initiating the debate, because the issue is of major concern to my constituents. Border TV had a campaign caravan at the switching on of the Christmas lights in Dumfries. It was mobbed by people who wanted T-shirts and balloons or wanted to take away petitions or postcards to get signed. There is very strong feeling about the issue in my constituency. Indeed, it is reminiscent of the strength of local feeling when the University of Glasgow threatened to withdraw from the Crichton campus. We saw how powerful that was, and I hope that the strength of feeling about Border TV may persuade Michael Grade and Ofcom that the proposals that appear to be on the table are highly unsatisfactory. Let us make no mistake: local media have a greater penetration and are a great deal more trusted than national media. Dumfries and Galloway is fortunate at present: it has excellent local newspapers, three good local radio stations and Border TV's coverage. All tiers of government are well reported, whether the United Kingdom Government, the Scottish Parliament or the local council. That results in a high recognition factor for local politicians; I have lost count of the number of people who have seen me on television and told me that they thought I was taller. Being recognised can be a disbenefit when people approach me at Tesco and so on with various bits of casework, but it means that they know who their local members are, and that  makes our constituents more confident about contacting us about local issues that affect them personally or to express their views on local or national issues. The local media and Border TV provide an excellent service to the democratic process because they make us closer to our constituents and bring our constituents closer to us. My preference, like that of John Lamont, is for the status quo. Cumbria and Carlisle have strong links to—and are important to—my constituency. People in the east of my constituency use medical facilities in Carlisle—they tend to use the hospital in Carlisle rather than the Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary. People from all over the Dumfries area use Carlisle for leisure pursuits—they shop there and they go there to play skittles and to visit the multiplex cinema. The last train back from Carlisle on a Friday night is always very busy with people coming back to Dumfries and Galloway. We have many people who work on both sides of the border. The Scottish Enterprise city region strategy has always been a concern to me as, for Dumfriesshire, our city is on the other side of the border. I do not like the idea of going in with the north of England and having news from Newcastle—I know that we would get an opt-out and that we would still get some Carlisle news, but we would certainly not get as much Dumfries and Galloway news—but nor am I keen on the STV idea, because that would result in our getting just central belt news. If we want to watch central belt news in Dumfries and Galloway, we can watch the BBC. I do not want us to receive only central belt news on both stations. Like John Lamont, I always hoped that digital technology would improve access to local coverage rather than reduce it, but a reduction seems to be happening. Instead of an improved service because of new technologies, we are in danger of losing out. My call to Michael Grade and to Ofcom is to let us keep local news coverage in the south of Scotland, in the Borders, and in Dumfries and Galloway—let us keep our local and much valued news coverage. We should also keep the Solway basin together, because it is an important geographic and economic unit and there are many cultural links across the border.

I ask for clarification from the cabinet secretary. He stated that funding that was previously earmarked through local government for such issues as domestic violence and supporting people will be allocated to councils in the same way. How will the voluntary sector agencies that provide support to vulnerable groups be able to monitor how those funds are being spent? Also, how will the specific grants that were allocated on the basis of bids, such as the strategic waste fund, be allocated in the future?

To ask the First Minister which household income deciles will benefit most from a freeze in council tax at its 2007-08 level. (S3F-334)

I say with respect to the First Minister that my question was about the effect of freezing council tax at its current level. He may be aware of a research paper that was published a week ago by the Finance Committee's independent budget adviser, Professor David Bell of the University of Stirling, on the effect of freezing council tax. Professor Bell advised not  only that those in council tax bands F, G and H would gain most from a freeze in council tax but that the poorest 20 per cent of households would not gain at all from freezing council tax. How does the First Minister reconcile that policy with his Government's objective of making Scotland fairer? Would it not be fairer to use the £70 million that has been allocated to freezing council tax to help Scotland's pensioners instead, for example by discounting their water rates?

I hope that it was not Tricia Marwick who had my minute.

Apparently it was. In his opening speech, Nicol Stephen referred to the situation in Spain. A dozen years or so ago, I had an interesting discussion about national  identity with a friend from Madrid, who said that he was perfectly comfortable with his triple identity as a madrileño, a Spaniard and—most important for him—a supporter of Real Madrid. In the eight years since the advent of the Scottish Parliament, I and—I believe—the majority of the Scottish people are becoming easier with our identity within the UK. Like Annabel Goldie, I have no problem with supporting Scotland at the Commonwealth games and Britain at the Olympic games. I do not believe that patriotism is exclusive. The relationship between Scotland and the rest of the UK is developing and maturing and we need to move away from acting like a jealous younger sibling, perpetually whingeing and complaining that big brother is bullying him. I am sorry to say that Kenny Gibson exemplified that very attitude in his speech. Scotland is better than that; we can have an adult partnership of equals in respect if not in size. In the same way, the relationship between this Parliament and the UK Parliament must also develop and mature, despite the Scottish Government's propensity for picking fights with Westminster. If devolution is growing up, it is appropriate for both partners to review progress. As Pauline McNeill pointed out, since 1999, powers have transferred from Westminster to Holyrood without the need for a referendum or a national conversation. However, today's motion, which is supported by three parties in the chamber, proposes the establishment of a commission to reflect on the experience of devolution. The reason why we have not come forward with a series of proposals is that we expect the commission to consider all the possibilities. However, we must also recognise that any subsequent action must necessarily be a matter for discussion, negotiation and agreement between the partners in the UK. The national conversation, on the other hand, is nothing more than a Trojan horse designed to bring in independence. As England is Scotland's largest trading partner, our relationship with England is integral to the Scottish economy's performance. However, that relationship is not just about the economy but about people. Two million people of Scottish origin reside south of the border, and half a million English people live in Scotland. As I represent a border constituency, it is not surprising that a significant number of my constituents are English—including, indeed, my own favourite Englishman. I believe that, in the SNP's proposed independence referendum, the treatment of those half a million English people living in Scotland and the 2 million Scots living in England would be seriously asymmetrical. For example, much as I  would have liked to, I was unable to vote in the 1979 referendum simply because I was living in Cambridge. However, in a referendum on Scottish independence, my English husband would be able to vote on whether he became a foreigner in his nation of residence, while my Scottish sister, my Scottish aunt and my Scottish second cousin, who all live in England, would be deprived of a vote on their national status. Changes in the relationship between Scotland and England affect both nations and should be discussed and negotiated between them. [ Interruption. ]

If there is ever to be a referendum on ending that partnership—

The member's point of order was not the point that I was making. As an Englishman in Scotland, he will get to vote in a referendum on independence, whereas a Scot who lives in England will not. The history of the nations that make up the UK before and since 1707 is long and complex. It is a history of evolution and devolution. If agreed to, the proposals in this motion will begin the next chapter of the history of both Scotland and the UK.

Many members have used the debate to express their passion for the attractions of their constituencies and of Scotland as a whole. Much as I would like to spend my whole speech talking about the attractions of my Dumfries constituency, I must respond to what other members have said—although I am sure that I will sneak in the odd reference to my constituency. In contemplating how to develop the industry, let us be clear about the challenge that we face from other parts of the world. The United Nations World Tourism Organization estimates that, globally, international tourist arrivals will grow by between 5.6 and 5.7 per cent and that long-term growth will average 4 per cent until 2020. Tourism contributes to the economy of more than 200 countries, which offer wide and varied products, including niche-market leisure, outdoor, cultural and business activities. They use their native cultures and heritage to attract visitors and they provide electronic marketing and booking.

Indeed. That issue has also been raised in Dumfries and Galloway, which, like Mr McArthur's constituency, has a number of smaller operators. The target of a 50 per cent real-terms improvement in tourism by 2015 was set by the industry, as Patricia Ferguson said, and not by the  Government. The target's context is a very competitive international market in which exchange rates are not at the moment acting to our advantage. The tourism framework for change identified key improvements that the Scottish tourism industry will need to make to achieve the target. The industry has to be receptive to consumer trends and it has to be flexible enough in responding to what customers want and to what competitor countries are offering. Of course, the industry also has to provide a very high-quality product. Scotland is expensive, so nothing less than excellence will do—excellence in accommodation, in food and in activities. Staff will have to be trained to a high level. Alasdair Allan was quite charitable towards the lady who offered him a biscuit, but that lady's attitude simply is not good enough. In the tourism sector—as in all areas of the economy—enterprise and innovation must become part of the culture. As my colleague Charlie Gordon showed, we need the infrastructure to get visitors into and around Scotland. Rob Gibson perhaps missed the point of the air route development fund: it was not about flying people from Leeds into Prestwick or Inverness, but about flying visitors from overseas into Scotland directly, so that they did not have to go to Heathrow first before taking a short-hop flight to Scotland, which is environmentally unfriendly.

I am sorry, but I want to make progress. The air route development fund is important environmentally as well as being important economically to the tourism industry. We have to ask a few questions of the Government. Why did the Government not seek an alternative to the air route development fund? I ask the minister to reflect on the important points that were raised by my colleague Dave Stewart on state aid funding. I hope that the Executive will examine those points and, as Charlie Gordon suggested, reconsider the possibility of rolling out the Glasgow model to support flights into Scotland. If a 50 per cent increase in revenue is to be achieved over eight years, how much of an increase in revenue do ministers think will be achieved over the period of the spending review. While Jim Mather was holding seminars, his boss John Swinney was cutting the budget to VisitScotland. Lewis Macdonald referred to his concerns over the marketing budget. VisitScotland's budget is falling in real terms by about 0.5 per cent per annum. As my colleague Patricia Ferguson said, VisitScotland has levered in money—£32 for every £1 invested—so why are we withdrawing funding from an industry that is so  successful at levering in additional funding? Many colleagues referred to the £90 million as if it were an SNP £90 million. The £90 million was already in the previous Executive's budget. We know that the VisitScotland network is to be subjected to yet more change. Gavin Brown was at one point in his speech a little confused between ATBs and TICs, but the current network was established in April 2005 and the legislation was passed last year. There has not been a lot of time. I know that Jim Mather has said that streamlining will help to address problems with overlaps, but realignment is taking place again after a very short time in order to ensure coterminosity with the enterprise networks. I am concerned about the effect of that on the morale of staff, who have already gone through a period of considerable upheaval. I echo some of the comments that were made by island members such as Liam McArthur about the effect of the withdrawal of the VisitScotland network from the islands. The network has specifically marketed the attractions of those parts of the country. Patricia Ferguson referred to skills and training in the tourism sector. With whom will responsibility rest? How will we achieve the necessary improvement in the skills base, so that people will no longer offer a biscuit instead of a bacon roll? Like my colleague Cathy Jamieson, I have concerns about the proximity of the year of homecoming. As she said, it is just a year away. Jim Mather seemed to suggest that we should be phoning our friends to get them to come over here. However, as a member for Dumfries—the place where Robert Burns died and where he wrote some of his greatest works—I would like to see more detail on the budget that will be available for the event and on how the budget will be accessed by local groups who want to use it to bring tourists into Dumfries and Galloway. Dave Stewart referred to the stunning new Eden Court Theatre in Inverness—I would like a stunning new theatre for Dumfries. We have to examine the potential of cultural tourism to enable the regeneration of town centres such as Dumfries town centre. The local council is working on that, but if we had better cultural facilities we would be going some way towards regenerating our culture, our community and our town. A number of members referred to the "Welcome to Scotland" slogan. All I will say is that Gretna has been well ahead for a considerable time. When I read the Conservative amendment, it is no surprise to see the Conservatives and the SNP snuggled up in bed together again. It is a marriage of convenience that will probably last only until the other side of the next general election.

I, too, congratulate Des McNulty in securing the debate today to coincide with this year's science in the Parliament event. Over several years, I was pleased to sponsor the event. I apologise to the organisers that the combination of an unforeseen event and preparation for debates tomorrow mean that I have not as yet been over to Our Dynamic Earth. I will go after the debate. I hope that people do not think that I am going there only for the wine. Des McNulty referred to our esteemed former colleague Bristow Muldoon. In that regard, the Parliament's loss is definitely the Royal Society of Edinburgh's and the Royal Society of Chemistry's gain. Prior to Bristow's becoming the event organiser for this and other events, one Willie Rennie was the science in the Parliament organiser. I have only two grouses with him. Of course, the first is that he took the Dunfermline and West Fife seat from Labour at the recent by-election, although that said, Thomas Docherty will rectify the situation at the next election. My other grouse with Willie Rennie is one that he will recall: at a Labour party conference one year, he persuaded me to take a health check, part of which involved an electric current being run through my arms and into a machine, after which a man told me that I was obese. I did not take that terribly well. In fact, I took it so badly that Willie still recalls the incident. He mentioned it to my colleague Russell Brown after he took his seat in the House of Commons.  I turn to the serious matter of the debate. The challenge of climate change must, and will, be addressed in two ways. First, of course, we must change our behaviour. However, we cannot expect people to go backwards in lifestyle terms. People are used to having energy supplied to their homes, to owning cars and so forth. They will not volunteer to go back to a dark age. Therefore, we need development of new technologies that will enable us to enjoy our lifestyle better, without damaging the planet as we are. We need to develop alternatives to the internal combustion engine. I understand that a lot of work is being done in Japan on fuel-cell cars—we need to be at the forefront of that type of technology, too. We need to develop more forms of low and non-carbon-producing power generation. Renewables, microgeneration and, I believe, new nuclear power generation will play parts. There is international co-operation on developing nuclear fusion power. At one stage, I thought that the curtain had fallen on nuclear fusion, but it could be a future source of power. We need developments in information and communication technology to enable people to work from home, so that they do not produce carbon by travelling to work. I believe that next week in the Sunday newspapers, there will be an article about the possibilities of data storage. One developer is keen on developing data storage facilities in Lockerbie in my constituency.

I am sorry—I have only one minute, otherwise I would. The idea is to link that development in Lockerbie to the development of an internet village, using the excess power from data storage—which would be green energy—to power houses. That is an interesting project. I am not sure whether Mr Mather's colleague Mike Russell has spoken to him about it, but I know that Mike Russell is aware of the project. I realise that the minister cannot comment on the proposal, as it may come to the Government for ministerial approval, but it is an extremely exciting project, not just for Lockerbie, but for Scotland. We need to produce more science graduates and postgraduates. Polly Purvis of ScotlandIS recently highlighted the shortage of computer science undergraduates and postgraduates, which is a significant concern to the information technology sector and other sectors that it services, such as the financial services sector. We need to tackle such shortages in two ways. One is to consider how we can improve science education in school—obviously, early numeracy is essential to that—and the other is to consider how  we can reskill adults. For example, if there are to be fewer jobs in the public sector as a result of decluttering, we must consider how to offer training so that individuals can transfer from the public sector to the private sector, where there are skills shortages.

I will start by clearing up the issue surrounding the answer Rhona Brankin was given last week. In reply to her second question, Mr Ingram stated: "The funding...we will put in place will maintain the existing number of modern apprenticeships."—[ Official Report ,15 November 2007; c 3462.] Rhona Brankin is therefore quite correct to state that not one extra apprenticeship place is being funded. On 22 September 2005, the Scottish Parliament passed the following amended motion: "That the Parliament supports growing the economy as the top priority of the Scottish Executive; believes that economic growth must be sustainable; agrees with the Partnership Agreement commitment to assess economic development policies against their impact on sustainable development indicators; notes that the Framework for Economic Development in Scotland has made sustainable development the principal objective; welcomes the stronger emphasis on sustainability in the refresh of A Smart Successful Scotland; endorses the Executive's determination to drive forward its green jobs strategy, and endorses the Executive's commitment to sustainable development." It sounds familiar. SNP members, including Mr Mather and Mr Swinney, abstained from the vote on that amended motion. It appears that, at that time, they did not agree with the policy direction that it sets out. During the debate, Jim Mather stated that the SNP had "reservations" about the use of GDP as an indicator. He said: "I agree that GDP is not an accurate reflection of performance ... GDP is subject to arbitrary adjustment and poor presentation."— [ Official Report , 22 September 2005; c 19349.]  However, things change in government. The SNP now states that its targets are "to match the GDP growth rate of the small independent EU countries by 2017" and "to raise Scotland's GDP growth rate to the UK level by 2011."

Surely the SNP's not wanting to develop better targets displays a lack of ambition. I am happy that the SNP recognises the importance of sustainable economic growth. I am also happy that the Government agrees with the former Executive that education and skills, addressing health inequalities, reducing the number of people of working age who are economically inactive and investing in infrastructure all contribute to economic growth. Unfortunately, we did not see that belief translated through to the spending review. I am happy that the key sector strategy survived the change of Government and that the Government states that "particular attention" will continue to be given to the creative industries, energy, financial and business services, food and drink, life sciences and tourism. The only thing is that the Government appears to claim that as its policy; it does not acknowledge that it has been happening since 2001. We have two concerns. First, the spending decisions that were announced in last week's spending review do not bear out the Government's stated objectives. As Liam McArthur said, there are real-terms cuts in the budgets that support economic development. Marilyn Livingstone pointed out the toothless nature of the proposed advisory boards in the Scottish Enterprise network and the likelihood that businesses will not want to become engaged in organisations that have no powers. Richard Baker and the Liberal Democrats pointed out the poverty of the university settlement. Let us be quite clear that, in real terms, the settlement is 1 per cent growth per annum for the higher education sector and the further education sector.

No. I am sorry; I have taken an intervention already and it was rather long. At 1 per cent, that growth is considerably less than the amount by which the Scottish block has grown, so the sectors' percentage is reducing. Tavish Scott mentioned the cut to the HIE network of 22 per cent over three years. I agree with him. It is a real-terms cut of some 7.6 per cent per annum. At the same time, Scottish Enterprise will receive a 5.2 per cent cut per annum. That does not suggest that the Government is supporting the mechanisms that support economic growth. John Park drew our attention to the future requirement for construction skills and the need for adult apprenticeships. If we will not get one extra modern apprentice, how will we meet industries' needs in the future? John Park also made an  important point about workers' rights. When the SNP talks about reducing the burden of regulation, it must be clear about what it means. Is it talking about a reduction in workers' rights or consumers' rights, or about making it easier for businesses to comply with legislation? There are two different ways in which to address the matter. Frank McAveety mentioned the cuts to VisitScotland's budget. The second area of concern is the comparisons with the countries in the "arc of prosperity". The SNP uses those comparisons to argue for its true purpose, which is, of course, independence. As David Whitton, Frank McAveety, Jeremy Purvis and others argued, the comparisons are selective and they underplay the performance of the Scottish economy. The statistics that the SNP uses to prove how badly we are doing are dominated by our poor life expectancy. That is an important issue, but it is not the only way of assessing our economy. In other areas, such as education, Scotland performs better than all the arc of prosperity countries other than Finland. Richard Baker referred to the successes of our universities.

I am sorry—I do not have time. Let us consider the performance of Scotland in the UK. It is true that UK long-term growth has exceeded that of Scotland since the 1970s, but the Scottish economy is now growing above its long-term trend and slightly above the UK economy for the second quarter of 2007. Exports in that quarter showed the sharpest increase for nine years, and the Scottish average wage is the highest in the UK outside London and the south of England. The average full-time wage for men and women increased by 50 per cent over the 10 years of the Labour Government. If we continue to grow wages at that rate in the next 10 years, the average household will get an average £10,000 more. I could go on, but I see that my time is running out. Scotland's economy has performed remarkably well considering the upheavals of the past 30 years—the loss of manufacturing, the demise of the mining, steel and shipbuilding industries, and the mass unemployment of the 1980s. Let us look at the successes in Scotland. The financial sector has grown by 60 per cent in six years while the UK's financial sector has grown only by 47 per cent. Let us remember the regeneration of Scottish cities and the opportunities that exist in life sciences and in information and communications technology. I want, finally, to refer to the Tories. Miss Goldie said in the summer that there is no unionist more trenchant or determined than her. Today, Alex Johnstone complained about the lack of  investment to underpin economic growth. It is difficult to understand why the Conservatives find it impossible to support our amendment, which refers to the underpinning of economic growth and the importance of the UK in developing Scotland's economy.

I am becoming increasingly concerned about SNP members' paranoia. However, I am not surprised by the Tories' and the SNP's complicity. I am sure that David Cameron has reminded them of the importance of supporting the SNP Government in Scotland. We have had a number of policy debates since we returned from the summer recess. There have been ministerial statements on cultural policy, the restructuring of the enterprise network, planning and housing—well, maybe not. There have been debates on the skills strategy and on early years. In all cases, ministers could not tell Parliament how policy intentions would be backed up financially, because that was dependent on the spending review.

No, I must make progress. Only yesterday, Linda Fabiani said under questioning: "I will not discuss funding until members have heard Mr Swinney's budget statement next week."— [ Official Report , 7 November 2007; c 3083.]  We have also had dozens of written and oral answers to questions to the Executive that have remained incomplete, pending decisions that are to be announced in the spending review. There have been questions on the freezing of council tax, the savings that are to be made by restructuring the enterprise network, funding for initiatives to tackle antisocial behaviour, support for carers and class-size reductions.

No. I will take an intervention from Mr Russell when he informs me about a ministerial engagement in my constituency—please sit down.

We have also had questions on flood prevention, future funding for Scottish universities, personal care for the elderly, and  funding for housing and community regeneration. We have had questions on the Howat review recommendations and on how many of them will be accepted. We have had many other questions, but we have not been given answers to them, pending the spending review. Nobody is arguing that the fact that the spending review and the Scottish budget have had to be announced later than normal is the fault of this Administration or, indeed, of the previous Administration. I say to Mr Brownlee that I stand by my comments and those of my colleague Tom McCabe that the current budget process is exemplary. However, this time we have lost a component that we would normally have in a spending review year.

Normally, in a spending review year, the Parliament would have undertaken stage 1 of the budget process by this point. That would involve publication of the annual evaluation report in March, which would be considered by the Finance Committee and the subject committees between April and the summer recess. The Executive—or the Government, as it now is—would have submitted a provisional expenditure plan, assessed its progress towards its priorities and submitted views on the future priorities for the coming spending review. Parliament, through its committees, would have had the opportunity to consider ministers' spending priorities and progress across the current spending review, and would have been able to make recommendations for the future spending review. As my colleague Wendy Alexander pointed out, that process has not happened since 2004, because we changed the procedure in years when there was no spending review. The stage 1 process has not been possible this year for several reasons: the delays in the United Kingdom Government's comprehensive spending review, the Scottish parliamentary elections and the change in Government. Consequently, we are asking for some additional debate—that is all. However, according to the people in the SNP, one would think that we were asking for some gross violation of parliamentary procedure that would bring democracy in Scotland crashing down. All we are asking for is a few little debates about areas of policy—that is all. I make no criticisms of ministers; in fact, I welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth's effort to preserve time for the Finance Committee and the subject committees to consider the budget. The proposal for additional debates in Parliament is no  disrespect to any of the committees. If I may speak on behalf of Labour colleagues, I assure ministers that we all intend to be extremely rigorous in our respective areas of budget scrutiny. However, the proposed parliamentary debates would fulfil a different function. Guidance from the Finance Committee to subject committees will be published once the budget documents are published next week. Committees do not have to accept the Finance Committee's recommendations, but we have already agreed to recommend that committees select a particular area of their subject portfolio, examine how it contributes to the Government's spending priorities and put forward any alternative proposals that they want to make. In the absence of stage 1 of the budget process, our proposed parliamentary debates would provide all interested MSPs with the opportunity to scrutinise how the Government selected its priorities within each portfolio and how they contribute to its overall priorities. Much has been said about the tightness of the settlement in the comprehensive spending review. I do not agree that the baseline budget has been increased by only 0.5 per cent or, indeed, that Scotland has been treated any differently from other UK departments. I believe that the real increase is more than three times what the Government claims, but we will have that argument at another time. However, we all knew that the increases would be less than they were in previous spending reviews. We all knew that long before our election manifestos were published. Indeed, there were references to the tightness of the settlement in the Chancellor of the Exchequer's pre-budget statement in 2006, so we all knew what was coming. The SNP made promises in order to achieve power. Now that it is in power, the Parliament is entitled to scrutinise how, and if, the SNP Government is delivering what it promised. If it intends to deliver, the Government should have no fear of our proposed debates.

This time last year, Young's Seafood employed around 250 people at its site in Annan in Dumfries and Galloway. By Christmas this year, there might be only a tenth of that number still in employment with Young's in my constituency. This is a story of the betrayal of a loyal workforce and of a community that has sustained the company in Annan since the 1940s. It is also an example of—to quote Mike Brider of the Transport and General Workers Union section of Unite— "globalisation at its very worst". On 14 November last year, Young's Seafood announced that 120 jobs were to be lost at the Annan site—an announcement that was widely condemned. The company's plans involved the transfer from Annan to Thailand of the process of deshelling langoustine tails, which are required to manufacture scampi—a product that was invented by Young's some 60 years ago. As of February this year, langoustines that have been caught off the west coast of Scotland have been undertaking a nine week, 12,000 mile round trip to Thailand, where their shells have been removed by workers who are reportedly paid 25p an hour. On their return, the tails are breaded, packaged and sold as "Scottish scampi". That announcement, in itself, was a devastating blow to Annan, but Young's was quick to issue assurances to the workers who would remain. According to the company's press release of 14 November 2006, the "re-introduction of hand peeling" was part of a long-term plan to grow the  Scottish langoustine market. Young's director of scampi stated: "we remain committed to Annan and fully expect that our development plans for the Scottish langoustine will result in long-term security for the site and even possible expansion in the future." The company's deputy chief executive officer, Mike Parker, also advised me during a meeting at the beginning of this year that transporting langoustine tails to Thailand was carbon neutral, as there would be savings in water use and refrigeration. Although he advised me that this claim was being validated by the Carbon Trust, I found it to be rather counterintuitive. However, an evaluation that was undertaken by Enviros Ltd stated that possible effects range from a net carbon reduction of 292 tonnes to an increase of 229 tonnes. The Carbon Trust agreed that the methodology that was used by Enviros was sound—but the input data were provided by Young's. Perhaps I am cynical, but we should all have been equally sceptical about some of the other assurances that the company was offering. After a sustained and vigorous but sadly unsuccessful campaign by the T & G, 100 workers were made redundant in February this year. Less than a month later, at 1.30 am on Thursday 8 March, a major fire broke out at the scampi production plant in Annan. Mr Parker, the deputy chief executive officer, issued reassurances that very day. He said: "there is absolutely no question mark over the future of the facility or our Annan employees ... I want to make it absolutely clear to all our staff that their jobs remain secure. Young's is committed to staying in Annan and building a bigger scampi business." However, on 11 October, a mere 32 weeks after those assurances were given, Young's announced a planned restructuring of its United Kingdom operations, with the transfer of 23 jobs in Pewsey and 89 in Annan to Cromer, Fraserburgh and Grimsby. Young's cunning plan is to reduce the workforce in Annan and to retain the site as its "langoustine grading, freezing and coldstore operation." However, one wonders for how long using the Annan site as a big freezer will remain viable. Unlike the previous redundancies, when there was a 90-day consultation period, a consultation period of only 30 days has been offered. The unions have been arguing that that is not enough for workers to consider the option of relocation—which is available because an additional 50 jobs are now available at the site in Grimsby, hence the wording of my motion. However, John Holroyd, the regional organiser for T & G Unite, has advised me that most of the work force are totally scunnered, and have no wish to remain in the employment of Young's at Annan or anywhere else. Who can blame them? To date, three  workers have indicated an interest in relocating to Grimsby—I understand that the company is offering them the financial incentive of the train fare there and a week in a bed and breakfast. I accept that the Scottish Government is not able to force Young's to reverse the decision—it is a commercial decision that has been taken by a commercial company—and we hear frequent complaints from industry and politicians about overregulation of industry. My colleague John Park will expand on that issue. In this case, there has been no protection for Scotland-domiciled workers who are producing a product that is labelled and marketed as being Scottish, and who are working for a company that has its headquarters in the United Kingdom. There is no regulation to protect those workers or to force the company to say that the product is not processed in Scotland. The current minister's predecessor, Allan Wilson, advised me last year that Young's had been taking forward its application for a Scottish Executive Environment and Rural Affairs Department processing grant to develop four deshelling machines for the Annan site, which would produce a better product. Members of Young's management also referred to that in conversation with me last year as part of the alleged potential expansion. Can the minister or his colleagues in the rural development and environment team advise whether that grant was awarded to Young's and if so, what has happened to the four machines that should have been coming to Annan? This is a sorry tale of globalisation and betrayal of a workforce. I do not blame any of my constituents for not wanting to work for the company any longer. I seek the minister's assurance that whatever can be done for the workers who are being made redundant will be done, in order to enable them to reskill and to find alternative employment in the Annandale and Eskdale area.

In 2001, the foot-and-mouth outbreak in Scotland was first detected in Lockerbie, and, thanks to the excellent  work of local agencies, it was restricted mainly to Dumfries and Galloway. During the recent outbreak, Dumfries and Lockerbie agricultural show was one of the first to be affected by the ban on animal movements. I thank the cabinet secretary for his phone call of 4 August, which I took while standing in a queue outside the catacombs in Paris. I was grateful to him for his courtesy in calling me and his recognition that the mere mention of foot-and-mouth disease sends shivers up the spines of people in Dumfries and Galloway. I also welcome what the Scottish Government has announced today. It is not what the NFUS has asked for, but we recognise that it is a step in the right direction, as Sarah Boyack and Peter Peacock said. In 2001 in Scotland alone, 735,000 animals were slaughtered, 644,000 of which were sheep; 187 farms were infected and 1,048 had their animals culled because they were contiguous to or within a 3km radius of an infected farm. The estimated reduction in the Scottish gross domestic product was between £14 million and £30 million, and the net effect on the Scottish economy was £33.5 million. According to the National Audit Office, the estimated cost to central Government of compensation for slaughtered animals was in the region of £334 million. The Scottish Executive provided £30 million out of its reserves for measures to alleviate hardship and to assist with economic restructuring, principally through VisitScotland, the local enterprise companies and local authorities. The 2007 outbreak is therefore very different, with only eight confirmed cases, which is thanks to the lessons that were learned last time. That does not mean to say that it has not caused severe problems to the livestock industry, as others have described cogently, and especially to sheep because of the time of year at which the outbreak occurred. The outbreak has also affected related industries. Workers at the slaughterhouse in Annan in my constituency were laid off or had to endure considerably reduced hours of work.

I am happy to agree. As I hope to mention later, a greater supply of local abattoirs would mean that animals would not be required to be moved around the country to the same extent.  Vaccination has been hotly debated since 2001, but there are certainly arguments in favour of when it should be used. That was highlighted in some of the research that was carried out after the previous outbreak. I was rather surprised to hear Mr John Scott express shock at my suggestion that the Scottish Executive's environment and rural affairs department and the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs should work together. I might have been less surprised if an SNP member had made such a comment, but I was slightly surprised that a Conservative should say that SEERAD and DEFRA should not work together.

Sorry, I have already taken an intervention and I have only two minutes left. In fact, at the time that this spat started, Hilary Benn made it quite clear that the door to the Treasury remained open if he required to seek additional funding. My suggestion is that SEERAD and DEFRA should be prepared to make a case together. If they feel that their budgets have been overstretched as a consequence of providing compensation, they should work on putting a reasoned, argued written case to the Treasury on why they need additional funding.

Sorry, I do not have time. SEERAD and DEFRA might wish to argue that a UK institution, rather than a DEFRA institution, was involved. They might wish to make that case. However, I am really quite surprised that a member of a unionist party should say what John Scott said. I would have thought that unionists would expect people to work together across the devolved Administrations to try to do the best for farmers. I would not have thought that Conservatives would be surprised at my suggestion.

No, I have only one minute left. Like others, I am disappointed that the fact of one of Scotland's important primary industries finding itself in dire straits has been used for political argument. On 16 May, Alex Salmond said: "I commit myself to leadership wholly and exclusively in the Scottish national interest."— [ Official Report , 16 May 2007; c 36.]  I do not believe that it is in the Scottish national interest to use a crisis in the Scottish livestock industry to create a fight over the constitution. We have heard a lot of talk in this Parliament about the new consensual politics. Surely it would have been in the Scottish national interest to have taken  action early in the crisis to build consensus on the need for a compensation scheme by taking into account the various suggestions from the NFUS and by presenting to the UK Treasury a reasoned, properly costed case that had cross-party support from this Parliament. In 2001, the Scottish Executive made strenuous efforts to work with the Scottish Parliament and the Rural Affairs Committee in responding to the effects of the foot-and-mouth crisis. During the period of the epidemic, all parties recognised the need to work together because the crisis was far too serious an issue to be used for political advantage. I am sincerely sorry that the current Scottish Government has not seen the matter in the same light as the Executive did back in 2001.

The Crerar review seems to have engendered a significant outbreak of consensus, not only in the chamber, but among outside commentators. Unison stated that "the recommendations around streamlining processes are welcome" and it welcomed "the move to more self-assessment by providers." The care commission agreed that "the scrutiny landscape in Scotland was more complex than it needed to be" and that the "key recommendations... should result in a process which is easier to understand, reduces duplication and avoids  unnecessary bureaucracy whilst providing the assurance of quality that service users...expect." Audit Scotland was "encouraged that the report acknowledges the important part that audit can play in supporting democratic scrutiny" and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities agreed in particular with "the need to reduce the burden of external scrutiny whilst at the same time making the scrutiny process more relevant to service users." There seems to be general agreement that scrutiny needs to be focused, appropriate, proportionate and service user-centred. The review noted, however, that service scrutiny costs money and that the growth in scrutiny has been accompanied by a growth in the cost of scrutiny, which potentially diverts resources from front-line service delivery. It is therefore important that scrutiny be proportionate and that the cost and benefit of external scrutiny be accurately assessed. Mr Swinney, Mr Mather and Mr Brownlee were all members of the previous session's Finance Committee, which conducted an inquiry into accountability and governance, particularly in relation to commissioners and ombudsmen, and reported to Parliament just over a year ago. Part of the inquiry's remit was to examine the growth in the number of independent regulatory and investigatory bodies, the associated growth in the funds that have been allocated since devolution, and the adequacy of the processes for setting and scrutinising the annual budgets of such bodies. The committee's work was done very much in parallel with the Crerar review. We found that the bodies had increased piecemeal through separate pieces of legislation—as Mr Scott said, not just legislation from the Scottish Parliament—in response to particular situations and pressures. Mr Swinney, Mr Kerr, Mr Scott and Mr Brownlee all mentioned the tendency for people to think, "Something must be done" when difficulties arise. An example, which is mentioned in chapter 9 of the of the Crerar report, is the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator. Those of us who were here in the first session of Parliament will remember that there was not much disagreement about the establishment of OSCR. There was certainly little disagreement in the voluntary and charitable sector that something needed to be done to restore public confidence in it. However, the Crerar report states: "It is questionable whether organisations such as OSCR would have been established if the criteria in our proposed new system had been in place." The previous Finance Committee's report states that  "The Committee remains unclear as to how Non-Ministerial Departments such as OSCR are effectively financially monitored as neither the Executive nor the Parliament is designated with a leading role in scrutinising expenditure." It could well be argued that, in our desire to do something about the charitable sector, we passed legislation that was not in all respects adequate. I agree with Mr Scott that Parliament was, during its first four years, a less mature organisation than it is now, but there are pressures on politicians, particularly when there is a great deal of press attention on particular issues or scandals. Mr Foulkes was right, although there now seems to be nobody in the press gallery.

Unfortunately, I do not have eyes in the back of my head, so I was unable to see that. When there are pressures on politicians, we tend to react by acting, while perhaps reflecting on the consequences only later. Professor Crerar also considered accountability and governance, which is covered in chapter 5 of his report. He notes that "There is no consistent approach to setting up scrutiny bodies and it is not clear why organisations undertaking similar roles have been given different governance arrangements." He also notes that "The complexity of organisational structures is a constraint on a strategic approach to developing and delivering an appropriate scrutiny regime across public services." The Crerar review identified some 43 scrutiny bodies. Rather worryingly, seven new ones were introduced during the mapping exercise. As Mr Scott said, many of those pre-dated the Scottish Parliament, but some 34 of the original 36—before the other seven crept onto the scene—report to Parliament in some way. The previous Finance Committee took evidence from the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care. When asked about sheltered housing as an example, the care commission's chief executive, Jacquie Roberts, listed the organisations that have roles in inspection of sheltered housing: Communities Scotland, the care commission, environmental health officers, the Health and Safety Executive, and possibly the Social Work Inspection Agency. The committee stated that "Bodies with similar roles and responsibilities should be amalgamated wherever possible" and that the pooling of resources should be considered. It also stated that  "direct remit overlaps should be dealt with by removing responsibility from one of the bodies" and that "Where bodies do not have direct overlaps but their roles interrelate ... memoranda of understanding" should be agreed between the organisations. Professor Crerar's suggestions are more detailed and go a lot further than the previous Finance Committee's recommendations, but are probably heading in much the same direction. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth mentioned engagement with Parliament and discussions with the SPCB: I would like to hear more on how that could be progressed. The cabinet secretary will recall that the previous session's Finance Committee's legacy paper suggested that some of the matters could be taken forward in a committee bill. That has not been discussed further by the Finance Committee, but it might be an issue for the cabinet secretary to consider.

I am running out of time, so I suppose that I should not have taken the intervention, but it is an important matter that both the Finance Committee and the Government—depending on the will of Parliament—may wish to take further in due course. That said, there is the small matter of the spending review and the draft budget to keep the Finance Committee occupied before Christmas, but thereafter there may be opportunities to discuss the issue further.

Earlier this month, the Scottish ministers announced their determination of three planning applications for wind turbine developments on which there had been considerable consultation with and comment from local communities and stakeholders. The applications were for Clashindarroch near Huntly, which is in the First Minister's constituency, Calliacher near Aberfeldy, which is in Mr Swinney's constituency, and Harestanes, which is in my constituency. Can the minister explain why the first two applications were turned down whereas permission was given for the Harestanes development to go ahead?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will support local initiatives to address antisocial behaviour in Dumfries and Galloway. (S3O-791)

I thank the minister for that reply and for his written answer to my question S3W-3748, in which he revealed that a total of £3.07 million in core antisocial behaviour funding was allocated between 2004-05 and the current financial year. That funding has financed, among other things, the extremely popular community wardens scheme that originally began in the north-west of Dumfries and Stranraer and has been expanded into other parts of Dumfries and Annan. Does the minister acknowledge the value of the work of community wardens in tackling antisocial behaviour, promoting alternative activities for young people and working with the police to improve safety in local communities? Will the  Scottish Government provide funding after the current financial year to enable that highly acclaimed local initiative to continue?

The First Minister is probably not aware of last night's announcement by Forest Garden of the loss of 70 jobs from its production plant at Steven's Croft in Lockerbie. The jobs will be transferred to sites in England. I am sure that the First Minister will want to join me in supporting the workers who will be affected and their families, and in wishing them well in their search for re-employment and re-skilling, in which they are being supported by Scottish Enterprise Dumfries and Galloway and by Jobcentre Plus. Following yesterday's announcement of the review of the enterprise networks, will the First Minister advise us which agency will be responsible for early identification of companies that might be facing problems; for early engagement with the affected workers; and for co-ordination of skills and training needs in the context of alternative local job opportunities?

The cabinet secretary announced the creation of six regional enterprise operations, but he also stated that existing local offices and staff will remain in place and that some functions will transfer to local authorities. I assume that appropriate resources will accompany those transfers. What sort of efficiency savings does he expect the reforms to yield? If local regeneration projects are to be delivered by local authorities, what is the future of the Gretna-Lockerbie-Annan regeneration project, which received £8 million from Scottish Enterprise and which set up a public-private partnership, Katalyst Projects, with Kilmartin Ltd? Will that transfer, somehow, to Dumfries and Galloway Council? Is so, will that not involve the unravelling of the arrangement between Scottish Enterprise and Kilmartin, or will it become part of the wider south of Scotland regional operation?

Flooding, like fire, must be one of the most frightening things that can invade someone's house. Those of us who are fortunate enough never to have experienced severe flooding can only begin to understand how terrifying the ordeal can be through our contact with constituents who have suffered it. Although the constituency of Dumfries has been spared events of the type witnessed in Hull and the south of England during the so-called summer, residents of Annan, Eaglesfield, Langholm and Eskdalemuir have suffered to differing degrees over that period. As members have said, a variety of factors have contributed, including deforestation, which particularly affects places such as Eskdalemuir; the amount of land on which drainage cannot occur due to house, garden and road building, as Sarah Boyack said; and, of course, climate change, which has produced exceptionally heavy bouts of rain with which drainage systems just cannot cope. Another factor is the piecemeal development of many conurbations, because when new developments are added to existing systems, the connections are not always in the most appropriate places. There is also a need to replace existing infrastructure to increase capacity. John Scott referred to the problem of combined road drains and sewers being unable to cope with heavy rain, resulting in the ingress of flood waters contaminated by sewage. On top of that, there is the problem that local authorities have no control over agricultural land. As members will know, there is a lot of agricultural land in my constituency. Unfortunately, the lack of field drain maintenance can create serious problems for nearby residents.  After flooding, fear is often followed by frustration. There is a family in Eaglesfield—a family with whom the Minister for Environment is familiar, as he has also been involved in their case—who I know will not object to their case being mentioned, as it has been highlighted in the local press. They purchased their home three or four years ago, having been advised that flooding was a one-in-200-year risk. I believe that they have now been flooded three times in 18 months. Prevention measures were taken by Scottish Water and the council, but because of the different responsibilities it took time to work out whose duty it was to do what. Meanwhile, because the flooding was caused by a bout of heavy rainfall that lasted only 15 minutes, the family is living in constant fear.

I absolutely agree. That is one of the reasons why we are all agreed that a flooding bill needs to be introduced. I am pleased that the Scottish Government is progressing down the same route as the previous Executive in that regard. We all agree that such a bill is necessary, because the current situation causes extreme frustration among people who have been flooded, particularly when no agency is able to compel private landowners to face their responsibilities to prevent flooding. In the case that I highlighted, three fields are allowed to flood into neighbouring properties, which is unacceptable. When I inquired into the matter, I was told that the insurance companies would have to pursue the landowner with regard to the damage. That is little consolation to a family who are manning the pumps at 4 o'clock in the morning to try to prevent the water getting into their home again. The planning and environment services committee of Dumfries and Galloway Council agreed only last week to introduce a flood prevention scheme for the Whitesands area of Dumfries, which is an area that is notorious for flooding. Usually, the flooding is caused by high tides coming up the river when the river is swollen by heavy rainfall. The agreed approach is to employ a combination of soft and hard engineering techniques, with a number of flood plains being opened upstream and a barrier system being created in the town centre. The hard engineering side has caused some concern among residents because of the potential visual impact on one of the focal points of the town centre, which is one of the town's greatest assets. Many people are attracted more to flood prevention techniques that involve natural flood plains and riparian woodlands  that collect water in times of overflow and slowly release it back into the river during drier times. River channels need to be improved to allow increased water flow. Over a long period of time, I have had arguments with SEPA and the Scottish ministers—past and present—about the removal of gravel from river beds, which can be done only under a licence that is extremely difficult to get. I understand that the removal of gravel from the River Esk at Hawick was permitted only after the floods to which Christine Grahame referred. In Langholm, there are concerns about the build-up of gravel, but it has been difficult to get a licence to remove it. I do not know whether the soft measures will be enough to address the problems that are caused by the tidal surge on the River Nith. Christine Grahame paid tribute to Dumfries and Galloway Council for its application for funding for Portpatrick, but I have to be a bit critical and point out that it took the council a heck of a long time to produce a scheme for the River Nith that it could present to the Scottish ministers. I understand that much of the funding is now committed and that the chance that the council will get the funding that it requested is substantially reduced. In welcoming the proposals to modernise flooding legislation that is only a few years younger than me, I say to ministers—in a consensual way—that we need to consider the funding. If local authority budgets are to be constrained, the money will have to be provided centrally. Many of us who will be scrutinising the budget and the spending review in a few weeks' time will be interested to find out what sort of funding is being allocated to address the problems that we have all raised.

Will the cabinet secretary commit to funding fully the cost of freezing council tax rates in Dumfries and Galloway? If not, and if Dumfries and Galloway Council feels compelled to increase council tax rates, what will he do?

I could speak about the Crichton for two hours and five minutes, but I promise that I shall not. Back in January 2000, my Westminster colleague, Russell Brown, and I were delighted to accompany Scotland's first First Minister, Donald Dewar, to the inauguration of the Crichton campus in Dumfries. In his speech, Donald Dewar highlighted the opportunities that there would be for higher and further education institutions to work together and the opportunities that there would be on the campus for business and higher education collaboration. It was more than an official engagement for Donald Dewar. He was enthralled by the Crichton campus, as successive ministers have been on their arrival. He was intrigued by the liberal arts undergraduate courses that his alma mater, the University of Glasgow, was delivering there. I recall that his officials became increasingly anxious as they could not prise him away from the campus and feared that he might be late for subsequent engagements. As one of those was a Burns supper, it must have been something pretty special to keep him away from a meal—as all of us who knew Donald well will appreciate. The success of the Crichton experiment took even those who were most closely associated with it by surprise. Even in the early days, there were concerns over the sustainability of its funding. I arranged a meeting between representatives of the University of Glasgow and the University of Paisley in November 2000 with the then Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Wendy Alexander. She took us by surprise by announcing that she was allocating £500,000 to the campus, and the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council awarded the first 150 fully funded places  to the Crichton campus, split between Glasgow and Paisley universities. As a man from Annan, Jim Wallace, who later became Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, also understood the importance for Dumfries and Galloway of having higher and further education opportunities available locally. Several members, including Alasdair Morgan, Alex Fergusson and me, met him to highlight the funding issues that were concerning us all at that time, and Jim Wallace issued a letter of guidance to the funding council—I think in 2004—specifically highlighting the Crichton as an example of good practice. Since the beginning, there has been cross-party unanimity in support of the Crichton. I have just mentioned our meetings with Jim Wallace. Michael Russell might recall that he and I had a meeting about the issues that had been highlighted to us with Roger McClure way back in the first session. As other members have said, the degree of cross-party support for the campus has been exceptional. I should also mention Chris Ballance of the Scottish Green Party and Rosemary Byrne of Solidarity, who were vocal in their support for the campus in session 2.

I am of course happy to endorse those comments. Most of all, however, it was the students who would not let the issue go once they discovered that the University of Glasgow might pull out of the Crichton campus. They demonstrated and petitioned; they undertook letter-writing campaigns; they e-mailed everybody they could think of; they visited the university senate; they went to the court; they went to the funding council; they came to attend the debate at the Parliament on 15 February this year; they marched in the summer from Dumfries to Gilmorehill to impress on Sir Muir Russell the importance of the institution to them. This is their victory more than that of anybody else. For myself, I just felt honoured to play my part. I always believed that a creative solution could be found to keep Glasgow's undergraduate courses in Dumfries. I felt that the university was being premature in withdrawing this year's allocation and that it was not giving the time to create a solution. When the university asked for the sum of £800,000, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council did not actually say no—although it did not say yes either. It suggested the development of an academic strategy. The first draft of that strategy was disappointing, but the partners managed to get back round the table and, with the help of the  Scottish ministers, an innovative solution was found. I have no hesitation in congratulating the cabinet secretary on her work to achieve that. I thank her for her support in the previous session, including during my members' business debate in February. Saying that does not mean that I have changed my view about how Scotland benefits from being in the union, and I still do not see the need for some interminable conversation about the powers of the Parliament, but I will be happy to congratulate ministers when they use the powers of this Parliament to good effect, and I believe that the minister has done so on this occasion. The Labour amendment takes up some residual concerns of staff and students and seeks reassurance. I have read it differently from how the minister has read it. I know that the Government cannot direct the funding council—I was told that often enough earlier this year—but I wanted the Parliament to ask the University of Glasgow to commit for the long term. We have all worked hard for Crichton, so I would like to hear Sir Muir Russell publicly saying on behalf of the university, "Yes, we are staying at the Crichton campus for the long term." We would all like to hear that, as none of us wants to be back here to go through another debate on the matter in three years' time. That is my interpretation of the Labour amendment. The retention of the University of Glasgow was not for me about its being a prestigious and ancient university, but some snobbery has crept in at times, which has rather denigrated the contribution of the University of Paisley and Bell College. I commend Paisley and Bell for their commitment to the Crichton campus. Much of the good news about the amalgamation of those two establishments and their commitment to the four sites at which they are based was overshadowed by the bad news about the University of Glasgow. Perhaps I should declare an interest, as my youngest son is about to become a student at the university of the west of Scotland at Crichton. David Mundell's comments about miracles were mentioned yesterday. It is perhaps not the first time that the shadow Secretary of State for Scotland has made remarks that he later regretted. The funding council and the University of Glasgow underestimated the people of Dumfries and Galloway and our pride in our flagship university campus. We would not roll over and allow it to be diminished. The prospect of reducing the campus created a firestorm that few outside Dumfries and Galloway would have expected. The new academic strategy is a victory for the people and most of all for the staff and students who campaigned tirelessly for the solution. As I said,  we should make it clear to everybody in Dumfries and Galloway that they will not have to go through such a situation in the near future, that the academic institutions are here to stay in Dumfries and that they will expand what they are doing there.

In view of the decision of the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission to refer the conviction of Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed Al Megrahi to the High Court for a second appeal, will the First Minister assure the Parliament that all will be done to uphold the reputation of the Scottish judicial system? Is the First Minister also aware that the Pan Am flight 103 crash is a curse under which my constituents in Lockerbie have lived for almost 19 years and which shows no signs of being lifted? Is he aware that Lockerbie is a pretty Borders town set in the southern uplands, only an hour by train from Glasgow and Edinburgh and linked by the west coast main line and motorway not only to the central belt of Scotland but to London, Birmingham, Bristol and Wales? Will he use his position in this country and overseas to promote the town and community of Lockerbie as more—much more—than just the site of the worst terrorist atrocity on British soil?

The minister is a former member of the Finance Committee, so he will be well aware of the importance that it places on publishing baseline data to allow efficiency savings to be quantified. Can he confirm that the Executive intends to publish baseline budgets, so that Parliament can be assured that the promised minimum 1.5 per cent cash-releasing efficiency savings can be calculated? Can the minister clarify whether all existing PPP arrangements, including those in which preferred bidders have been announced but contracts have not been signed, will be allowed to continue?

I wish to press the minister further. Has the Scottish funding council allocated any additional funding to the University of Glasgow to enable it to continue its undergraduate provision at Crichton? Have any additional fully-funded higher education places been allocated to the Crichton campus? Has the University of Glasgow agreed to revoke its suspension of undergraduate admissions? Bearing in mind the fact that the academic strategy was under development at the end of last year, has any progress been made on the aforementioned issues since the debates in February and March?

In his statement to Parliament on 23 May, the First Minister confirmed that: "It is still the Government's objective to abolish the hated and oppressive council tax."— [ Official Report , 23 May 2007; c 68.]  As we have since heard, it is the intention of the new Executive to replace it with that incredibly  popular tax—income tax. As we know, income tax is so popular that wealthy individuals employ accountants just to ensure that they are not deprived of the pleasure of paying everything that they should be paying. All taxes are disliked. Benjamin Franklin said that the only certainties were death and taxes; very few people welcome either. We have heard arguments about ability to pay. I would say first that 80 per cent of Government finance comes from general taxation and income tax.

I am sorry; I have only four minutes. When we consider a policy for local income tax, we have to ask who will be liable to pay it. In working families, couples are already burdened with mortgage repayments, the expenses of bringing up a family, and possibly a student loan. Those families will be expected to stump up, as will young people who are starting their employment and who are living at home with their parents, saving for a place of their own. We must also consider pensioners who pay income tax because they have savings, or because they have invested in contributing to their pensions. After listening to Mr Swinney, I am not quite sure of the SNP's position, but I think that the tax man will be coming for pensioners too. The arguments against replacing the council tax with a local income tax were well rehearsed during the election campaign. The Executive will find it difficult to get its proposed legislation through this Parliament. A lot will depend on the position of the Greens, who will demonstrate whether or not they have been bought and sold for the price of the convenership of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee. I want to examine the Executive's interim position. As Margo MacDonald said, the Executive has pledged in the short term to freeze council tax. In reply to my written parliamentary question S3W-507—and I apologise if reading that number out makes me sound a bit like Stewart Stevenson in a previous life—Mr Swinney said that the Executive intended to freeze council tax at this year's level. However, in reply to S3W-508, he was unable to say how much additional resource would be made available to Dumfries and Galloway Council to enable it to freeze council tax. I should perhaps warn Mr Swinney that Dumfries and Galloway Council is already arguing that, to meet financial pressures, it needs an additional £3.8 million next year and a further £3.5 million in the year after that. As did the Conservatives, I ask whether it is better to use resources to freeze  council tax and make everyone a wee bit happier, or whether it would be better to use funds to target council tax relief at those who have the most difficulty in paying the tax. In 2003, a report from Age Concern estimated that there were 565,000 pensioner households throughout Scotland, of which almost 60 per cent were single-pensioner households. I cannot go through all the arguments in one minute, but I estimate that, if we were to freeze council tax, it would cost something like £45 million in the first year, rising to something like £91 million in 2009-10. However, £91 million would more than cover the cost of halving water rates for pensioner households in that year. So, simply by redirecting the resource that would be used to freeze council tax, we would be able to offer pensioners a reduction by half in their water rates in two years' time. I have also done the calculation on the Tories' proposals and I came out with £230 million, so I agree with them on that. It would be cheaper to consider our proposals in the short term and I urge the Executive to do so.

I congratulate the ministerial team. To ask the Scottish Executive how it will support the regeneration of town centres in the Dumfries constituency. (S3O-146)

I recognise that the small business rates relief scheme has helped many small businesses—that is one of the reasons why the Labour Party proposed its extension in its election manifesto. Nevertheless, does the minister acknowledge that the extension of the scheme will not tackle the problem of the derelict buildings that blight many town centres, including that of Dumfries? Will the Executive consider proposals to enable local communities and businesses to work together to improve the physical environment of town and village centres?

Three national newspapers have recently carried articles indicating that the First Minister supports a deep coal mine at Canonbie, in my constituency. Have the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism or the First Minister discussed that proposal with the chief executive of Scottish Coal? I have, and I understand that, although samples were taken a couple of years ago, Scottish Coal has not yet undertaken core prospecting, still less a pre-application consultation, which would be required before any planning application could be considered. Is the announcement of the First Minister's predetermined support for a deep coal mine at Canonbie not therefore somewhat premature? Is that an example of spin designed to prevent the Executive from having to answer the hard questions about where base-load capacity will come from when the existing nuclear power stations are decommissioned?

I, too, congratulate Richard Lochhead and Michael Russell on their appointments to their new posts. Like other members, I thought that we would have a wide-ranging subject debate on rural development; I did not realise that the debate would be a Trojan horse for an Executive announcement on the SRDP. I intend to continue in the same vein as many colleagues and consider particular issues. How we can maintain sustainable and vibrant rural communities is an extremely important issue for many rural industries in the south of Scotland, such as farming, forestry and tourism. Peter Peacock referred to the problems of the Highlands and Islands 40 years ago. Unfortunately, rural areas in the south of Scotland, such as Dumfries and Galloway, still have similar problems. We are still struggling with a number of challenges. We still have a declining population, an older demographic profile and difficulties with retaining indigenous young people and attracting other younger people to live and work in the region. Sometimes, we have difficulties with recruiting people with particular skills or from particular professions; we have problems with filling vacancies in teaching, social work and certain health professions. However, rather than simply complain about the Highlands and Islands getting everything, as people in the south of Scotland sometimes do, I want to learn from what has happened there and find out how we can apply lessons in the south of Scotland to build up our rural communities. I want to concentrate on thriving rural communities, which is the fifth key outcome to be identified in the Scottish Executive rural development programme. It is not clear how thriving rural communities are to be achieved through the SRDP, but several factors can, of course, contribute. Towns and villages are central to the success of the economy of all rural areas. The role of cities as  dynamos that drive the economies of their surrounding regions has been widely recognised; indeed, their role was part of Scottish Enterprise's city regions strategy. However, we must recognise that, on a smaller scale, county towns such as Dumfries and smaller towns and villages drive their local economies and that any strategy that is aimed at promoting sustainable rural development must promote sustainable towns and villages in rural areas. That is why the regeneration of rural towns and villages is extremely important. We need a strategy that assists and empowers communities to regenerate town and village centres. In a debate last week, I referred to Labour's manifesto proposal that the Scottish Executive establish town centre trusts that will bring together national agencies and local interests, and will have powers of compulsory purchase and be able to set up business improvement districts. I also referred to the proposal to set up a town centre turnaround fund to help to finance schemes that the trusts propose. I urge the Executive to consider those proposals because, other than extending the previous Executive's small business rates relief scheme, the current Administration seems to have no proposals to help communities to participate in the renovation of their towns and villages. Other parties have made proposals for regenerating town centres. We must have a debate about how that should be done. I do not think that there will be any problem with achieving consensus and getting agreement from the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment on the second issue. To help young people to stay in rural communities and bring others into them, there must be access to further and higher education opportunities, not just for the young, but for older people who wish to refresh their skills or develop new skills. That is why the Crichton campus in Dumfries has been a trail-blazer. As well as celebrating the university of the west of Scotland's commitment to expanding its provision in Dumfries and welcoming the relocation of Dumfries and Galloway College to a new building on the same site, we must persevere with trying to change the University of Glasgow's decision to suspend its intake of undergraduates. The commitment to the liberal arts course must be maintained. Jim Hume has lodged a motion on the issue. We must continue to work across the parties to change the mind of the funding council and the University of Glasgow to reverse the decision that has been taken. The Crichton is home to the centre for research into regional development, which is a collaborative three-year project that involves the University of Glasgow and the University of Paisley. It undertakes research into the four key sectors in the south of Scotland—agriculture and food,  tourism and heritage, forestry, and renewable energy. Development of the Crichton, additional full-time undergraduate places and support for research are an essential part of creating thriving rural businesses and communities well beyond the town of Dumfries. Finally, I want to address the availability of affordable private and rented housing in rural areas, which is as pressing an issue in rural communities as it is in urban areas. Around 5,000 people in Dumfries and Galloway are on the housing associations' waiting lists. They are trying to get rented accommodation not only in towns such as Dumfries, but in smaller communities. Affordable housing in our rural and urban communities is essential. The Administration wants to abolish Communities Scotland, but Communities Scotland has been instrumental in providing considerable funding—£13 million was provided to Dumfries and Galloway last year. If the Administration gets rid of Communities Scotland, how does it intend to address the important issue of affordable housing in rural communities?

Having congratulated Mr Swinney yesterday on his appointment as cabinet secretary, I start by congratulating Jim Mather, who is another former member of the Finance Committee, on his appointment to ministerial office. I thank Mr Swinney for putting a little more meat on the bones of the Scottish National Party's approach to government. The First Minister's speech yesterday was a little light on content. His approach seemed to be predicated on the idea that the economy is a good thing and nuclear power is a bad thing. Mr Salmond often reminds audiences that he was a Royal Bank of Scotland economist before he became a politician. After I listened to his musings on power generation yesterday, it was certainly clear to me that he was never a scientist or an engineer. One of Mr Swinney's priorities is to deliver "annual efficiency savings of 1.5% per annum" and to meet "the Treasury target of 5% annual administration savings". That is what it says on the SNP website. Unfortunately, as we know from the Finance Committee, that is easy to say but not always easy to do. Indeed, in last December's budget debate, Mr Swinney expressed strong reservations "about whether it was possible to verify the effectiveness of the efficient government programme because of the lack of established baselines against which the process and the achievements that the Government was claiming could be judged."— [ Official Report , 21 December 2006; c 30798.]  Audit Scotland also agreed that robust baselines were required and the Howat report—published today, I understand—advised ministers that efficiency savings must be more transparent, robustly costed and deducted from the budget baseline. Indeed, the Finance Committee also asked for changes in budget lines to be specifically reported in budget documents. Therefore, let me put this question to Mr Swinney, although I appreciate that it is only one week since his appointment. Is progress being made on those actions that all members of the Finance Committee agreed required to be done if we are to be able to claim that we are making  efficiency savings? Will he say a little more about how he proposes to work towards achieving the necessary robustness of data? At this early stage, can the ministerial team claim that they will be able to achieve those levels of annual savings, given that efficient government and reversing decisions on Edinburgh's airport rail link and tram system and other infrastructure projects were the means by which the SNP was supposed to be able to fulfil its—at times extravagant—promises to the electorate in advance of 3 May? I appreciate that some of those commitments seem to have become slightly less robust since then. Last week, the First Minister said that it was his belief that there had been "too many Government departments, too many executive agencies and too many quangos for a country of 5 million people."— [ Official Report , 17 May 2007; c 46.]  Today, the cabinet secretary said that he wished to "declutter the landscape". It is well worth debating that point, but if the Executive's intention is to bring departments together and to streamline government, how can it do that without any compulsory redundancies? Is slimming down government just about bringing people together in a bigger department but with the same number of people? How will that make savings? In particular, what is the new Government's attitude towards the relocation of departments and agencies?

One cannot always be certain that the people who decide to leave are the people who should not be in the organisation. Sometimes departments need to recruit a person with a particular specialism, so they cannot simply say that they can do without a particular post just because the post holder happens to have retired or moved on. What is the ministerial team's view on the relocation of departments? As we know, it was the Parliament's first First Minister who stated that the Executive should be "committed to ensuring that government in Scotland is efficient and decentralised, as part of a wider vision of more accessible, open and responsive government."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 15 September 1999; S1W-1558.]  In 2002, progress was made with the small units initiative, which aimed to promote sustainable rural communities by relocating small units of Executive work to more remote and rural communities. How will that initiative sit with the new Executive's aim of bringing departments together? In the last session, the Finance Committee held an inquiry  into relocation. I think that we all agreed that relocation was an important issue. In fact, the report that the committee produced was one of the things that it could be proud of. The then Executive accepted much of it. The First Minister and his colleagues have said that they will accept good ideas from the other parties. I want to venture one good idea. Before and during the election campaign, I sent out thousands of surveys to constituents to ascertain their priorities for the next parliamentary session. In the town of Dumfries, the top priority, even above tackling antisocial behaviour and drugs, was addressing the state of the town centre. The SNP's manifesto made no commitments on town centre regeneration, but the Labour Party's manifesto contained good ideas in that respect, such as the establishment of a town centre turnaround fund. Will the Executive please reflect on establishing town centre trusts with powers of compulsory purchase and the ability to set up business improvement districts, which our manifesto suggested? If the Government is to be consensual and we are to bring ideas to the table for it to contemplate, will it undertake to consider that suggestion in the forthcoming spending review? Yesterday, the First Minister said: "A vibrant, dynamic economy is the beating heart of a successful, confident nation."— [ Official Report , 23 May 2007; c 60.]  A dynamic, vibrant town centre is the beating heart of a successful, confident local economy. I urge the Executive to prioritise town centre regeneration.

I congratulate Mr Swinney on his ministerial appointment. Does he agree that 800 post offices across the UK having an average of only 16 customers a week is unsustainable? At a cost to the taxpayer of £17 a transaction, that is rather an expensive stamp. Instead of yielding to the temptation to use the issue to pick a fight with Westminster, will the new Executive support the UK Government's proposals to deliver postal services in rural areas in more flexible ways, such as the outreach and community postal services that Peter Peacock mentioned? In Clarencefield in my constituency, the post office is in the pub.  As the minister's reply to Peter Peacock's question about financing was rather elliptical, I will ask the question again. Is the Executive prepared to offer financial support for such developments?

rose—

I start by adding to the tributes to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton. Some 30 or so years ago, Lord James was my MP, although I am afraid that I did not vote for him. Whether or not people agree with Lord James's politics, we all agree that he is a gentleman in every sense of the word. As this might be my last speech in the chamber—this session—I hope that members will allow me to be a little self-indulgent and talk about some of the educational successes in Dumfries and Galloway. Unfortunately, Dumfries and Galloway's progress in refurbishing and replacing its schools estate has been slow and, compared with other local authorities, the ride has been rather rocky. In 2002, the Scottish Executive offered Dumfries and Galloway Council £103 million for the refurbishment and replacement of its schools estate. Councillors could not give the ambitious original proposals political approval, because they were too controversial. The council produced a rejigged proposal, which was eventually considered not to offer best value, because it could not attract more than one interested bidder. The council returned to the drawing board and made further proposals for rebuilding 10 schools in the region. Those proposals have been much more successful and councillors will decide on and announce the preferred bidder next week. The final contract is expected to be signed in the summer. Lockerbie academy will be rebuilt and Lockerbie primary school—which burned down some 10 years ago—will be rebuilt on a shared campus with the academy; Moffat all-through school will be  rebuilt; a new Roman Catholic primary school will be built in Dumfries; and the community of Heathhall in Dumfries will have its own primary school for the first time. That community has aspired to that goal for at least 20 years. Some people who now have children of their own had been expected to attend a Heathhall primary school. The construction of that primary school and of the Lockerbie and Moffat schools is planned to start before the end of this year. In addition, because the PPP bid is smaller and because the Executive provided additional capital consent to the council, Troqueer primary school, Cargenbridge primary school and Lincluden primary school in my constituency will be rebuilt with conventional funding. Construction of those schools is also expected to start before the end of this year. The only thing that can go wrong for those schools is the election of an SNP Executive that is committed to cancelling all PPP contracts that have not been signed. That would set the PPP schools in Dumfries and Galloway back to square 1, as alternative funding would have to be sought. In that scenario, how much longer would the community of Heathhall have to wait for its much-wanted primary school? There is other news of progress in Dumfries and Galloway, where the council has embraced the Executive's determination to promote healthy eating in schools. Primary pupils are offered a healthy two-course lunch. Cafe DG, which was launched in September 2006 as part of the Executive's hungry for success programme, offers secondary school pupils a healthy meal with a pre-order facility and express food bars to reduce queueing. That is important, because when the Communities Committee took evidence on the Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Bill, it heard that one factor that puts secondary school pupils off school meals is the length of time for which they must queue. Dumfries and Galloway Council has successfully participated in the Executive's determined to succeed programme and it was one of only four councils to have received supplementary funding when its further bid for £84,000 was awarded in full. That funds the gift of the gabs speaking competition, which started in January. The council's determined to succeed team, which Janice Rough leads, is also using the funding creatively. She has worked closely with partners to prepare a bid to the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority's socioeconomic fund to use the Chapelcross legacy to promote science and arts in schools. Local pupils wrote poems to commemorate the power station's 50 th anniversary and I look forward to attending a presentation by secondary 3 pupils of Lockerbie academy on  research that they have done into what could be located on the Chapelcross site in future. I will hear all about that on Tuesday next week. Further up the age scale, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has allocated £28 million to rebuild Dumfries and Galloway College at the Crichton site. That is one reason why it is disappointing that the University of Glasgow has decided not to fund its intake of new students there this year. One reason to take the college to the Crichton site was to achieve better progression and better interaction between the college and higher education institutions. The college will be larger than it needs to be to provide dining and library facilities, for example, at the Crichton site. I believe that the Crichton campus has a great future and I hope that we will overcome the current difficulties. We need seriously to consider how we provide further and higher education opportunities for people throughout Scotland—in rural areas as well as urban areas. For that reason, I welcome the University of Paisley's recent announcement of its merger with Bell College and of the increase in the number of courses that it will offer at the Crichton site, which will contribute much to my constituents and offer them opportunities to progress further than they could in the past.

Five weeks has elapsed since my members' business debate on the issue, on 15 February, and I am disappointed that the proposed meeting between the Scottish Executive, the Scottish funding council and the University of Glasgow has not yet taken place, as far as I am aware. I have been in regular contact with the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Allan Wilson, during that period and I know that, shortly after that debate, he asked the funding council to organise a meeting and to invite the various parties. I hear the sound of dragging feet. Either the University of Glasgow or the funding council—perhaps both—does not seem to be keen to sit at the table with the Executive to try to resolve the problem. I suspect that they see the fact that the Parliament is about to go into dissolution as an opportunity to kick the matter to the other side of the election, as Alasdair Morgan has suggested.  On Tuesday evening, I was pleased to join students and staff in demonstrating outside Easterbrook Hall, where Sir Muir Russell, the principal of the University of Glasgow, was giving a lecture that was rather ironically entitled "The Future of Higher Education". What a cheek, considering what he is doing to damage higher education in Dumfries and Galloway. The following morning, I was disappointed to hear Sir Muir Russell give an interview to BBC Radio Scotland on the Dumfries and Galloway opt-out in which he seemed to dismiss any reconsideration by the university court of the decision to cancel the September intake at the Crichton. To give him his due, however, he said that the University of Glasgow was participating in the joint academic strategy for the Crichton and that the university might have a future in Dumfries. Staff and students also met Sir Muir Russell on Tuesday afternoon—difficult as that was for them, as the university at the Crichton is now on holiday, which meant that the students could not provide the presence that they might otherwise have had. However, I am sorry to say that, from the reports that I have heard of that meeting, it seems that he was not receptive at all to the points that were put to him by the staff and the students. Since the previous debate on the issue, I have read the minute of the funding council's meeting at which it considered the University of Glasgow's request for 220 additional fully funded places. The funding council considered three options. The first was to accept the bid and to grant the places; the second was to reject the bid; and the third was to try to find a compromise. Contrary to the impression that is being given by the court of the University of Glasgow, the funding council did not reject the bid outright. However, the funding council said that it would be difficult for it to accept the bid because that could set a precedent for other universities. Other universities that had problems might say, "You did it for the University of Glasgow, why can you not do it for us?" The funding council decided on the third way, which was to try to find a compromise through the development of the academic strategy. I believe that a meeting of all stakeholders took place on 6 March, at which the University of Glasgow was represented. It is unfortunate that the University of Glasgow's lack of commitment to the Crichton has overshadowed the statement by the university of the west of Scotland that it intends to increase its commitment to Dumfries and Galloway. That is good news, and I am pleased to say that my youngest son, who is a student, is considering studying at that university. Nevertheless, the university of the west of Scotland cannot substitute for the courses that are offered by the University of Glasgow.  I was pleased to hear in Alasdair Morgan's speech that the party consensus on fighting to keep the University of Glasgow's support for the Crichton has been retained. Mr Michael Russell, who is standing for the SNP in my constituency, issued a press release last week in which he stated that the SNP will make it "absolutely certain that the Glasgow University presence at the Crichton is not lost". The trouble is that he did not go on to explain how. I believe that Mr Salmond said the same thing at a recent meeting in Annan. Is Mr Russell saying that Mr Salmond is going to instruct the funding council to give the University of Glasgow all the money that it has asked for? If so, that would require the amendment of section 9 of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 2005, which introduced a safeguard against ministerial interference in the funding council's decisions to prevent ministers from directing funds towards universities in their constituencies or in marginal constituencies. It is not that easy. In wrapping up—I know that others wish to speak—I yet again make a plea to the University of Glasgow to reconsider its decision. The university is £2 million in profit and the Crichton campus was on course this year to deliver savings in the deficit. Account should be taken of further developments such as the comprehensive spending review and the review of higher education funding. The university does not need to take this decision at this time. It can hold back and see how things develop.

Will the member give way?

To ask the First Minister what action is proposed to reduce the presence of trans fats in Scotland's diet. (S2F-2787)

Is the First Minister aware that evidence from the United States of America indicates that trans fats in the diet increase low-density cholesterol levels and reduce high-density cholesterol levels, thereby increasing the probability of clogged arteries and heart attack?  The UK as a whole consumes less than the recommended maximum of 2 per cent of trans fats, but is he concerned that trans fats are more prevalent in the economy brands and that therefore people on lower incomes may be inadvertently consuming higher levels of trans fats? Will he discuss with the Food Standards Agency the inclusion of trans fats in its traffic light scheme?

Like many others, including members of the Finance Committee and the Education Committee, I came to stage 1 of the bill with significant concerns because of the issues that had been raised, especially by the voluntary sector, and most of all by groups representing the interests of children, such as Children 1 st and Children in Scotland. There was no perceived problem in supporting the bill's improvements on the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003, such as streamlining the vetting and barring system and ensuring its coherence with the legislation that was passed in England and Wales, but there were concerns—as we heard earlier today—about the scope of the bill and the fact that it included statutory duties to share information, which had not been subject to the same degree of consultation as the rest of the bill. There were also concerns about how retrospection would work. Those concerns were not new to the Education Committee, as they had been raised with us in the context of POCSA—as the deputy minister knows from his previous role as convener of the Education Committee. We were aware that it was a difficult issue. The financial memorandum to the bill also suggested that around 20 per cent of the Scottish population might eventually be drawn into the scope of the bill, and there were worries about how small voluntary sector organisations would cope and whether scheme membership would deter people from volunteering. We have found ways of dealing with that. Retrospection will be dealt with in secondary legislation that is subject to the affirmative procedure, which will enable Parliament to judge whether it is appropriate. Provisions on the issuing of ministerial guidance have been included in the  bill, which is crucial in ensuring that all organisations do not become so risk averse and concerned about litigation that they insist on the highest possible level of disclosure for even the most minor interactions with children. The fact that there were only five non-Executive amendments at stage 3 bears testament to ministers' consideration of the issues that were raised by witnesses and the amendments that were lodged by committee members at stage 2. The bill team and the committee should be commended for being able to work well together. That contrasts with what happened in England and Wales, where the legislation was passed without any questions being asked and it was only afterwards that people began to think, "Oh dear, there may be problems with this." On the removal of part 3 of the bill, there is no suggestion that the sharing of information is not crucial. Speaking as someone who represents the constituency in which young Kennedy McFarlane was killed by her mother's partner, which happened because agencies did not share information, I of all people am not going to argue that information sharing is not important. The committee's only real concern was about how the statutory duty would affect groups that offer counselling to survivors of abuse or to children who have been abused. That was one of the main concerns that were brought to us, and it was why we felt that further consultation was necessary. However, the situation ought to be addressed in the next appropriate piece of legislation in the next parliamentary session.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to regenerate town centres. (S2O-12298)

The minister will be aware that one problem in towns such as Dumfries, Annan and Lockerbie in my constituency is empty properties that are owned by absentee landlords. What steps can the Executive take to help and encourage local authorities to purchase compulsorily such properties and return them to productive use?

I, too, welcome amendment 5. One of the concerns that was communicated to the Education Committee during consideration of the bill was the issue of people becoming risk averse, particularly when working with children. We have heard stories about, for example, parents not being allowed to get on to buses to fasten the seatbelts of their disabled children because they had not been disclosure checked. That sort of situation arises where there is confusion over when someone has to be a scheme member or needs to be disclosure checked. Organisations, rather than attracting blame, will tend to err on the side of caution and will seek the maximum level of disclosure to protect themselves. At one point, the bill was described as "a protection of vulnerable organisations bill."— [ Official Report , 17 January 2007; c 31097.]  Without the appropriate guidance, organisations will use the legislation to protect themselves from litigation and blame. It is important that people have appropriate and robust guidance on who needs to be in the scheme and who does not. I welcome the fact that the Executive has lodged amendment 5 at this stage to make it absolutely clear that ministers will produce guidance and that there will be no excuse for such risk-averse behaviour under the new regulations.

I have had a lot of sympathy for many of the points that have been raised by the voluntary sector, but I feel that amendments 36 and 37 are based on concerns about the bill as introduced rather than the bill as amended. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton referred to retrospection being phased in over three years, but we have already passed an amendment today to put that process into regulations that will be considered by Parliament under the affirmative procedure.

I was going to talk about that later. I am considering amendment 36 at the moment. It falls into the trap of treating all voluntary sector organisations as identical. As many members, including Ms Hyslop, have said during the debate, they are not all the same. I therefore prefer the approach in the amendment 14, which will allow the circumstances in which fees are payable to be considered, and allow a more flexible approach to the different types of organisations in the voluntary sector. I want to comment on the idea that increases in fees should come back under the affirmative procedure. Like Ken Macintosh and Iain Smith, I feel that that is a disproportionate response. It is not necessary for every inflationary increase in fees to have to go through the affirmative procedure. Members have referred to future ministers being members of the "flat earth party". I wonder whether the same members feel that future Education Committee members will be devoid of brains, because I am sure that if a negative instrument that proposes a huge increase in fees for the voluntary sector comes before the committee, someone on the committee will notice that and comment on it. The shadow Secretary of State for Scotland has described some of his colleagues as "clueless". Perhaps that is being reflected in concerns about the composition of the future Education Committee. The voluntary sector had serious concerns about how the bill as introduced would affect the sector. Those concerns have been addressed adequately, so amendments 36 and 37 are not necessary. I commend amendment 14 as the appropriate way forward.

In response to Mr Gorrie's comments, I think that he has missed the whole point of the amendments. I am extremely pleased to see amendment 1, as I lodged a similar amendment at stage 2 that I did not press because the Executive agreed to reconsider the matter. The entire reason for lodging the amendments in this group is to allow Parliament to have another look at the issue. In doing that, the Executive is responding to concerns that the voluntary sector raised with both the Finance Committee and the Education  Committee. The reassurance that Mr Gorrie seeks is in the amendment 1. That is the purpose of it. The Finance Committee—of which I was a member at the time—had significant concerns about the costs that might arise if retrospective checking was introduced too early. The concern was not just about the cost to the voluntary sector but about whether the system would be able to cope and whether there might be increased costs on the Executive. Amendment 1 provides all of us with another chance to consider the system that is being introduced. For the subject committee, the amendment reinforces the opportunity—which it would have had anyway—to scrutinise the matter when it considers the regulations. The successor committee to the Finance Committee will have another opportunity to consider the matter because of the powers that that committee has to look at statutory instruments. The committees of the Parliament will be able to reassure themselves about the scheme. The amendment will also allow the voluntary sector, which raised its concerns with us, to be consulted on the implementation of the scheme. For those reasons, I very much welcome the amendment. I also welcome the fact that the regulations will be introduced under the affirmative procedure, so they will require the approval of the full Parliament. The matter will be considered not just by committees but by the full Parliament. I hope that that will reassure the voluntary sector that the Education Committee and the Executive have listened carefully and responded to the sector's concerns.

I hope that the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning used his private meeting with Sir Muir Russell to emphasise the views of all interested parties on the importance of the University of Glasgow's continued presence at the Crichton. I seek an assurance from the minister that the round-table meetings between the Executive, the Scottish funding council and the University of Glasgow will be progressed as soon as possible, as promised during the members' business debate on the subject, and that stakeholders will be kept informed of progress, especially any reversal of the decision by the University of Glasgow to suspend student recruitment this year. Staff and prospective students will need to be apprised as soon as possible of any changes of policy by the university.

I welcome the group of stakeholders who are in the public gallery. They comprise students, staff, the chief executive of Dumfries and Galloway Council, and people from the Crichton Development Company and the Crichton stakeholder group. We have a good representation of people who have a strong view on the future of the Crichton campus. When Dr James Crichton died in 1923, it was his wish that his considerable fortune should be used to create a university in Dumfries. His widow, Elizabeth Crichton, tried valiantly to have his wish fulfilled but, unfortunately, the existing Scottish universities opposed the creation of a rival in the south. Instead, a psychiatric hospital, the Crichton royal, was created. For many years, it won international recognition as a centre of excellence. When the treatment of people with mental health and learning difficulties moved away from institutionalised care, the opportunity arose to make Elizabeth and James Crichton's dreams of a university campus a reality. In fact, one of the ancient universities that had opposed the establishment of a university in Dumfries—the University of Glasgow—spearheaded the new development by signing the first Crichton accord in December 1996. Since then, the Crichton campus has grown into a unique collaboration between higher and further education partners: the University of Glasgow, the University of Paisley, Bell College, the Open University and Dumfries and Galloway College. It has been the topic of several debates and questions in the Parliament.  Each partner brings its own different and expert contribution to the joint venture, and each expands the choices that are available to students at this most beautiful of campuses. Many of those students, of all ages, would not otherwise be able to access a university-level education. The University of Glasgow's contribution to the mix is its liberal arts degree—a concept that was promoted by the former vice-chancellor and principal, Sir Graeme Davies, to provide a broad-based education and develop a wide range of transferable skills that would enable graduates to adapt in a rapidly changing workplace. In 2000, my colleague, Wendy Alexander, who was then the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, allocated 150 fully funded places to the Crichton campus and made available £500,000 of capital for both the University of Glasgow and the University of Paisley. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has, more recently, demonstrated support for the collaboration between higher and further education through the allocation of £30 million to enable Dumfries and Galloway College to relocate at the Crichton campus, allowing the sharing of facilities between institutions and facilitating progression between further and higher education. Sadly, an apparently irreconcilable difference of opinion has arisen between the University of Glasgow and the SFC. In my opinion, both bear some blame for the current impasse. Unlike the University of Paisley and Bell College, which will soon merge to become the university of the west of Scotland, the University of Glasgow does not share its fully funded student places between its different campuses. It sees its operation in Dumfries as additional to Gilmorehill and not part of its core activity. Because the only fully funded places on the Crichton campus account are the 88.4 that are allocated to the University of Glasgow through Wendy Alexander's intervention, the Crichton campus's budget for the University of Glasgow shows a deficit that is calculated to be around £880,000. The SFC argues that it is providing £147 million to the University of Glasgow this year and that it is up to the university to decide how that funding is distributed. It also allocated an additional £900,000 of non-recurring funding to the University of Glasgow last week. Indeed, the University of Glasgow has managed to turn a deficit of £10 million into a surplus of £2 million, yet for some reason the SFC does not seem to value the liberal arts degree that is provided at the Crichton campus. It has said that it does not think that the degree contributes to the local economy, despite the fact that it includes courses in such things as cultural heritage, the environment and tourism—subjects that seem to be particularly appropriate in Dumfries and Galloway.  The SFC has also criticised the course for attracting women returners—or, as they are somewhat patronisingly described on the website, middle-aged ladies. As someone who might be loosely described as a middle-aged lady, I find the phrase offensive. Strangely enough, the SFC is perfectly happy to support very similar courses that are offered at the University of the Highlands and Islands. The Crichton campus can offer much to the delivery of the SFC's aims and objectives as detailed in its 2006 to 2009 corporate plan which, I imagine, was agreed with the Scottish ministers. The aims include working across further and higher education, improving the supply of lifelong learning, enhancing the skills and employability of local people, supplying professional development, and enhancing research contributing to the cultural well-being of Scotland. The Crichton university campus hits all those targets. Provision at the campus also enjoys widespread public support. I have with me two petitions, the first of which, raised by students at Crichton, has gathered more than 2,500 signatures. At lunch time, three students from Dumfries and Galloway presented another petition raised by college students and signed by 400 more people. There is also a petition running in the local press. That demonstrates the strength of feeling in Dumfries and Galloway about the Crichton campus's importance. Sadly, despite all that, the senate of Glasgow University decided yesterday not to admit an intake of new students from Crichton this year, although it has said that it will review the decision in future years, depending on further developments. If there is full withdrawal, the campus will be diminished, student choice will be reduced and the other partners will be financially affected. Courses in, for example, social work, which are part-funded by Dumfries and Galloway Council to address the serious shortage of social workers in the region, will not go ahead this year. Unfortunately, there seems to have been little discussion with the council about what the implications for it might be. Prospective students have already been told that they will have to go somewhere else for their social work training. I say to the minister that we cannot let this happen. The sad fact is that Executive investment in the south of Scotland lags behind that in the Highlands and Islands. According to figures supplied by the Crichton Development Company, compared with the Highlands and Islands we have, per capita, half the number of higher education students, one sixth of the capital investment in higher education, one seventh of the number of fully funded higher education places and one eighth of the recurrent funding. I am not  criticising the Highlands and Islands for having that money; all we in the south of Scotland want is a bit of the action. I ask the minister to help us negotiate a way forward out of this impasse. I have, for example, suggested to the SFC that more fully funded places could be allocated not to Glasgow but to the Crichton site, which could then be offered to Glasgow in return for a commitment to remain in Dumfries. In the longer term, the review of HE funding will, I hope, recompense universities for the additional expense of providing higher education in rural areas. I believe that a solution is possible. My plea to the Scottish Executive is that it helps us to find it. After all, Dumfries and Galloway deserves it. [ Applause. ]

To ask the Scottish Executive how many new schools have been built since May 2003. (S2O-12060)

The minister may be aware that Dumfries and Galloway Council intends to announce the preferred bidder for its public-private partnership schools building programme next month, and that the contract will be signed in the summer. Does the minister share my concern that, if Alex Salmond becomes First Minister in May and pulls the plug on PPP, instead of construction starting in the autumn, plans for new schools in Heathhall, Lockerbie and Moffat in my constituency will have to be shelved?

Is the First Minister aware that the court of the University of Glasgow decided yesterday not to admit any undergraduate students to the Crichton campus in Dumfries in September? Does he recognise and value the particular contribution that Glasgow University makes to the courses on offer to students in Dumfries? Will he do whatever he can to facilitate negotiations between Glasgow University and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council with the aim of enabling Glasgow to retain its presence at Crichton?

As a member of both the Finance Committee and the Education Committee, I approached the bill with a number of significant reservations on the basis of the evidence that the Finance Committee had taken. The Finance Committee was concerned about the number of individuals who seem likely to be captured in the vetting and barring scheme once it becomes fully operational. Although the minister compared the task to looking for a needle in a haystack, we were a bit concerned that the bill  treated all the hay as needles. We also worried about the accuracy of the financial memorandum regarding the costs of implementation, the setting up of the scheme and the costs to the voluntary sector. We asked whether there was sufficient money available to ensure that the scheme could be operated effectively. In addition, we were concerned that individuals such as relatives could be put off helping out at events on a casual basis for fear that the organisation that was being helped would be breaking the law if the individuals were not covered by the scheme. We were also concerned that people would be put off volunteering. As other members have said, the evidence to the Education Committee was contradictory. The statutory sector was extremely enthusiastic about all sections of the bill and urged the committee to proceed with them all. The trade unions—the Educational Institute of Scotland and Unison—were generally in favour, although Unison was a bit worried about provisions that meant that a malicious employer could make an allegation about the behaviour of an employee who had left that could end up being reported to the scheme. Voluntary organisations welcomed the passporting proposals, which would mean that they were no longer required to have multiple disclosures, as under the current system, but they were concerned about the cost and whether volunteers might be deterred. However, they saw the bill as an improvement on POCSA. We must acknowledge that some of the proposals will certainly be a significant improvement on the current situation. The commissioner for children and young people, Children in Scotland and Children 1 st asked us to have the bill withdrawn. They wanted a review of POCSA and believed that the bill was a disproportionate response that would contribute to a risk-averse culture. However, we must acknowledge that those organisations did not consider the situation of vulnerable adults, as Euan Robson said. If a review were undertaken, the vulnerable adults provisions would also be lost. As has been said, the greatest concern was about part 3. That is not because there is not support for sharing information. I say that as somebody who is from Dumfries and Galloway, where a very young girl—three-year-old Kennedy MacFarlane—was able to be murdered by a step-parent because the statutory agencies did not share information. Nobody is against sharing information, but some voluntary organisations are concerned that if they are obliged by law to share information, children and vulnerable adults who have been abused and who wish to disclose that in confidence to those organisations, could be  deterred from doing so. That is why we have asked for that provision to be removed, so that we can consult on the issue. We hope that the provision might be reintroduced, possibly as part of the getting it right for every child proposals. My colleague Marilyn Livingstone might say more on that issue. We would have liked more time, but we are where we are in the parliamentary timetable. I acknowledge that it is important that the vetting and barring system in Scotland is coherent with that south of the border, so that nobody slips through any holes between the systems in the two countries. Guidance that is as strong as we can make it is needed on who should and should not be in the scheme, to prevent the risk-averse behaviour that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton described, whereby a council refuses to allow somebody to fasten their child's seat belt if they do not have enhanced disclosure. That is happening under current legislation, not because of the bill. We need to tighten the position to prevent silly, risk-averse behaviour by councils and other organisations. The voluntary sector is concerned about retrospective checks. Is it possible to introduce them in secondary legislation, to allow Parliament and the committees to have another look at the provisions before they are implemented? That would allow some consultation of the voluntary sector on how and whether that could be handled. I would like ministers to consider that. I agree with other members, including Fiona Hyslop, that we need to consider the risk-averse culture, which involves not just legislation but litigation. We cannot become a society in which children are not allowed to do anything just in case something happens. We will never be able to legislate to remove all risk, particularly as people who wish to harm children and vulnerable adults may use their children or their friends to access children. We cannot prevent everything awful that could ever happen to a child. We do not want to destroy children's quality of life by being so frightened that something might happen to them that they do not have a normal childhood. I would like the Executive to lead on something to counteract that risk-averse culture.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects a decision to be made regarding the location of Scotland's  first coastal and marine national park. (S2O-11639)

The minister will be aware that a meeting with stakeholders was held in Dumfries on Monday. I know that the Solway may not be Scottish Natural Heritage's favoured location for the park, but I seek an assurance that its merits will be carefully considered. At that meeting, Claudia Beamish, the Scottish chair of the Socialist Environment and Resources Association, was advised that some people have raised concerns about the implications of a marine national park. I seek the minister's assurance that, where concerns have been expressed, there will be adequate consultation in order to ensure that those views are taken on board if the Solway is chosen as the location of the park.

The debate has been interesting and lively at times. I was a little surprised by Mark Ballard's desire not to talk about the issue but to have a referendum. An election is coming up on 3 May. If the people of Scotland are desperate to have independence, they can elect the parties that believe in independence.

I am not aware of the people in my party who believe in independence and I have never met an SNP supporter who does not believe in independence. Mark Ballard's comment is slightly strange. The SNP rejects the figures in GERS, which were produced through independent research by professional statisticians and not by Tom McCabe and George Lyon—not that I am trying to imply anything about my esteemed colleagues.

I am sorry; I have already taken one rather long intervention. The methodology for GERS is being improved, because when the methodology has been poor, that has been reflected on. The trouble is that the SNP does not like the story that GERS tells. I am certainly not arguing that GERS is totally accurate. I have often observed that economics is far from being an exact science—it often confuses me in many respects.

No—I am sorry, but I have already taken a long intervention, as I said. The general trend of the fiscal transfers is supported by other academic research. More is spent here than is raised through various forms of taxation not because Scotland is inefficient or because our economy is performing poorly. My colleagues such as Richard Baker and Andrew Arbuckle argued well that the economy is strong and that we have much to show for the eight years of devolution. The fiscal transfer is a result of demography and geography. More than twice as many people live in the small geographical area of greater London than in the whole of Scotland. Wages there are higher, so tax receipts are higher and a higher proportion of people pay tax at the higher rate. A larger number of companies have their head offices in London. Scotland's population is older, partly because Scotland is an attractive place to retire to. I lived and worked in the south of England for several years and I think that people would have to be mad to want to retire there rather than in Dumfries and Galloway, for example. Even an older person who has a good pension and has sold their house down south for a fantastic sum is unlikely to pay tax at the same rate as when they worked. We can add to that the fact that sparsely populated areas require higher expenditure per head of population on services and facilities. Road mileage levels are 54 per cent higher in Scotland than in the UK as a whole and our population is four times more sparse.

No—sorry. As I said, we have an older population, so people are more likely to need medical services, for example. Unfortunately, we have traditionally had a poor health record. The Executive is doing much to tackle that, but we still have the legacy of a poor health record and we still have a higher rate of benefits claims. Given that, it is hardly  surprising that expenditure in Scotland is proportionally higher than that in the UK as a whole and in the south of England, to the tune of £11.2 billion according to the estimates. I will be fair to John Swinney and the SNP and will consider some of the SNP's suggestions. Even if 100 per cent of oil revenues were attributed to Scotland and even if we accepted the arguments of Jim and Margaret Cuthbert—to which John Swinney referred—that £440 million of identifiable expenditure in Scotland is double counted in GERS, the fiscal transfer to Scotland would still be about £5.56 billion. Even if we included John Swinney's alternative £400 million, that would bring the transfer down to just over £5 billion. That is before we consider the matters that Wendy Alexander described, such as the spending commitments that the SNP is making, which would add another £5 billion. The figure still would not really go below £10 billion. We could also include what my colleague Bristow Muldoon talked about—the cost of separation and of establishing all the additional departments. At the point of independence—nobody is saying that the GERS report tells us anything about life in an independent Scotland—that transfer of funds into Scotland from south of the border would have to be catered for.

I am sorry, but I am in my last minute. An independent country could negotiate a borrowing requirement—that is true. At the moment, the UK Government borrows about £44 billion, or 4 per cent of its GDP. However, Alex Salmond would have to negotiate a borrowing requirement for Scotland of around 13 per cent of Scotland's GDP in order to cover the debt. There are those in the Tory ranks who advocate fiscal autonomy. I have not heard from them today, but some, from time to time, have talked about fiscal autonomy in a devolved Scotland and about Scotland spending only what it generates. They would not have the option of a borrowing requirement—they would have to make cuts to raise the £11.2 billion. I am sure that the policies of the fiscal autonomists in both the Tory party and the SNP would be popular with our friends and relatives in England, as they would have an additional £11 billion to spend on their services. In fact, if fiscal autonomy was taken further and applied to the regions within the UK, I am sure that Ken Livingstone and his colleagues in London and the south-east of England would be extremely happy.

I do not intend to shout over Mr Swinney, particularly given that I have done him the favour of taking over his slot in summing up for the committee—on this occasion it is not because I was late. However, I do not mind, as it gives me the opportunity to be the last member to speak in a debate in the chamber in 2006. As my family can confirm, I enjoy getting the last word.

Indeed.  The debate has been an opportunity for many members to trot around the chamber, metaphorically speaking, on various hobby-horses. We heard speeches about efficient government, the Howat review, local government finance and the importance of health spending in Gordon Jackson's constituency. All those topics are of importance and interest. However, in summing up for the committee, I will return to the subject of its stage 2 report on the budget process. In its report, the committee recognises that significant progress has been made with the budget process over the past four years. Indeed, the Executive has taken into account many of the suggestions that the Finance Committee made in previous years. We should recognise the way in which the Executive and the Finance Committee have been able to work together on the process. Ministers themselves may feel that the Finance Committee can sometimes be a rather aggressive forum. However, we have managed to work together and we have seen progress with the budget process. As other members have said, this was a relatively light year, as the UK spending review was put back a year to 2007. As a consequence, the Executive's spending review will also take place in 2007. Given the considerable burden of legislation that the Parliament has had to deal with this year, I for one am quite pleased that the spending review was put back a year, as that will give us a little more time to consider it. In some ways, the timing presents some difficulties—there is an event of some significance in May next year, which may create a certain hiatus in our concentration on the spending review. Mark Ballard, Frank McAveety and others voiced concerns over the presentation of cross-cutting issues and how they are being supported by the various departmental portfolios. That is a difficult matter. I do not think that they are not being presented because the Executive does not want to present them, but it is difficult to drill down into the various departmental budget lines to identify how those issues are being dealt with. The Finance Committee has a number of suggestions to make for SR 2007. For example, we suggest that there should be a clear statement of overall priorities and we want to see a definition of the spending programmes that contribute towards them. We must recognise that some budget lines will of course contribute towards more than one priority. We would also like to see an explanation of how priorities are reflected in portfolio budget lines, although we recognise that some departments—we single out the communities portfolio—are already doing that job fairly well.  As Wendy Alexander and Derek Brownlee mentioned, we highlight the need for the publication of spending review reports on the cross-cutting priorities. Furthermore, we would like completion of the reports on the SR 2002 targets that were replaced in SR 2004. We cannot measure whether they were achieved unless we get the final reports, so it would be useful to have them. We would like reports following spending review 2007 to focus on the changes to proposed budgets in subsequent years, with an explanation of the major changes in the guide accompanying the budget. I know that ministers have pledged to take that on board. Others have referred to subject committee input to the budget process, and to the level of information that committees should discuss with the relevant Executive departments. We know that the Enterprise and Culture Committee already does that. We have to consider the level of information that committees need in order to allow them to make a significant input to the budget process. A more general issue for subject committees came up yesterday during the debate on the accountability of commissioners: the need for subject committees to receive reports from the various commissioners—especially reports on the subjects that most closely relate to the committees' responsibilities. The Finance Committee's legacy paper, to which Derek Brownlee referred, will have to take account of such issues. Committees have legislation to consider and they often have wide-ranging inquiries on issues in which they are passionately interested. It is therefore sometimes difficult for committees to fit in financial scrutiny, and indeed the scrutiny of commissioners. After the election in 2007, there will have to be discussions between the convener of the Finance Committee and the conveners of the subject committees on how such scrutiny can be built into the committees' programmes. Subject committees will also have to look into the level of support that they require—from advisers, for example—to allow them to undertake scrutiny more effectively. Some work will have to be done on that. [ Interruption. ]

I will keep going. Wendy Alexander and George Lyon talked about the need to review GAE figures and local spending levels. The Education Committee has worried about spending on services for children. Obviously, work needs to be done. That work will  have to involve the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and not just the Scottish Executive, because it is COSLA that determines many of the formulae by which various councils receive their budgets. The Finance Committee also feels that equalities information has to improve; we suggest that each department should perform a gender-disaggregated analysis of one quantitative target, and then use that analysis to inform the following spending review. Seeing the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport in the chamber prompted me to think, for example, about general levels of physical activity and about—dare I say it at this time of year?—the need to tackle obesity. Policies may have different effects on men and women, so we need gender-disaggregated information. Members have spoken about the known pressures. Some issues that we raised in our stage 2 report—such as the draw-down from the central unallocated provision and the pressures on local government funding—were addressed in the ministerial statement last week and in George Lyon's contribution today. Andrew Welsh asked whether the funding would be recurrent. I think that I heard the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform say last week that £157 million would be included in further years in the baseline. That deals with many concerns that the Finance Committee has raised in previous years and again this year. The Finance Committee has three main requests for future years: we would like the Executive's priorities to be more obviously reflected in funding decisions; we would like a sharper focus on cross-cutting themes and the budget lines that contribute towards the Executive's objectives; and we would like there to be more direct linking of objectives, budget lines and targets. I will end by thanking Arthur Midwinter—as Wendy Alexander did—for his contribution over the past four years. He has done a tremendous amount of work for us. I would also like to thank the clerks, committee members and committee witnesses, and all my constituents and Alex Fergusson's constituents who came to the meeting of the committee in Dumfries to inform us of their priorities and of the issues in the budget that affect them. Finally, I wish all members a happy Christmas and a prosperous and, indeed, prudent 2007. I am convinced that that will be the happy situation in Scotland should Labour continue to lead the Executive after 3 May.

My closing the debate on behalf of the Finance Committee is not an indication of any sort of seniority within it; it is just that I got stuck in traffic and, by the time I arrived, everybody else had refused the honour of summing up. The debate has been remarkably lively—probably livelier than many of us expected a debate on a Finance Committee report to be. Frances Curran asked what our agenda was, as if we had sinister reasons for wanting to undertake the inquiry, so I will say a few words about why we wanted to do it. We were aware that an increasing number of investigatory, regulatory and independent—by which we mean independent of the Executive—bodies were being set up by a variety of different means. Having scrutinised the SPCB's budget, we were also aware that there were issues with its ability—and hence ours—to scrutinise some of those bodies. There were also issues with lines of accountability. Alasdair Morgan was right to point out that although the commissioner for children and young people feels she is responsible to children and young people, they do not elect her and cannot scrutinise her budget, which somebody has to do. Such bodies spend public money, not their own, so there must be a mechanism by which we can scrutinise their expenditure. We were also concerned that, as we were setting up a number of such bodies, there was potential for overlap in their remits, which is not the most efficient way of doing things. Frances Curran and Mark Ballard said that, at almost £6 million, the total budget of existing independent commissioners and ombudsmen was rather small beer compared with the Scottish Executive budget, but I have another comparison for members. I hope that I have got my information right, but from memory the budget for MSPs' offices, salaries and expenses is in the region of £9 million. Hardly a week goes past without a freedom of information request about whether we are buying iPods from our allowances—I would like to know how anybody could do that—and a website has been set up so that journalists and other sad folk can check how much each MSP has spent on photocopying in a particular quarter of the year. I am not suggesting that we would expect the commissioners and ombudsmen to be subject to such scrutiny but, as I said, they are spending public money. We are the elected representatives of the public, and there should be some mechanism by which we can ask questions to ensure that the money is being spent effectively and efficiently. That is not  because we are trying to pull strings or do not like what they are saying, but because they are spending public money and it is our duty to ensure that it is being spent efficiently.

I totally disagree with Mark Ballard's interpretation of the report. We are proposing not a power of direction but a strengthening of the mechanisms to interrogate the budgets and ensure that efficient measures are being taken. Reference has been made to NDPBs and other budgets that are accountable to the Executive and the Scottish ministers. Those budgets are within departmental portfolios. If civil servants and ministers are doing their jobs properly, they will be examining and interrogating those budgets, and if we on the Finance Committee think ministers are not doing that, we should be asking them about the details of those budgets. There are mechanisms to deal with those budgets, but not with the independent budgets. We were also aware of the anomalies in the legislation that established the posts. The commissioner for children and young people was set up by the Parliament following a proposal from the former Education, Culture and Sport Committee. Many members of different parties are concerned about how the post is operating, but many asked for it. The Executive did not ask for the commissioner—in fact, it resisted it for a while. Parliament asked for it, and the legislation came from the Parliament. OSCR was set up because of a disastrous collapse in public confidence in charities in Scotland, after a particular scandal. It was necessary to take action to restore public confidence and to ensure that people continued to donate to charities. There was a different reason for that body. We have a slightly messy jigsaw: posts have been set up as a reaction to different circumstances. The committee looked at other ways for bodies to report to Parliament. We came down in favour of enhancing the SPCB's ability to scrutinise the budgets and, as Andrew Arbuckle said, the suggestion that three-year strategic plans be submitted. We briefly contemplated a new committee or commission to investigate the others—a sort of tsars tsar—but, unsurprisingly, backed away from that fairly quickly. We also considered transferring responsibility to the  Scottish Commission for Public Audit, because we were impressed with its audit work. Our session with Margaret Jamieson threw up a number of anomalies in how the SCPA is treated compared with committees of the Parliament. Those issues need to be addressed when the new session starts in May. We felt that there was no clear rationale behind why some organisations are NDPBs and some are non-ministerial bodies. We were unclear about how non-ministerial departments such as OSCR are monitored financially, because neither the Executive nor the Parliament have the designated lead. We made a number of recommendations for the Executive and the Parliament when they consider setting up bodies. When a new body or commission is proposed, the possibility of incorporating it into existing bodies must first be investigated. We must consider whether we can make use of existing resources to support the new office holders. Indeed, we should avoid creating new bodies whenever possible. We suggested that we should integrate the human rights commission into the SPSO. In a sense, we were too late, as the Justice 1 Committee had done a lot of work on that and it was difficult for another committee to charge in at the end and suggest a different way of proceeding. When new commissioners or ombudsmen are proposed, detailed discussion should take place with the SPCB before bills are introduced. The SPCB must be involved at the beginning. The SPCB should approve the locations of all commissioners and ombudsmen. The committee was pleased that the SPCB will have the power to approve the location of the most recent body—the Scottish commission for human rights. We were attracted by the New Zealand approach that specific interest groups should not be represented by parliamentary commissioners. An issue with the commissioner for children and young people is that children who are under 18 cannot vote and therefore cannot voice their view in Parliament. However, I agree with Frank McAveety and Alasdair Morgan that we are responsible for representing all such groups. If we went down the route of representing specific interest groups, we could have commissioners for older people, for disabled people and for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people—we could keep on expanding that. Representing such people is what we do. We are elected to represent not only people like us, but all our constituents. That is ultimately a job for us in Parliament. The committee suggested that the Executive should consider delaying the implementation and creation of new bodies until Professor Crerar had  reported. For the future, we suggest that bodies with similar roles and responsibilities should be amalgamated. The pooling of existing resources should be encouraged. When the remits of bodies or commissioners overlap directly, the responsibility should be removed from one body and transferred to another and the budgets should be altered accordingly to reflect the differences in responsibilities. When remits do not overlap directly but roles interrelate, the two bodies should have a memorandum of understanding. We suggested that the Executive should review the existing classifications of bodies with a view to simplification. The minister was right to say that classification should not in itself stand in the way of shared services, but we need to make some progress in that direction. I, too, thank the clerks; the Scottish Parliament information centre, which has always supported us well; all the witnesses who appeared before us, some of whom possibly had a hard time and felt that they were under a fair amount of scrutiny; and, of course, other committee members and our former convener, Des McNulty, who, as others have said, was extremely diligent in pursuing the subject.

Judging from the long faces of members in certain parties, one would not believe that it was good news that was being announced. I welcome the additional £250 million for local government and the fact that £157 million of revenue support will be baselined in future settlements. I also welcome the reduction in business rates. In previous parliamentary discussions about the business rate poundage, finance ministers have explained that the multiplier must be taken into account. Can the minister advise us whether the business rate multiplier in Scotland is still lower than the business rate multiplier south of the border and whether Scottish businesses have a competitive edge over those south of the border because of the reduction in the poundage?

I, too, thank all those who helped the committee with its consideration of the bill, and all the witnesses who  came to or wrote to the committee. I also pay tribute to the ministers who listened carefully to the concerns that were brought to them by the committee and who have been prepared to change the bill and adapt it according to those concerns. That does not always happen, and I do not know that it happens south of the border in quite the same way that it happens here. It is a strength of our Parliament that ministers are prepared to listen to committees and take on board their concerns. I return to what the bill is about. Despite the way in which it has been trailed in the media, the bill is not about anyone's right to adopt. I have to say to Patrick Harvie that the bill is not about challenging homophobia. I am perfectly happy to challenge homophobia, but that is not what the bill is about.

I will come to that, and I support that position. However, it is not what the bill is about. The bill is about increasing the opportunities for those children who are no longer able to live with their birth parents to become part of a stable and loving family in the broadest definition of the word. That family may be one in which a man and woman are married, and it may be one in which two people of the same sex want to bring up a child together. The bill introduces obligations on local authorities to provide support and services to families who are involved in adoption, and that includes a wide range of people who will be touched by adoption. By introducing the permanence orders, the bill creates greater stability for children who are in foster care or who are awaiting adoption. It is a pity that permanence orders have not been more prominent in the wider public perception of the bill, because they are probably the most important part of it. The bill deals with kinship care, and I was pleased to see that issue progressing through the committee. It is important that those constituents who brought the issue to their MSPs can see it being raised in the chamber and dealt with in legislation and regulation. I hope that grandparents who for various reasons are looking after their grandchildren will eventually have the opportunity to be recompensed and will not have to bear the financial burden that would otherwise fall on local authorities. Of course, the bill has not been without controversy and this morning several contentious amendments were debated. Again, I do not agree  with Patrick Harvie when he talks about lancing a boil; members have the right to bring issues of concern to the chamber. They represent the views of constituents and faith communities that have been presented to them. Whether or not I disagreed with Roseanna Cunningham's views—as I did—she had every right to bring them to the chamber. I welcomed the opportunity to discuss and vote on such issues, because it meant that we demonstrated a fairly strong position with regard to the amendments and reflected the views of the majority of members of the Parliament. That was valuable. I do not agree that issues of conscience are always about sexual orientation. There are many other issues of conscience, including war—an issue on which I once voted contrary to my party—and disarmament. I recognise that the BAAF Scotland had concerns about the interface between the children's hearings system and permanence orders. I hope that we got that right; I had to bow to the superior knowledge of the minister, Adam Ingram and the BAAF on those issues, but good work was done on that. The bill is not anti-marriage. It recognises that families come in many varieties and that the stability of the adoptive family's environment and the love within that unit can make a difference to those children who can no longer live with their parents and who need to be adopted. That, rather than the controversial issues, is what we must carry forward.

I welcome the amendments. Issues relating to kinship carers have become more prominent in discussions on the bill. I am certainly not the only member who has received representations from constituents on the matter, which, as Rosemary Byrne said, seems to be becoming more pressing as more and more families—sadly—have alcohol and drug abuse problems that require relatives to take care of children. Relatives of children have said to me that if local authorities had to accommodate the children who are affected by such problems, they would be considerably out of pocket. It seems to be unfair that relatives should have to bear such financial burdens.  Fiona Hyslop was a little unfair to ministers when she complained about the consultation document. There is not a strategy yet—there is only a consultation document. Guidance or regulations will be produced as a result of that consultation. On amendment 135, I say to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton that it would not necessarily be appropriate to say that regulations must be made before the results of the consultation are known. The bill's current phraseology is probably more appropriate.

I have just finished. I am sorry.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to heighten awareness among the public and medical practitioners of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. (S2O-11400)

The minister will be aware that COPD kills some 5,000 people in Scotland each year—more than transport accidents, breast cancer, liver disease and illegal drug use put together. It is also one of the three leading causes of absence from work. As the principal cause of COPD in Scotland nowadays is smoking, what action is the Executive taking to ensure that smokers and potential smokers are aware of the prevalence of that health consequence of smoking?

Although I recognise that it has probably taken a lot of courage for Roseanna Cunningham to lodge her amendments, I totally disagree with them. As others said, the Adoption of Children (Scotland) Act 1930 allowed single people to adopt whether they were in unmarried relationships and whatever their sexuality. Theoretically, those single adoptive parents could be involved in serial or multiple relationships with others. The bill extends the adoption process to include unmarried couples who are able to offer a child a stable, loving home with two people to love, support and continue to support them for the rest of their lives. Most children who are adopted are not babies; they have come from difficult circumstances, they might suffer from disability, they might be vulnerable or they might have undergone terrific trauma. The opportunity to be involved in a caring, loving family where two people will love, support and protect a child's interests is a hell of an improvement for many of those children and might be something that they have never known. The fact that the adoptive parents might be an unmarried or a homosexual couple is far less important than the love and support that they are able to offer those children.

During the Education Committee's consideration of the bill, we heard evidence from the faith-based agencies and we considered the issue of their not being forced to do things that would be against their conscience. It is important that they are protected and not forced to do anything that is against their conscience and their ethos, but the minister assured us at stages 1 and 2 that nothing in the bill will change the current situation and that the matter could be dealt with in guidance. I have some concerns about that, and I am also concerned that amendment 86 does not say anything about people's right to exercise their conscience. It states only that adoption agencies must refer people on. I have some anxiety about the wording of the bill, and I would like to hear a little more about the effect that the amendment would have on the faith-based agencies. Could the matter be dealt with less controversially in guidance?

There is a question about whether amendment 84 is necessary, given that the bill places importance on enduring family relationships. However, to reiterate the importance of such relationships would not be to the detriment of the bill. Perhaps amendment 84 should have referred to "an enduring family relationship", rather than "a stable family unit", but we would create no problems by reinforcing the need for an enduring family  relationship when the best interests of the child are being considered. We must bear it in mind that families in Britain come in many different shapes, sizes and types. I would be concerned about an implication that one type of family is better than another, but amendment 84 does not contain such an implication, so I am prepared to accept it on the basis that it would provide additional reassurance.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assistance it can offer to the 120 people to be made redundant by Young's Bluecrest in Annan. (S2O-11223)

Is the minister aware that later last week Penman Engineering in Dumfries announced the loss of 47 jobs; that just last month  46 jobs were lost at Interfloor in Dumfries; and that uncertainty still surrounds the future of the Hunter Rubber Company, which is also in Dumfries? Does he support the Transport and General Workers Union's campaign to save the jobs in Annan and does he agree that, although Scotland is outperforming the rest of the United Kingdom on employment, Dumfries and Galloway requires specific assistance in the face of the loss of the jobs in the manufacturing sector to which I referred?

Farepak Food and Gifts was a company supplying Christmas vouchers and hampers to the public, who purchased them over a period of up to 10 months. The company ceased trading on 11 October and went into administration on 13 October. An estimated 140,000 families across the United Kingdom lost their Christmas savings, sustaining a combined loss of around £40 million. From my experience of the constituents who have contacted me, it seems that most of the savers were women. Most were on low incomes, in part-time work or were pensioners. These were people who wanted to save for Christmas, not take out a loan or use a credit card. It was because their family incomes were low that they saved for Christmas in this way, putting aside money month by month that could not be touched if the kids needed new trainers or cash was needed for a family holiday. That is why they did not save using a bank—various people have asked me that. They wanted to be sure that the money would be left untouched until it was needed for Christmas. Unknown to them, however, European Home Retail, Farepak's parent company, was touching their money and using it to prop up other parts of its failing business empire. It has been suggested that that was going on from the beginning of this year. EHR told the stock exchange in June that it had problems and that it would run out of funds by the autumn unless further funds were made available. In August, HBOS advised that it would make no further funds available. The Hamper Industry Trade Association asked EHR to ensure that Farepak customers' money was ring fenced and would be available to customers at Christmas. EHR refused to do so and continued to encourage its customers to make payments for the period until 31 October. Companies House reckons that between £17 million and £23 million of Farepak customers' money—money that was carefully set  aside by low-income families to provide for Christmas—was paid out by Farepak to EHR. There is no doubt who the villains are in this unhappy Christmas carol—they are the Farepak directors: ultra-wealthy individuals such as Sir Clive Thompson, Nick Gilodi-Johnson and William Rollason, who used the hard-earned cash of Farepak customers to try to bail out their failing enterprises. Their bankers, HBOS, deny any responsibility. Shane O'Riordain, the general manager of group communications for HBOS, advised me last week in a letter that "HBoS stood behind its customer, EHR, through its financial difficulties for as long as we could. We believe it was the right thing for the bank to stand behind its customers. We have behaved honourably throughout." However, it is a pity that Farepak did not stand behind its customers. Further, if HBOS had pulled the rug out from under EHR during the summer, those customers would have lost less and would have had more time to make arrangements for Christmas. HBOS has also stated that it will not donate any more than £2 million as that might, somehow, imply responsibility. However, with profits of £2.9 million, I suggest that HBOS could do more without prejudice. What is being done and what can be done to help the families that have been affected and to reassure people that this will not happen again and that, if possible, those who are responsible for their plight will receive some form of just deserts? Some families—those whose agents paid by credit card—will have been able to reclaim their contributions. Indeed, some have already been repaid. I am pleased to say that the first constituent who contacted me has received her money back because her agent paid by credit card. However, many will not be repaid. The Farepak Response Fund was established under the auspices of the Family Fund—which, fortuitously, has a reception in the garden lobby of the Parliament tonight. The Family Fund was established more than 30 years ago in response to families that were affected by thalidomide and has supported families affected by disability ever since. The Farepak Response Fund is not a compensation fund. It will distribute goodwill payments to customers, via their agents, in the week before Christmas. Because of that deadline, the fund was due to close on Friday. However, today the deadline was extended to 6 pm next Wednesday. I am hoping to use this debate as a plea to businesses and banks in Scotland and to individuals who have not yet made contributions to make donations to the fund in the next week. As of this morning, almost £4.9 million had been  donated, including £144,000 from individuals. However, bear it in mind that, as around £40 million has been lost, that sum represents a recovery of only about 8p in the pound. Argos, Alliance and Leicester, Asda, Boots, Business Performance, Co-op, Debenhams, Findel, HMV/Waterstones, Jessops, John Lewis, Halfords, Marks and Spencer, Morrisons, Park Food, PKF, Ryman stationers, United Norwest, Tesco, Fifth Business, W H Smith and Woolworths have all pledged or made payments to the response fund—now we know who the good guys are—but many banks and businesses out there have still not made any payments. Indeed, some banks that have a high profile in Scotland have yet to contribute. Of course, I hope that fellow MSPs will donate, too. I point out that the response fund can claim back, through gift aid, the tax that someone has paid on a donation, so it will be worth more than the actual amount that is given. It would be great if enough cash came flooding into the response fund to enable everyone to get their money back, but that is unlikely, so families may well have to borrow. The credit unions are keen to help. They can make loans available to new members while charging considerably less interest than do major credit providers. However, many of their existing members will also want to take out savings or loans to cope with the expense of Christmas. Therefore, I ask whether the Executive can help by providing some sort of security for the credit unions to help to tide them over so that they can offer loans to Farepak savers. On the issue of just deserts, the companies investigation branch has already started an investigation into Farepak. It is possible that there could be criminal investigations thereafter. The Office of Fair Trading is looking at the need for legislative change to prevent such an event from happening again. I end by repeating my plea to colleagues, businesses and Scottish citizens to make a donation so that we can help these families to have the enjoyable Christmas that they deserve. We know who the Scrooges are. I hope that we will all act as the Ghost of Christmas Past, the Ghost of Christmas Present and the Ghost of Christmas Future by putting pressure on our colleagues and on businesses to help these families to have the Christmas that they deserve and to make Santa come for their children. [ Applause. ]

To ask the Scottish Executive what drug treatments are currently available on the national health service in Scotland for the treatment of mild, moderate and severe Alzheimer's disease and whether this position is likely to change in the near future. (S2O-11124)

The minister will be aware that carers and Alzheimer's sufferers are campaigning for the National Institute of Clinical Excellence's recommendations for England and Wales on this matter not to be followed in Scotland. Does the minister acknowledge that in many other countries—as in Scotland at the moment—those drugs are available to all Alzheimer's sufferers? Will he consider aligning Scottish policy with the policy in those countries rather than that in England and Wales?

The First Minister will be aware of the announcement by Youngs Bluecrest Ltd that it is to cease the machine peeling of scampi at its factory in Annan in my constituency, which will mean the loss of 120 jobs. Does the First Minister appreciate the impact that that will have on the local economy in Annandale? Will he commit the Scottish Executive and Scottish Enterprise to offering whatever support they can make available to the workers who will be affected? Does he share my concern that companies such as Youngs Bluecrest are deciding to ship Scottish caught langoustines 12,000 miles—six weeks there and back—to take advantage of low wages in the far east? How can Government encourage companies to take social and environmental factors into account, as well as commercial pressures, when considering such decisions?

I doubt that anyone in the Scottish Parliament would not subscribe to the principle of equal pay, and I am sure that many of us fervently wish for public services to be maintained. However, the situation is far more complex than the motion or Carolyn Leckie's speech suggest. As others have said, the Finance Committee came up against some of the complications during its inquiry into the financial implications of the local authority single status agreement, the report of which was published in March this year. The Finance Committee did not conclude that the Scottish Executive should commit either to funding the single status agreement or to funding backdated equal pay claims. The two issues are not the same but they are strongly interconnected: until single status is resolved between local authorities and trade unions, the possibility of additional equal pay claims will remain. It worries me that some local authorities have made their equal pay offers without having solved the single status problem, because a further round of equal pay claims could be coming up. The Equal Pay Act was passed in 1970 and the single status agreement was signed in 1999, when it was intended that it should be implemented in 2002. It is no consolation to say that we should not be where we are. As others have said, the payment of bonuses to some employees—usually men—but not to others—usually women—was acknowledged as an equalities issue about 10 years ago. Some of us in the chamber today, me included, were councillors at that time. Casting our minds back, we can remember that not only did we have  local government reorganisation, we had exceedingly difficult local government settlements under Mr Michael Forsyth. I am sure that Des McNulty can recall that those of us who were in Strathclyde Regional Council had to set a council tax increase of somewhere between 20 per cent and 25 per cent in 1995, so that we could deal with problems. I suspect that such things were behind the fact that some councils did not solve other problems even though those problems had been acknowledged. I was a little surprised by some of Mr Brownlee's comments about independent solicitors. The intervention of independent solicitors who imply to employees on low pay that they will somehow be able to obtain a wonderful and enormous settlement by going down the independent route has done a great deal of damage. Councils are threatened with being taken to tribunals, and trade unions might be sued. That is making it extremely difficult for both partners to come together to work out appropriate settlements.

I am sorry; I have only just over a minute left. It is easy to say that the Scottish Executive should simply reach into its magic wallet and pull out the cash to settle the problem. We do not know how much money would be involved in meeting the costs of equal pay and single status. COSLA estimates that the cost of equal pay compensation could range from £310 million to £560 million, and Unison thinks that the figure might be even higher. The equal pay issue cannot be compared directly with the agenda for change, which is an Executive-driven policy that has been carried out by health boards that are appointed. The equal pay issue predates even the referendum for the Scottish Parliament, and local authorities are democratically elected bodies with revenue-raising powers. The two issues are therefore not identical. However, the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform has told the Finance Committee that he will be drawing down something like £750 million from central unallocated provision. If COSLA presents a good case regarding the pressures that local authorities face, I am sure that it will be considered in next year's round of settlements.

If Mr Morgan had read the Official Report of that meeting more carefully, he would realise that my concern was that I would put Mr Howat and his colleagues in a difficult position, whereas it is the minister who should be questioned.

I express my condolences to the deputy minister. I know how he feels. I am sure Mr McNulty does also, having been in a similar position. The debate concerns two issues. The first is what the Howat review was about. To my mind, it was intended to inform the spending review.

That was my understanding of the review's main purpose. Alasdair Morgan should not heckle from the floor; he should intervene or—

A spending review also takes place in Scotland. The comprehensive spending review here should have taken place this year, but it has been postponed until next year, because the comprehensive spending review in London has been postponed. In the Scottish budget spending review, ministers consider what can be expanded and contracted. The Howat review's purpose was to bring in a fresh set of eyes to advise the Executive on what the sun could set on and what could be expanded.

I am sorry, but I have only about three minutes for my speech. Bringing somebody in serves a good purpose and it is done in local authorities, too. If deciding on closure programmes is just left with a minister or a department, people will come forward with the ones that look most frightening, because they do not want to lose face or revenue. I warned our whips that if they asked me to speak, I would not be altogether helpful, because I think that the Executive made a mistake. It was unnecessary to set a timescale of February 2006. If the review was intended to inform the spending review, setting that timescale was unwise. It would be unwise to publish a report that says some budget lines should be altered or that advises ministers to discontinue programmes when decisions are not to be taken until more than a year later. That would leave those projects in limbo, as it is not known whether the Executive will accept the Howat review's advice that they should be run down. I wish that I had picked up on that lack of wisdom at the time, but perhaps I was not paying enough attention. It is not the case that the Executive was unaware that the UK comprehensive spending review had been postponed, because the Chief Secretary to the Treasury announced the postponement in summer 2005. When the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform appeared before the Finance Committee a year ago, he knew of that postponement. In the quote from him that is in my prepared speech, which I am not using, he says that the spending review will take place in 2007.

I do not know—doing so was unwise. As Andrew Arbuckle said, the public are not desperate to see the Howat review. In post office queues and pubs, people do not say, "Oh dear, what's happened to the Howat review?" People are not terribly likely to vote on that basis. However, I say to the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform that it was unnecessary to set himself a bear trap by saying that he would publish the report in spring. The minister conceded that if the review group asked for more time, he would consider allowing it. If the Executive has something to learn from the situation, it is that it should not make such commitments when it is unlikely to fulfil them. Yesterday, I asked our whips whether the minister would appear, and I was told that he would. Given what a pugnacious character he normally is, I am surprised not to see him here.

It is some years since I have had the pleasure of summing up a debate. In summing up, members always say that the debate has been interesting, but in this case that is true. That is not surprising, as the subject of the debate is one of the most important responsibilities of the Scottish Parliament. That is demonstrated by the useful responses that the Education Committee has had so far to the inquiry findings. At the core of the inquiry is how we provide high-quality and flexible care for every child. We recognise that care will be provided in a variety of settings, including the parental home. It is therefore not just professional input that is important to determine the quality of the care; there must also be access for parents to advice on parenting skills. I agree with David Davidson on  that. I was interested in his colleague David McLetchie's praise for the Chancellor of the Exchequer, whom I applaud on his attempts to get Labour Party policy taken up appropriately by public bodies. However, there is a difference between the entitlement of parents to assistance with care and the entitlement of every child to a good-quality start in life. I wish we lived in a world in which every parent knew exactly what was best for their child. As a parent of three children—now grown up—I doubt that I always knew best for my children; I am sure that every other parent has their failings just as I did. Vulnerable children must have their needs identified as early as possible so that intervention can be put in place. Where required, that intervention must be sustained and coherent throughout the child's education. In her metaphor about winning the lottery, Wendy Alexander eloquently described the importance of investment as early as possible. We can make far more difference when someone is six months than we can ever make when they are 16, although that is not to say that people do not turn their lives round at 16. In time for reflection this morning, we heard a tremendous contribution from a young woman who has become involved in training in an unusual sphere. That shows how young people are able to turn their lives round. I felt for her, being the only female builder in her workplace. At one time, I was the only female physical chemist at work, so I know how it feels to work in a very male environment. As many members have said, excellent education can be delivered only if the workers discharging that vital role are well trained, properly rewarded and well respected. Some of the pronouncements that the committee has made about the involvement of teachers have been a little controversial. We based them on research—admittedly from England—that has demonstrated the important role of input from qualified teachers in improving attainment later in education, especially among children in the most disadvantaged communities. We recognise that the system in England is different from that of Scotland; we were therefore concerned that some local authorities are withdrawing qualified teachers from their early years workforce and we recommended that the Executive should provide clear guidance to councils on their deployment of qualified teaching staff. Last night, I had an interesting conversation with Carol Ball of Unison, which does not accept that recommendation. She says that, after 29 years of experience in the early years sector, she does not believe that the teaching qualification makes much difference. There is still an interesting debate to be had between the different professionals involved in the early years sector. I hope that the Executive can  facilitate that debate in some respect and provide useful guidance to local authorities. Initial teacher education may require to be changed to make the early years a more attractive area in which to study and work. The committee believes that there may be opportunities for joint training of teaching and other child care staff. That happens in Scandinavia; unfortunately, I did not manage to get over there to see how things are done, but colleagues tell me that it was an interesting experience. In the longer term, a joint core curriculum for teachers and other early years professionals should be developed, allowing people to start off in comprehensive child care and education training and then branch out into teaching or other parts of the education and care of children. That model can perhaps be developed in future. The need for flexibility in career choice and the need for quality in the training of the early years workforce were key findings of the Executive's national review of the early years workforce. Several committee members have mentioned how impressed they were by their visits to family centres and how those centres are able to provide non-stigmatised provision. We believe that that type of provision should become more widely available. However, we commissioned an analysis of the cost of universal provision of that type in every school community and recognised that, in the short term, however much we might like it to happen, the cost is prohibitive. We suggest therefore that provision should be increased initially in more disadvantaged communities, where early intervention will be of most benefit. We believe that family centres should be delivered by local authorities working with other partners and that that approach will enable communities to develop the models that are most suited to their needs. It is almost a community planning model, in which local authorities can take a lead but other partners will be involved and will be important. Robin Harper, Ken Macintosh and others mentioned the problems of transition between the early years and primary 1. Transition in education—from early years to primary school and from primary to secondary—is a problematic time. Indeed, the problems of people leaving secondary school and going into further and higher education were mentioned on the radio just the other day. At all those stages, differences in learning and teaching methods can be problematic. The committee's adviser, Professor Kathy Sylva, impressed on us the benefit of some degree of directed learning in the very early years. She used the example of children learning how to clap out the rhythm of words, which enables them to understand the component shapes of words as a precursor to reading skills. Equally, child-directed, play-based learning can make a contribution in the  early years of primary school, so the committee welcomes the Executive's commitment to better integration of the three-to-five and primary 1 curriculums. As Ken Macintosh and others have said, early years providers in the voluntary sector, in particular, commented on the problems posed by multiple funding streams, which can make longer-term planning difficult. It was a wee bit uncharitable of Christine Grahame to state that the Executive has no interest in addressing that. In other areas, the Executive has been trying to bring together funding streams, but we recommend that the Executive review the present arrangements and try to progress that work in the early years sector. As many members have said, the evaluation of sure start in England has suggested that there have been benefits to some parents but not to others. So far—perhaps because of the timescales involved—there does not seem to have been much benefit to children themselves. The committee is keen for the Executive to evaluate sure start in Scotland to ensure that we are achieving what we hope to achieve. We asked the Scottish Executive to reflect on and update the strategy that was produced by the Scottish Office in 1998 and to produce a vision of how that can be built on over the next 10 years. I finish by thanking—as the convener did—the clerks; the witnesses, who gave both oral and written evidence; and the early years centres that entertained us and allowed us to interact with their young people. In particular, I thank the little boy at the Cowgate under-fives centre who showed me his collection of insects, some of which were no longer alive. I was most impressed by the spirit of scientific inquiry being fostered in such a young child.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities regarding the payment of allowances to kinship carers. (S2O-10766)

I thank the minister for his reply and for the Executive's consideration of the circumstances of relatives who care for children whose parents are not capable of that. Is the minister aware of the recent research that suggests that it might cost up to £100,000 to raise a child to the age of 18? Does he agree that grandparents, in particular, who may be retired or preparing for retirement after bringing up their own families, may find it extremely difficult financially to support their grandchildren for a number of years and, in some cases, to adulthood?

I speak as someone who is anxious not to be retired prematurely next year, at the age of 52. If I were to be uncharitable about the motion, I would reflect on the fact that senior citizens comprise a significant proportion of the electorate who bother to vote in elections, which may be why there is a concentration on trying to woo the votes of older people. However, I will not be totally negative about the motion. I am not averse to reform of the council tax system to provide more assistance to people, including pensioners, who are on low and fixed incomes but who do not qualify for council tax benefit and who therefore may have difficulty paying their council tax bills. However, I would not go along the road that the Tories have taken on the matter. We should consider the effects that the Tories' proposals would have in Dumfries and Galloway. A pensioner couple who live in a band A property, which means that it was valued at less than £27,000 in 1991—I cannot imagine any property being worth less than that these days—would get a discount of £457.54. However, a pensioner couple in a band H property, which in 1991 would have been worth more than £212,000—it must have been a heck of a mansion to retail for that sort of price in Dumfries and Galloway back then—would get three times the discount, at £1,335.75. That couple would pay much the same council tax as people on a fairly modest income in a band D house would pay. Despite the reassurances that Mr Cameron offered during the Tory party conference, the proposals seem to be  the same old Tory policy of cutting tax and rewarding the better off. There are some unanswered questions about the policy that I ask the Tories to address. First, what will happen to the 25 per cent discount for single persons who live on their own? Would that be abolished or would it be on top of the proposed new discount?

Because I have limited time, perhaps that issue could be addressed later. Is the reduction of the council tax benefit revenue from the Treasury to the Executive included in the £200 million price tag? As other members have asked, how will £200 million be raised from the mutualisation of Scottish Water? I accept that the proposal is for mutualisation, not privatisation at the moment. Scottish Water's annual report for last year shows that its net borrowing was £162 million and that it raised £49 million from other capital projects, such as the disposal of assets. The rest of its revenue, which was more than £1 billion, came from charges to customers. The report shows that £142 million of outgoings went on the repayment of loans. The money was lent—not given—by the Executive. Therefore, the minister was correct to say that the Tories' proposal would be a short-term measure. If the Tories do not believe us, I ask them to reflect on a couple of opinions on mutualisation. First, although the trade union movement is generally in favour of mutualisation and the co-operative movement, Unison, the union that represents most workers in the water industry, has noted that the water and sewerage industry is capital intensive and that Scottish Water would therefore become dependent on private financial institutions, as happened with Welsh Water, on which the Tories base much of their proposal for Scottish Water. In 2003, Unison stated: "the so-called mutual option is in reality a token representation for customers on a board overseeing a wholly privatised Scottish Water." Secondly, although Digby Jones is, as one might expect of someone who is ex-Confederation of British Industry, in favour of the total privatisation of Scottish Water, in June this year in response to proposals from Ian Byatt, he argued that mutualisation would not raise funds for the Executive. Bearing in mind that Scottish Water receives borrowing consent and that higher interest rates are paid to private sector funders, would not water rates rise under the Tory proposals? That would injure pensioners and small businesses, of which the Tories often like to see themselves as the champion. The Tories say that council tax rose by more than 60 per cent in the past nine years. The  figures that I have seen show that the minimum income guarantee for pensioners has risen in absolute—not real—terms by 65 per cent. I do not say that that is anything like enough to look after pensioners on lower incomes.

I am sorry—I only have a minute left. The Tories broke the link with earnings and Labour intends to restore that link in 2012. Colin Fox said that we would do it only if we could afford it, but we would be damn stupid to do it if we could not afford it. My husband is 54 today, so in six years' time he will be eligible to receive some of the benefits of a pension. However, people such as he and I, because of the generation to which we belong, have put money aside for our pensions. We will be better off. The fact that many of us had the opportunity to invest in our futures should be factored into any calculation about the way in which we support poorer pensioners. Christine Grahame mentioned energy bills, which have risen by more than 50 per cent in one year. The energy bill for an average household is now comparable to the council tax. That is why I consistently argue for a sensible and balanced energy policy. I would prefer the Tories' approach to the issue to that of those who talk about local income tax. Local income tax does not reflect ability to pay for young couples who perhaps have two or three children and have mortgage repayments, credit card repayments or student loan repayments to make. It is a tax on employment and on families. I would prefer the reform of the council tax system to take account of some of the problems.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is aware of potential job losses at Interfloor in Dumfries. (S2O-10693) I am afraid that those job losses have now been confirmed.

I can give slightly better news: the unions and management have been able to reduce the proposed number of redundancies by eight. However, I am sure that the minister is concerned about the loss of high-quality manufacturing jobs in Dumfries, particularly given the loss of similar jobs in spring at the Hunter Rubber Company. Is there any way in which the Scottish Executive can help existing companies to consolidate and preserve jobs without contravening European Union state aid rules?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any concerns about the effect of milk prices on the dairy industry in Dumfries and Galloway. (S2O-10613)

The minister will be aware that milk production throughout the United Kingdom is at a 13-year low and that prices for milk products have risen substantially, but those price increases have not been reflected in the prices that are being paid to producers. The minister has indicated his concern that processors such as Arla Foods Ltd in my constituency, which has invested significantly in a new processing plant, might risk losing their production base if they do not pay more for the raw materials that they receive from farmers. The minister is clearly concerned about this matter. How might the Scottish Executive input into any discussions with the processors to resolve the issue?

To ask the First Minister whether there will be sufficient GPs to meet future health needs. (S2F-2433)

I appreciate that the Executive has plans to increase the number of GPs in training, but the British Medical Association and the Royal College of General Practitioners have this week expressed concerns that there might be a shortfall in the number of GPs in Scotland in six years. After the Tory Government closed the Edinburgh Dental School in the 1980s, there was an increasing shortage of dentists that resulted in a dental crisis in many parts of Scotland; fortunately, that crisis has been alleviated in Dumfries and Galloway by the employment of a number of eastern European dentists.

Will the First Minister assure the chamber and Scotland that action to increase GP numbers will be taken in sufficient time to prevent similar problems arising in general practice?

The media have tended to describe the bill as controversial, but it has been widely welcomed by organisations that represent children's interests, although I know that such organisations will propose to us several amendments for stage 2, which we will consider carefully. I will quote some of those organisations. Children 1 st said: "Many of the Bill's provisions will help to increase stability of placement which is so desperately needed by Scotland's most vulnerable children and young people",  and Children in Scotland "welcomes this Bill as a positive and well thought out approach to modernising the adoption system in Scotland." Barbara Hudson, who is the Scottish director of the British Association for Adoption and Fostering, believes that "This bill is hugely important and has the potential to ensure that many more children can live more stable lives ... Permanence Orders will make it easier for long-term plans to be made for children" and "foster carers can share some of the responsibility for day to day decisions". Even the Bishops Conference of Scotland said in its written evidence: "We are encouraged that" the bill "contains many positive proposals which will make a positive impact on the lives of the children who are unfortunately unable to remain with their natural family." In the conclusion at paragraph 113 of its stage 1 report, the Education Committee "welcomes the introduction of the Bill as an important contribution to providing greater stability and security for children and recommends that the Parliament approves the general principles". Members of all parties that are represented on the Education Committee unanimously supported that conclusion. That concurrence of views has been reflected in the debate. I was disappointed and saddened by the letter that I received from Bishop Joseph Devine, the Bishop of Motherwell, not least because it seemed to be overtly party political. He mentioned just two parties—those in the Executive—and did not recognise the cross-party support in the committee for the bill. In his defence, perhaps he had not read the committee's stage 1 report, which all committee members unanimously agreed. As other members have said, the bishop's letter is factually incorrect in that homosexual and unmarried people have been able, as individuals, to adopt since the 1930s, whether or not they were involved in a relationship. If two people are adopting, their partnership will, to a certain extent, be part of the assessment of the sort of home that they can offer the child. In some ways, that could be seen as increasing protection for the child by ensuring that he or she will go to people who are in a stable relationship and not to a single person who might change their partner every few months. Professor Kathleen Marshall, Scotland's commissioner for children and young people, believes that the provisions in section 31 of the bill  will help to clarify the existing situation because both partners will obtain legal status as adoptive parents, and she believes that the child will benefit from the greater stability that that will bring. Unfortunately, the Bishop of Motherwell has presented the bill as giving in to "gay demands" and as being driven by political correctness. As others have said, no one has the right to adopt. Time and again during stage 1, witnesses and committee members stressed that the absolute priority in any arrangements for a child who cannot live with his or her own parents must be that child's best interests. If people want to see that in writing, it is in paragraph 6 of the committee's report. How different was the tone of that letter from that of the submission from John Deighan of the Catholic Parliamentary Office, who looks forward to the bill "making a positive impact on adoption services in Scotland and bringing benefit to children in the adoption system." He did, of course, point out that there might be issues of conscience for some MSPs—we all appreciate that some of our colleagues will have those issues. How different was the tone of the Bishop of Motherwell's letter to the tone of the evidence that was given by the faith-based adoption agencies, St Margaret's Children and Family Care Society, and the St Andrew's Children's Society, whose evidence I and others found to be measured and compelling. None of us wants legislation to force faith-based organisations to act against their beliefs. I and others have sought and received reassurances—the minister has reassured Parliament again—that the bill will not do that. Again, if people want to see that in writing, it is in paragraph 54 of our report. Strangely enough, Bishop Devine also wanted a referendum on the bill. I am not quite sure why he wanted a referendum on this particular piece of legislation; we did not have a referendum on the legislation for the ban on smoking in public places, on section 2A, or on antisocial behaviour. Why should we have a referendum on this bill? Our procedures have checks and balances—the Executive holds consultations and we take evidence from witnesses. If I were the bishop, I would not particularly want to go down the referendum route because there could be a call for a referendum on whether local authorities should fund denominational schools. I am afraid that such a referendum might not come up with the results that he would want. The bill is about improving the stability and life chances of children and young people who might be very vulnerable. Their interests must always  take precedence over ideology, whether religious or political. Finally, I am pleased with the Executive's reassurances that it is seriously considering kinship care. I will cite a typical example of a kinship-care issue. I was approached by a constituent who is in her late 50s. She brought up four children of her own but, sadly, one of her daughters has a serious heroin addiction, which has resulted in her having her three-year-old grandchild to look after. Undoubtedly there are financial pressures on such people. A recent article said that it is estimated that it costs £100,000 to bring up each child to the age of 18; that is before they start at university, when it gets considerably more expensive, as I know. There is no way that someone who is approaching their retirement, having brought up three or four children already, is going to be able to find that sort of finance on their own when they are looking forward to their retirement. We need some way of supporting the people who have taken the responsibility of looking after their grandchildren. I look forward to a positive recommendation on that from the Executive as part of its fostering strategy.

As other members have said, in his speech yesterday the First Minister stated his desire to ensure that by 2020 Scotland has the best education system in the world. I am sure that we all share that aspiration. In Scotland we have a good basis that will help us to attain that goal. At the beginning of last week, the Minister for Education and Young People accompanied me to a small rural school in Lochmaben in my constituency. In its recent HMIE report, the school achieved either very good or excellent ratings in every category. Members have referred to sport and culture. In Lochmaben, we saw not only a fine school but an interesting sports programme. I confess that I am a Queen of the South supporter, but we must give credit to Gretna Football Club for the great work that it has done in that area. One of its outreach workers is teaching young girls and boys to play football and is working with their primary school teacher to develop curricular materials to build on that experience by using the children's interest in football to develop their numeracy and literacy skills. It is right that we should celebrate good practice in our schools and that we should do as much as we can to ensure that others know about it. It is also right that we should celebrate what the Scottish Executive has achieved since 1999. All three of my children were born when Mrs Thatcher was Prime Minister. At the time, we lived in Ayrshire, where only one child in four had the opportunity to receive a year's pre-school education. Now every child from the age of three is entitled to pre-school education. That policy was introduced by the Labour Government in 1997 and has been continued by the Labour-led Executive in the Parliament since 1999. We should be proud of that achievement. During my days as a councillor, I was involved in Convention of Scottish Local Authorities negotiations on teachers' salaries. I remember the frustration that we all felt in the mid-1990s, when we were unable to offer teachers the sort of recompense that they deserved for the vitally  important job that they did. Although there may still be issues arising from the McCrone settlement, we have solved the important problem of the remuneration of teachers and the value that we place on their skills. Iain Smith made the point that we are improving eating habits, which is very important, by introducing free fresh fruit for primary 1 and 2 pupils. We are also introducing legislation to ensure good standards of nutrition in schools, which is more important than whether school meals are free for everyone or free for those who need that. We are reforming the curriculum to ensure that it is interesting and relevant to all pupils. Andrew Welsh suggested that we are going to abolish history and modern studies. That is not and never has been the case. Curriculum reform is concerned with the way in which subjects are presented. We need to make the presentation of all subjects relevant to pupils, to allow them to access those subjects properly. We are improving the teaching and learning environment for pupils and staff by investing in modern school buildings. The Scottish Executive has committed £103 million to Dumfries and Galloway, and 11 schools will be rebuilt under the PPP project. Investment is not limited to schools. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton referred to the importance of college education. Twenty-seven million pounds has been pledged for the rebuilding of Dumfries and Galloway College, which will be relocated next to the Crichton university campus, creating a unique campus for tertiary education in Dumfries and Galloway. That is an interesting experiment. Money is being invested to improve education in our country. I agreed with much of what Richard Lochhead said about rural schools. It is important that we maintain primary schools in rural locations. If we do not, there will be a further drift of young people away from those areas. Although there is a lot to be proud of in Scotland's education system, issues remain that require serious attention. As Scott Barrie and Peter Peacock said, outcomes for looked-after children need to be radically improved, and too many young people are still not in education, employment or training. We have not made the progress in the past eight years that we wanted to make. The performance of the lowest-attaining 20 per cent of pupils has not improved and, in particular, there is a problem with young males underachieving. That might seem a strange thing for a middle-aged feminist to worry about, but we have a problem with how we educate young boys. Boys account for 90 per cent of exclusions from primary schools and over 75  per cent of exclusions from secondary schools. There is a definite issue about how those young people relate to education. I can remember a time when it was not considered worth while to educate females, particularly in science subjects; I do not want us to reach the stage when a group of young males appears not to be worth educating. I was pleased by what the minister said about the Executive's determination to address those problems and look forward to hearing more about it. I was going to speak about the need to improve science education, which is a great enthusiasm of mine, but I do not have time.

I wonder whether the member has looked at my website, where he would find references to all the speeches that I have made on education, the questions that I have asked about it and the press releases that I have issued on it.

I congratulate Alex Fergusson on being the first person to lodge a motion on this subject when a number of people thought that it would be useful to commemorate the anniversary of James Clerk Maxwell. One of the websites at which I looked described Maxwell as being one of the three most influential physicists, the other two being Newton and Einstein. It said that, unlike the other two, James Clerk Maxwell was well known only among physicists. Alex Fergusson said that he was not even well known among physicists, although I have come across lots of Maxwell laboratory buildings and at least three of the labs in which I have worked have been attached to Maxwell buildings—one of them was irreverently or affectionately known as Maxwell house. The fact that James Clerk Maxwell is Scottish is not the reason why he is not so well known; it is possibly because no soundbites are associated  with his work. Everybody recognises the Newtonian concept that for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction and people know Einstein's equation, E=mc 2 . Even if people do not understand the physics, they know the soundbites. James Clerk Maxwell's work, however, is less easily encapsulated in the public imagination. I will briefly describe what James Clerk Maxwell did to develop understanding of the nature of electromagnetic radiation, or light, as it is more commonly known. His work is an illustration of how science progresses and the way in which the contribution of great scientists such as Maxwell or Einstein is not in inventing something new but in taking the results and theories that are under debate in the scientific community and interpreting them in a novel way that radically improves our understanding of the world about us. Newtonian physics was modelled on particles and the way in which they behaved when subjected to external factors. Newton believed that light was made up of particles, which was why shadows were sharp replicas of the object that caused them. In the early 19 th century, a physicist called Thomas Young noticed that if one shone a beam of light through a very narrow slit, the shadow produced looked like the waves on the surface of a pond, suggesting that light travelled like a wave and not a particle. Maxwell transformed the way in which the nature of light was understood. He took four observations: when electric charges move, they produce an electric force; magnetic monopoles do not exist, or there is no north pole without a south pole, because they exist in pairs; changing electric forces produces a change in magnetic forces; and changing magnetic forces produces changes in electric fields. That last is the principle of the dynamo—when one cycles along with moving magnets, one is able to produce an electric current that puts the light on. Maxwell put together all those equations that describe such phenomena and showed mathematically that waves consisting of oscillating magnetic and electric fields could travel through empty space at the speed of light—just over 300,000km per second. That model of electromagnetic radiation, to which Alasdair Morgan referred, was suggested by Michael Faraday about 20 years earlier, but it was James Clerk Maxwell who had the mathematical ability to "prove"—a word that scientists always put in inverted commas—that it was a substantial hypothesis. Einstein went on to bring together the work of Newton and Maxwell. Another physicist, Max Planck, to whom Alasdair Morgan referred,  suggested prior to Einstein that light could behave like a moving particle—so Newton was not altogether wrong—and that the energy of those particles was related to the frequency of the light, or the rate at which those oscillating electromagnetic fields that Maxwell spoke about related to the energy of those light particles. Einstein went on to develop that work to show that light could be considered to have mass, which was related to its energy, and that because it has mass, it could be affected by electromagnetic fields, which he famously proved during an eclipse of the sun. James Clerk Maxwell's theories therefore influenced future developments in understanding physics as well as chemistry, affecting our understanding of the atom and the way in which atoms interact with light and with each other. His work influenced many scientists and enabled the development of many instruments and gadgets that we now take for granted. Isaac Newton said: "If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of Giants". It is clear that James Clerk Maxwell was one of the giants on whose shoulders others, including Albert Einstein, stood. It is therefore fitting that we in the Scottish Parliament record the contribution that this Scottish physicist made to international science.

To ask the Scottish Executive what funding has been made available to Dumfries and Galloway Council this financial year for the provision of after-school care and when the council was made aware of its allocation. (S2O-10311)

Does the minister share my concern that after-school clubs in my constituency were not made aware of their grant allocation until the middle of this month, which made it necessary for some to take out loans to pay their staff? Will the  Executive encourage the council to ensure that those voluntary sector organisations, which provide a vital service for children and young people and their families, are not subjected to such financial insecurity in future years?

I was going to apologise to the convener of the Finance Committee for being late for his opening speech because I was meeting a minister, but I see that he is not present to hear my speech, so I may not apologise. We all agree that deprivation is not a straightforward concept. It is not only about poverty, although income is clearly a factor. It is possibly better to say that deprivation occurs when a person has a low standard of living, which could be the result of poor housing, poor health, a lack of education and employment opportunities or poor access to services. In some cities, deprivation is concentrated in geographical areas, where it is much more recognisable. Such levels of deprivation are often self-reinforcing. I see that the convener of the Finance Committee has returned to the chamber. I apologise to him for being late for his speech. As we know, in rural communities, individual households that are in close proximity to very advantaged households may experience multiple deprivation. It is therefore difficult to identify where deprivation exists. As a result, there cannot be a Scotland-wide solution to tackling deprivation. Unlike some members who have spoken, I think that the Scottish index of multiple deprivation is spatially useful in identifying areas of multiple deprivation at a council ward level. It has been used by the Executive to allocate the community regeneration fund to the most deprived 15 per cent of areas. Some people who represent rural areas seem to argue that only places such as Glasgow, Dundee and Edinburgh receive benefits, but in my constituency in Dumfries and Galloway, funding has been made available to urban areas in north-west Dumfries and Stranraer. As a result, some 400 substandard flats will be demolished and replaced by 600 houses for rent, co-ownership and ownership. That has helped a more rural community.  The funding is extremely welcome, but it does not address the fact that the majority of deprived households do not live within the most deprived 15 per cent of communities. At the same time, some of the people who live in the most deprived 15 per cent of communities are not deprived. For example, I live in north-west Dumfries, but I do not think that I am suffering multiple deprivation—although there is always the chance of my being deprived of employment in the next year or so. That is true of most communities, including urban council areas. The response to our report from the City of Edinburgh Council states that, in Edinburgh, 62 per cent of people on low incomes and 68 per cent of unemployed people live outside the SIMD-defined areas of the city. It is not just about rural areas, therefore; it is true of many cities as well. Nevertheless, I believe that the City of Edinburgh Council may have misunderstood some of our report. It thinks that we are talking only about area deprivation in most of our recommendations and I do not think that that is the case. We are reflecting the need for the division between area and individual aspects of deprivation. It is not fair, either, to maintain that the Scottish Executive is unaware of the issue. In the minister's interim response to our report, he mentioned recent work under the closing the opportunity gap project. Last month, 22 rural service priority areas were identified using the SIMD approach combined with difficulties in accessing services due to remoteness and rurality. The minister stated in his interim response that funding will be made available to those areas. My constituency includes the council wards of Langholm and Upper Eskdale, Moffat, Canonbie and Kirtle, and Lockerbie East. Someone travelling around my constituency would not necessarily recognise those council wards as areas in which multiple deprivation is a problem, but they are. In areas such as Canonbie and Langholm, the economy is very fragile and the communities have suffered greatly because of the decline in the textile trade, which has meant a reduction in the number of employment opportunities, coupled with the difficulties that remoteness brings in accessing services. I therefore look forward to hearing more about how the rural services priority areas will be progressed. The committee received a range of evidence on how the SIMD should be used, if it should be used at all. Some local authorities believe that the range should be much narrower and that, if we concentrated on the most deprived 10 per cent of areas, we would focus on the areas that had the most severe problems—areas such as Glasgow, Dundee, West Dunbartonshire and Inverclyde. They believe that that would give us a clearer focus on those areas of multiple deprivation.  However, other authorities argue that the range should be wider. I think that Fife Council argued that the range should be extended to about 25 per cent. That reflects the geography of that area, where there are small fishing communities and former mining communities in which deprivation exists, which would not necessarily show up in a rigorous analysis. Local authorities have a fundamental role in determining how local regeneration should be effected. That has been reflected in the setting up of statutory community planning partnerships whose role is to agree the three-year regeneration outcome agreements and use their allocation of the communities regeneration fund to deliver specific outcomes. However, I will argue later that how those partnerships are set up at the moment is a bit too well defined—they are not flexible enough truly to reflect the needs of their communities. Mention has been made of whether it is possible to bend the spend. That is not a phrase that I like terribly much. We need to reflect on the relative size of the budgets. The sum of £327.8 million has been allocated to the community regeneration fund and community voices, but that is a pretty small amount compared to the £8.1 billion in aggregate external finance that local authorities receive and the £6 billion that health boards receive. At the moment, there is little evidence that the Executive is really able to bend those big budgets, although I acknowledge the minister's point that the ROAs have not been in existence for long and that we are perhaps being a bit quick in judging their ability to create a real difference. As we have heard, the committee recommends that the Executive reviews the possibility of including additional deprivation weightings in the mainstream local government and health budgets and that it also undertakes a more fundamental longer-term review. Of course, those weightings would need to take account of the tension between area and individual deprivation. That is why the committee has also recommended that the community planning partnerships should be given more discretion in determining how the balance of available funding can be directed—whether it should be directed towards area deprivation or towards individual family deprivation. I was pleased to hear from the minister that the Executive is taking on board the committee's recommendation that the deprivation weightings should be revisited before the next spending review. That is welcome, as is the fact that it will be done within that timescale. However, as others have said, the most crucial recommendation in the report is the bringing together of the various funding streams into one single deprivation fund. I was not quite sure of  Mike Rumbles's points, because he did not seem to think that that is what we recommended. My understanding is that that is what we recommended. A single deprivation fund will be allocated among CPPs and will supplement area-based programmes with funding to tackle the wider issues of household deprivation. We also believe that local outcomes should be agreed but that national progress should be monitored relative to a fairly narrow range of performance indicators. Having criticised the Executive on many occasions for having too many targets, we are not going to advocate setting a whole range of targets to monitor how it is getting on in this area. We would like there to be a narrow range of national performance indicators so that we can assess whether we really are making progress in tackling deprivation across Scotland. If we could take on board the recommendations, the approach could effect real change in Scotland. I therefore commend the report to Parliament, although I accept to some extent what Tommy Sheridan said. I thought it myself when I was reading the report. We did fail the plain-speaking test and it might be difficult for people who are not familiar with some of the concepts to understand what we are getting at. We might have to take that on board in future.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to assess the success of the sure start programme. (S2O-10051)

The minister will probably be aware of the concerns that have been raised about the English sure start project, which has been formally assessed. There is anecdotal evidence that it has been successful, but although parents of children who are from moderately disadvantaged backgrounds seem to have gained some advantages from it, parents of children who are from the most deprived sections of society do not seem to have benefited from it. It also seems that children have not derived any particular benefits and that parents have benefited to a greater extent than children have done. Will the minister examine the results from the English sure start programme to check that we are not obtaining similar results in Scotland?

I am always pleased to have the opportunity to debate education matters in Parliament, so I am grateful to the Conservatives for selecting education as their topic for debate and for making it the sole topic rather than using their time to have two debates, which gives people time to address some of the issues. However, that is the last time that I will be nice to the Tories in my speech, because I believe that their motion is misleading in a number of respects. The Executive has devolved and will devolve more power to head teachers. The amount of budgetary control that head teachers have under devolved school management has increased. It was interesting that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton used the example of South Ayrshire, as the decision that he mentioned was taken when I was the chair of educational services in South Ayrshire Council. Labour-led councils have taken the decision to devolve more power and financial power to head teachers over a period of time. Programmes such as the schools of ambition  initiative, which Fiona Hyslop mentioned, will allow head teachers to develop their own programmes to tackle issues in their schools and to formulate best practice that can be rolled out to other schools. That will allow diversity within our current education system. The Executive has encouraged and will encourage parents to become more involved in their children's schools. Reference was made to recent legislation. Contrary to what the Conservatives' motion says, the replacement of school boards by parent councils is intended to give parents greater flexibility in determining how the parent body operates and places a duty on local authorities and ministers to encourage parental involvement. As we said in the debate that dealt with the matter, legislation alone cannot ensure that that happens, but we have created the legislative basis for it by placing that duty on those who are responsible for education. The Scottish Parent Teacher Council welcomed the new Scottish Schools (Parental Involvement) Bill, declaring it to be parent friendly and focused on the issues that are of most concern to parents, and saying that it should deliver what parents have long said they want. If the legislation reduced the amount of parental control, why on earth would a national parental body welcome it? It just does not make sense. Even the Scottish School Board Association, which was originally opposed to the bill, felt that its views were taken on board and that the functions of the new parent councils, which are dealt with in section 8 of the bill, would enhance the effectiveness of school boards. The Tories are beating on a broken drum. The motion goes on to congratulate Jordanhill school on its successes, which the Conservatives seem to attribute not to the hard work of teachers or pupils but to the simple fact that it is the only publicly funded school that is not under local authority control in Scotland—a somewhat simplistic analysis.

I do not think that Murdo Fraser was listening. Since the days of Mrs Thatcher, opting out in a variety of guises has been the Tories' magic wand for education. In February last year, Mr Fraser claimed that £600 million could be saved by removing responsibility for school education from local authorities, which would reduce council tax by 35 per cent. What he failed to say was how the money would be found in the Scottish Executive's budget to provide the public funds for each publicly run school. Would the Conservatives like to explain?

What Mr McCabe is looking at is the way in which we configure public services, not removing schools—

It would not necessarily be cheaper. What the Conservatives are talking about would mean that we could not have such efficiency exercises across public services, because they would break things down into smaller and smaller units. Bill Butler asked where the Conservatives now stand on passports. Before the general election, school passports were the best thing since sliced bread and Mr McLetchie swanned off to Sweden to tell us how wonderful they were. Mr Cameron does not think that they are such a good idea, so perhaps the Conservatives could explain where they now stand on the matter. On school discipline, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's press release last Friday claimed: "The EIS report is firmly in keeping with what Scottish Conservatives have been saying for years." Setting aside what the EIS might think about claims that it endorses Tory education policy, let us have a look at some of the things that were said in "Supporting teachers, tackling indiscipline". I quote from page 7, which states: "At the present time there is an unprecedented level of activity on the part of the Scottish Executive, local authorities, the EIS and individual teachers in response to concerns relating to pupil indiscipline." It states that there is no precedent for the current level of activity, not even when the great Tories were in control of the Scottish Office. The EIS is asking for a number of things. Quite rightly, teachers are asking for sufficient funding for additional support needs. The Deputy Minister for Education and Young People has indicated the resources that have gone in and we must ensure that they are channelled properly. Teachers are also calling for additional staffing for in-school behaviour bases and units for the most challenging pupils, for early intervention and, if that is not successful, for off-site behavioural facilities. Part of the Tories' solution—not in Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's speech, but in some of their press releases—is to use exclusion as a blunt  instrument. Of course, exclusion has a role to play, but it is certainly not a solution, and I do not believe that young people should be rewarded for bad behaviour by being given holidays, especially if they just transfer their bad behaviour to the local community.

I am afraid that I must make progress. What we need is specialist training, more continuing professional development, a more flexible curriculum, the ability for young people who are seriously disruptive to work with teachers and trained assistants to confront and address their problems and the curriculum to be adjusted accordingly. The way in which some schools treat young men is an issue. I do not have time to expound on that, but the way in which young men are treated in schools can cause problems. The motion concludes with some guff about a more diverse education system. Lord James claims that that refers to some of the educational reforms south of the border. I am certainly not embarrassed to say that we are not seeking the same solutions for Scotland. The Tories managed to all but destroy the state education system in parts of England during their rule in the 1980s and 1990s. I lived in England from 1976 to 1988, but I was determined to return to my homeland. That was partly because I knew that we would get our own Parliament eventually and I wanted to be there when that happened, but I also knew that I certainly was not going to educate my kids in the corrupted and deformed education system in England. We resisted the introduction of such a system in Scotland and, as Fiona Hyslop rightly said, the Tories' philosophy and our education system is all the better for it. We do not need the solution of opted out schools and so on.

No, because I have to finish now. We must offer choice within schools and excellence within schools. There must be ambition for all pupils, excellence for all pupils and all pupils must fulfil their potential. We reject the solutions that seem to be necessary south of the border. We have a better system here. We will improve on it and will ensure that it delivers for all our children.

It will come as no surprise to members that amendment 8 is to do with ragwort, as I have referred to ragwort on a number of occasions. Ragwort is an attractive  yellow wildflower and is the habitat of the cinnabar moth, but it also—unfortunately—contains a number of alkaloid toxins that are particularly toxic to horses, to cattle to a lesser extent and to sheep to a lesser extent still. A horse that consumes only a small amount of ragwort in its lifetime can die an unpleasant, lingering and cruel death. The British Horse Society has identified the need for education. Many people do not know what ragwort looks like, do not realise how dangerous it is to horses and do not appreciate that it should be nowhere near horses. I lodged amendment 8 because I wanted an assurance from ministers that they would produce a code of practice on the control of ragwort that is similar to that which DEFRA produced following a private member's bill. At one time, I thought of introducing a member's bill on the issue, but that will not be necessary if the Executive is prepared to act. Clarification about the contamination of forage crops is needed in such a code. Horses are unlikely to eat ragwort in fields, but they are likely to consume it if it is contained in hay. People are not always aware of the dangers of ragwort in hay. I would like clarification on the matter because legislation exists that prevents the sale of contaminated foodstuffs, but many horse owners do not know their rights. Many townspeople think that every person who owns a horse is a Lady Chatterley type, but many ordinary people in rural areas—nurses and factory workers, for example—own horses, which represent a considerable expense. Such people forgo many other pleasures by owning horses and their rights with respect to what recourse they can have if they are sold contaminated crops for their horses need to be clarified. Dealing with the matter in the code would be helpful. I will sum up. I would like an assurance on the record from ministers that a code of practice will be produced as soon as possible. That should not take long, given that DEFRA already has a similar code, which could be translated to Scotland. If I receive such an assurance, I will not press my amendment, but I will thank ministers on behalf of horse owners and their equine friends throughout Scotland. I move amendment 8.

I am pleased with the assurances that I have received. Jim Wallace is correct to say that there are other forms of ragwort. The usual form, which is covered by the Weeds Act 1959, is common ragwort, but there are other forms of ragwort. That needs to be looked into. I inform the minister that my PhD is not in ragwort, I am afraid, but in laser magnetic resonance spectroscopy. I thank the minister for his assurances and I thank the many members who have raised the issue over the years. I look forward to guidance being issued. I seek to withdraw amendment 8.  Amendment 8, by agreement, withdrawn.

The fear to which Iain Smith referred has been caused by misinformation that was primarily put about by the Conservative party about the bill's provisions and intentions. As Ken Macintosh rightly said, the primary purpose of the Conservatives' previous legislation, which established school boards, was to encourage schools to opt out from local education authority control. As I said in an earlier debate, the legislation was not successful in achieving that aim, but school boards were successful in encouraging parents to become more involved in the running of their children's schools.

No. I am sorry, but I have only three minutes. I agree that the bill is not just about sweeping away the previous legislation—it is about building on it and modernising and reforming it to provide a more flexible arrangement that will allow parents to decide how they would like to be involved in school arrangements. The current school boards can be retained if that is what parents want, but the structure of the parent representative body can be changed if it is felt that that is more appropriate to the school. I am surprised at what Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said. In support of amendment 1, he said that parents rather than the Government should shape how things develop. That is entirely what the bill is about. I recently attended a forum on discrimination in my constituency. It was specifically said in one workshop that school boards are not inclusive. In fact, I was asked to go to the Executive to suggest that the legislation be reformed. I was pleased to tell the audience that the Executive had already taken the matter on board and that reform was imminent. As the minister said, the bill is a start in increasing parental involvement in children's education. Legislation alone cannot deliver increased involvement, but it can provide a framework. I am pleased that the SNP supports the bill, but I wonder why SNP members think that other pieces of legislation have been delayed. I am certainly not aware of other pieces of legislation that have been held back because of it.

No. I am sorry, but I have only a minute left. James Douglas-Hamilton mentioned appointments. As the minister said, parents will be involved much earlier in the process of selecting head teachers, so they will have greater influence, but it must be recognised that head teachers are the employees of local authorities and that responsibility for their appointment rests with local authorities. However, it would be an unwise local authority that went against the wishes of the parent council, as that would hardly bode well for the operation of the parent council in future. Like many members, I was disappointed by Mr Gallie's speech. I will not be verbally abusive towards him, but I feel that his last-ditch intervention—in which he tried to revive the  spectres that haunted the Parliament in its early days around the discussions on the abolition of section 2A—was most unfortunate. If his constituents had raised the matter as a concern at that time, the Conservatives should have lodged an amendment at stage 2 and had the matter fully discussed then. I am pleased to support the bill.

Section 1 states: "It is the duty of an education authority to promote the involvement of the parents ... in the education provided ... to that pupil". All that Fiona Hyslop's amendments would do is to add cumbersome phraseology; they would not add to the spirit of the bill in any way.

Although I agree that it is essential that ministers consult any national parents body, the new subsection that amendment 1 proposes could have an unintended consequence. Would every bill that went through the Parliament in future need to specify who would have to be consulted? If so, would ministers need to bother to  consult any agency other than those that were specified in statute?

I speak in support of the minister's approach, which reflects the concerns that the committee raised on the need for parents of pre-school children to become more involved in their children's education. The problem with the way in which the committee amended the bill at stage 2 is that parents of children at publicly funded nursery schools, which are only one form of pre-school education, would be treated differently. Obviously, in some local authority areas, large numbers of pupils are in school nursery classes, and I assume that their parents will be able to get involved in the parent forum for that school. We also have publicly funded nursery schools that disperse children to a number of primary schools and, in rural areas in particular, agreements are in place with the private and voluntary sectors for the delivery of pre-school provision. Amendment 27 will not encourage the parents of pupils in publicly funded nursery schools to become involved in the same way that other parents will be involved.  It is difficult to find a form of words that encompasses the parents of pupils in all the different forms of pre-school education, but the solution that the ministers have gone for is the most appropriate one.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to reduce waiting times for treatment for heroin addicts in Dumfries and Galloway. (S2O-9706)

The minister will be aware that a significant heroin problem remains in Dumfries and Galloway. Information passed to me suggests that it can often take weeks for addicts to get an appointment at Cameron House and that when they get one the range of treatment that is available is often fairly limited. Does the Executive have further plans to help to reduce waiting times and to assist the DAT in Dumfries and Galloway? Will the Executive consider releasing funds seized as a result of the confiscation of assets in the Dumfries and Galloway region to enable them to be used to help to tackle addiction problems and their consequences?

The Greens' motion does not call on the Scottish Labour Party or the Scottish Conservatives to do anything, so I suspect that some of the intention behind it is to discomfit our Liberal Democrat coalition partners. I am sure that they will deal with those arguments when their time comes. My position is well known. I was pleased to support the motion—Christine May referred to it in an intervention—which was proposed by Amicus and supported by the National Union of Mineworkers, that was passed at this year's Scottish Labour Party conference. It recognised that the long-term future security of energy supply is crucial to the UK's industrial and domestic economy, and it called for a balanced energy policy that should include replacement nuclear new build and clean coal technologies to meet the nation's needs. It should be recognised that we also passed a motion at the conference that called for increased Government support for renewable energy technologies and energy efficiency measures. Like those at the Scottish Labour Party conference and the Scottish Trades Union Congress later on, I and many of my Labour Party colleagues are in favour of a mixture of measures to ensure a secure supply of energy generated in the UK—we are unionist parties and I am not ashamed of being a unionist, so I am talking about an energy policy for the union—to meet the country's needs for the foreseeable future. Nuclear fission technologies, which are making progress at long last, will play a part in the next generation of base-load capacity. They will be part of the mix with other technologies, such as a wider variety of renewables technologies, which will be developed further in the hope that, in 50 years' time, we will no longer need to use nuclear fission technologies. We need to have ambitious targets for renewables generation to ensure that the momentum in developing renewables technologies of all sizes—micro and large—is sustained.

Indeed. Experiences such as that at Chernobyl, which was horrendous, have no bearing on the argument in favour of nuclear power stations today. I was going to say later in my speech that the Sustainable Development Commission recognises that the UK nuclear power industry has the best safety record.  I do not believe that nuclear power is the total solution; we need to have separate targets for the generation of power from non and low-carbon-producing technologies. Nuclear should not be included in renewables targets because it is not a renewable technology. I must address the rest of the motion, which says "CoRWM takes no position on the desirability or otherwise of nuclear new build." CORWM was not asked to do that. It is an independent body of experts that took three years to look at the burial of waste. What it has proposed is in line with what happens in other countries. It is all very well to try to make out that it is rehashing old solutions or to talk about nuclear dumping grounds, but there is no reference to nuclear dumping grounds in the CORWM report—and referring to the old list of possible Nirex sites is just a red herring. The Sustainable Development Commission did not say that nuclear should be ruled out; it recognised the UK nuclear safety record and said that, on balance, nuclear power is not the option at the moment but that it could be revisited through technology exchange. Some of the arguments that are being put forward by the anti-nuclear lobby are red herrings and scaremongering stories that are not relevant to the scientific arguments. There is a sentence in the partnership agreement that papers over, I suppose, the differences between two parties that have different policies. Indeed, people in the same parties have different views. I do not think that such differences are a deal breaker at the moment. Somebody has to want to build a new nuclear power station. The Scottish Executive will become involved when a company proposes a plan for a new nuclear power station. I do not think that that will happen before May 2007. I do not think that any future coalition agreement between any parties will contain such a statement. In any case, this whole issue, which is simply a political point aimed predominantly at our Liberal Democrat coalition partners in the run-up to the May 2007 elections, is not relevant to the much more serious scientific debate that we must have on nuclear power.

I congratulate Alasdair Morgan on having his motion accepted for debate. I apologise for not having signed it, although I thought that I had done. I am sure that my Dumfries and Galloway Council colleague, Jim Dempster, will take me to  task for that oversight. Like many others who have represented the area, he is extremely and rightly proud of the excellent visitor attraction in his ward. As Alex Fergusson said, we have just been discussing the Scottish historic environment policy. SHEP 1 refers to Scotland's industrial heritage, specifically to the Verdant Works in Dundee. I am particularly delighted to see the recognition of the importance of our industrial heritage in that policy document. I do not think that it can be overemphasised. Industrial museums such as the Museum of Lead Mining at Wanlockhead, the Verdant Works in Dundee, the Scottish Mining Museum in Midlothian and the Scottish Fisheries Museum in Anstruther teach us about the lives of our forebears in ways that no other medium can. No film, DVD or television programme, however well made it might be, can compare with the experience of being inside the workplaces or homes of those who worked in those industries or with seeing the actual equipment with which they worked. Speaking as a Labour Party member, I believe that such museums tell us why our forebears had to become involved in the trade union movement and why they had to fight for better conditions and a better environment. It is important that we support the industrial heritage museums, because we should not lose sight of where we came from. If we do not support them, we will lose sight of our past and our young people will not understand what their grandparents and great-grandparents had to endure in the course of their work. As Alasdair Morgan said, Wanlockhead is a remote village. The Museum of Lead Mining brings visitors up to Wanlockhead who would not go there otherwise. I do not know the area as well as either Alasdair Morgan or Alex Fergusson, the previous and current constituency members, but I do not think that there is an awful lot at Wanlockhead to bring visitors up there other than the museum. It brings in people and money, supporting the local economy. It is a real asset to the area. Back in 2003, during my brief period as Deputy Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport, the Scottish Executive provided a grant of £30,000 to the Wanlockhead museum. I felt at the time that I was somewhat unpopular with officials for wanting to make the grant. The resistance seemed to come from the civil service. There was a feeling that, because some industrial museums had been set up independently or by voluntary bodies, they should not have any expectation of national support, as nobody had asked the National Museums of Scotland or whatever to set them up. The people who set them up were apparently expected simply to get on with it.  I feel now, as I did at the time, that that is a churlish attitude, and I sense that the Executive is now moving away from that. The way in which the SHEP now describes the museums is different. A huge amount of effort has been put in by volunteers and by those who believe passionately in the preservation of that part of our heritage. We ought to congratulate and support the people who have done that, rather than just leave them to get on with it. I hope that there is a way forward, perhaps through a discussion around the expansion of the role of the National Museums, of which the industrial museums could somehow possibly become part. It is important that we continue to support our industrial heritage, which I believe to be as important to our understanding of our past and of our nation's history as any artefact, any crown jewels or any other object that we might see stuck in a box somewhere. I hope that there is a way to develop a mechanism of long-term support for our industrial heritage.

Like Michael Matheson, I remember what happened when the Parliament planned to debate architectural policy, so when I heard that we were to debate the historic environment policy I was concerned about the historic environment of this building and the area around it. I am not quite sure why Donald Gorrie thinks that being photographed with his dog is politically incorrect, but I wondered whether the dog was called Shep. Perhaps the previous environmental policy was called Old Shep—but I will move on.  I welcome the publication of the SHEP 1 report and consultation paper on the historic environment policy. Although the consultation paper does not ask specific questions, it invites suggestions about how key outcomes can be achieved. It is unlikely that anyone will disagree with the key outcomes, but the consultation process will give people an opportunity to feed in information about how we can achieve the results that we seek for the historic environment. Like other members, I am pleased that SHEP 1 says: "The protection of the historic environment is not about preventing change. The historic environment ... is dynamic and its protection and conservation is about ensuring that change is managed intelligently". That statement is important and welcome. In the past, the protection of the historic environment has sometimes appeared to prevent the possibility of adapting buildings to new use. Other members have referred to that approach, which can mean that historic buildings are condemned to lie empty and disused instead of being sympathetically adapted. I understand that the approach represented a reaction to activity in the 1960s. I was brought up in Edinburgh, where the desecration of buildings on Princes Street and elsewhere in the historic environment provoked a response that perhaps swung too far in the opposite direction. There has been too much resistance to the minor adaptation of historic buildings to enable them to be used and I welcome a change in that approach, if such a change is happening. There is probably no place more appropriate for reflection on the reuse of historic buildings than the Scottish Parliament complex, where Queensberry House has found a new life as part of a contemporary building. There are many good examples of the successful merger of historic and modern buildings; the Lighthouse in Glasgow, for example, which is mentioned in SHEP 1, is an outstanding example of how contemporary and older styles of architecture can complement each other. In my constituency, A-listed buildings on the Crichton campus have been sensitively adapted to provide accommodation for the university campus and business park. The Scottish Executive's national health service central register, which was relocated to Dumfries last year, is housed in one such building. The most recent developments on the site involve the extension of Easterbrook Hall to provide enhanced conference facilities and the incorporation of a grade A-listed building, Johnston House, into a new hotel that will open this autumn. There was some resistance to the development from Historic Scotland, which was at  first suspicious of some of the plans that involved the grade A-listed building. About a year ago, I arranged and attended a meeting with the chief executive of Historic Scotland and representatives from the Crichton Development Company, Dumfries and Galloway Council and Scottish Enterprise Dumfries and Galloway. We all went somewhat mob-handed to Longmore House, where we had a successful conversation with Historic Scotland, out of which came ways of addressing some of the concerns about the plans. Eventually, mutually acceptable plans were drawn up, which will allow the project to be completed. I am pleased that the new facilities will be opened this autumn, as they are important for the local economy and for the development of the Crichton site. I say to members of various parties that the site will make an excellent venue for party conferences, a point that I have been trying to drive home to my party. In Annan in my constituency, Bridge House, which is an absolutely outstanding example of a Georgian town house and which was the home of Annan academy when Thomas Carlyle was a pupil, sadly lay vacant for many years, despite the best efforts of a trust to try to find funding and alternative uses for it. One benefit from the decommissioning of the Chapelcross power station is that a new use has at long last been found for Bridge House and that fine house will be back in use. Like other members, I am concerned about the powers, or perhaps I should say the lack of powers, that local authorities have to deal with the owners of historic buildings, or of buildings in historic areas, who allow them to fall into disrepair. I will briefly give two examples. The house and gardens in the centre of Dumfries that inspired J M Barrie to write "Peter Pan" have lain vacant and untended for many years. The property is in ownership and, every so often, rumour goes round the town that it will be used. The most recent rumour that I heard was that it was to become a hotel with a theme park as a garden. However, nobody seems to be able to track down the owner. I have tried to find out who the owner is through the assessor's roll and the solicitors who act on their behalf, but I cannot. The council cannot do so either, so there seems to be no possibility of doing something with an historic building that is important to the town.

I take the point on board, although that is not necessarily the only way of addressing the problem. However, methods of addressing the problem must be found.  A second brief example is the little street in which my constituency office is situated, which is called Friars Vennel. It is an ancient street that used to lead from the monastery up to the town, which is why it has its name, and which has associations with the Covenanters and other historic associations. At one time, it was a thriving business area, but it fell on hard times. Because of the development of the High Street and the Loreburn shopping centre, the shops and small businesses in Friars Vennel no longer had passing visitors on the main shopping trail. Despite that, local businesses and the council have made efforts to renovate the street and bring back its historic character. However, those efforts are being severely hampered by the owners of four derelict buildings. The buildings are not particularly important historically, but as they are not being looked after the historic environment is being brought down. In that second case, we know who the owners are; they have simply failed to invest in the buildings over the years. During the recent heavy snowfall, one of the buildings collapsed and is now lying by the side of the street, looking rather sad. Despite all the efforts of everyone who wants to bring up the street to the appropriate standard, it is impossible for the council to do anything about the situation. I would like there to be increased powers—possibly through planning regulations—for councils to compulsorily purchase such buildings for the value of the property less the amount that they would have to spend to get them into a suitable condition to either use or resell. I wonder whether the Executive has given any consideration to streamlining the compulsory purchase process to enable councils to take on board derelict properties and do something with them. Such buildings are an absolute blight, not just on Dumfries but on other places in my constituency and around Scotland. If we could do something about that, we would be doing something for our nation's historic environment.

To ask the Scottish Executive what improvements have been achieved in the performance of NHS 24. (S2O-9648)

I am sure that everybody is pleased about the improved performance, but does the minister agree that that owes much to the devolution of services to local call centres, such as that in Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary, at times of high demand? Will he reassure the Parliament that the use of local call centres will continue and that NHS 24 will not follow the similar organisation south of the border, NHS Direct, in centralising the nurse adviser system?

The First Minister may be aware of two announcements that were made last week, about the closure of the Ring True call centre in Dumfries and about the Hunter Rubber Company going into administration. Almost 100 jobs have already been lost in the town through those two events, and a further 60 may be lost if a buyer is not found for the Hunter Rubber Company. Does he agree that those are significant losses for a town with a population of 35,000? How can he and the Scottish Executive ensure that the internal problems of Scottish Enterprise do not diminish its efforts and its role in securing new businesses to take over both those high-quality sites and provide employment for those whose jobs have been lost or are in jeopardy?

I am pleased to sum up for the Labour Party in this debate and to welcome the proposals that were published in the curriculum review progress report on Monday. The group was set up to identify the purposes of education and the principles of the design of the three-to-18 curriculum to ensure that Scottish education would be fit for the challenges of the 21 st century. As I think that we have said in the chamber before, in the past, assessment and education was about failure, because the vast majority of people failed and only a small number of people would pass and get the sort of qualifications that would enable them to do well in life. Now, however, we aspire to a system in which all learners are successful learners. That is important in terms of enabling each individual to reach their full potential in all the ways to which Sylvia Jackson referred in relation to the 2000 act. However, it is also important in the production of a skilled workforce that is able to drive forward the knowledge economy, which we debated last week. The report is still a work in progress and more detailed work will follow. However, there are a lot of interesting ideas in it. It suggests that the  curriculum should be designed to develop the four capacities that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton commented on, but it is also intended to develop important skills such as numeracy and literacy. It takes the approach of having a single-curriculum framework throughout all the ages of school, from the age of three to the age of 18. As the minister and Iain Smith said, it tries to iron out the problems of transition. Iain Smith suggested that the teaching techniques that are used in nursery schools, such as active learning, could be extended into primary schools. The report recognises that learning is delivered through several paths in school. Bill Butler pointed out that the ethos of the school is one of those paths. Others are the curriculum areas and subjects, interdisciplinary projects and personal development—a lot of outdoor education would come under that heading. The report recognises that children learn in different ways and at different rates. Like the minister, I was interested in the different ways of describing progression and I am aware of the fact that educational experiences can be lateral as well as vertical. I do not know whether that is what Brian Adam was driving at when he talked about repetition, but it is possible to have enhancing understanding experiences, which are about not taking the pupil to a higher level but deepening the pupil's understanding of concepts at the level that they have reached. The report suggests that there should be eight curriculum groupings in order to develop skills across a range of contexts. It is important to think of those as groupings and not mergers, because subject groupings will remain within those groupings. As I am a former scientist, like Brian Adam, I would like to see scientists regarded as heroes—actually, I would also like politicians to be regarded as heroes, but that could happen only in a parallel universe. I was interested in the detailed exploration of the science curriculum in appendix 2 of the report. I wish that I had read it before last week's debate on the knowledge economy, because it reflected some of the points that I tried to make in that debate about the ways in which science education is delivered in the curriculum. The report suggests that the science curriculum up to and including secondary 3 would be based on the development of scientific skills, using three main groupings: the living world; the material world; and the physical world. That would replace the traditional science subjects and would involve pupils using real-life contexts for scientific study and engaging in thematic and interdisciplinary work to avoid the repetition that is not about enhancement but which occurs as a result of the same things coming up in different subjects.  It is important to encourage informed debate on current issues that face us all. Brian Adam touched on that. As Fiona Hyslop said, we all need to be scientifically literate, not just those of us who want to go on to be scientists. If anybody has concerns about that approach, I reassure them that a similar approach was taken by the Open University in its structure of science foundation course, which I taught for a year. In that new course, we moved away from teaching physics, chemistry, biology and earth science to cover a variety of different contexts. To allay the fears of those who are worried about the diminution of subjects, I point out that, at the end of the course, students could decide to study chemistry, physics or whatever. However, the concepts and skills were introduced in a cross-disciplinary way that encouraged reflective learning. Like the minister, I am interested in the review group's suggestions about learner-focused outcomes in which learners can recognise and describe what they have learned. That means not only that they can recognise the development of their essential transferable skills, but that they know what they have learned. That encourages self-esteem and is linked to motivation, so the focus on learner-focused outcomes is an interesting development.

To ask  the Scottish Executive how good practice in tackling substance misuse is shared between drug and alcohol action teams across Scotland. (S2O-9494)

I thank the minister for his reply; I am interested to hear what the Executive is doing. I noticed that recently published statistics show considerable differences in waiting times for drug treatments and rehabilitation in ADATs, but there was also a caveat that it was not appropriate to make too-rigid comparisons. Given that there are increased concerns about the appropriateness of methadone treatment for some addicts, how can we ensure that developments in drug treatments—in particular novel drug treatments, one of which is now being trialled by a patient in Dumfries and Galloway—are made available throughout Scotland so that any addict for whom the treatment is appropriate can receive it in his or her own area?

To ask the Scottish Executive what arrangements should be put in place before elderly patients are discharged from hospital and which agencies are responsible for ensuring that adequate home care is provided. (S2O-9392)

Unfortunately, in recent months a number of cases in which adequate care has not been put in place have been brought to my attention. The most recent case involves a constituent of almost 80 years of age, who lives alone, who was discharged from Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary after suffering a stroke and having a pacemaker fitted and who is also a cancer sufferer. She receives less than one hour's care per day at home and is expected to stay in her bed from 8 o'clock at night until 10 or half past 10 the following morning, because she is not yet strong enough to get herself out of bed. Does the minister share my concern about that? Does he agree that it is unacceptable and that if it is not possible to ensure that adequate care is provided at home, elderly patients, especially those living alone, should be offered a period of recuperation in a residential or care home until such care can be provided for them?

To ask the First Minister whether all measures are in place to enforce the legislation on smoking in public places, which comes into force this Sunday. (S2F-2196)

As the Parliament has provided a lead to other legislatures in banning smoking in public places, I am pleased that the Executive has made resources available to local authorities to adequately enforce the legislation. I am also pleased that funding has been made available to help people who want to give up smoking. However, does the First Minister agree that the third side of the triangle is prevention, and that the best way of combating nicotine addiction is never to start smoking? What measures is the Executive thinking of taking to discourage young people—especially girls, I am afraid—from experimenting with tobacco? Will he consider the possible use of role models from the fields of entertainment—and indeed sport, with the return of our heroes from Melbourne—to get across the anti-smoking message to children in the later years of primary school and the early years of secondary school?

One of the good things about as wide-ranging a subject as growing the knowledge economy is that it gives all of us the opportunity to mount our own hobby horses. Members have done a certain amount of that already and I am going to do the same. What I will speak about is dear to my heart—the contribution of science and technology to the expansion of the knowledge economy and the need to encourage more young people at school and in further and higher education to study the sciences. If we do not grow enough scientists, the expansion of our knowledge economy will not continue. As has been said many times in the chamber, we have a great tradition of excellence in science  and technology. For example, James Clerk Maxwell, whose 175 th birthday will be celebrated this summer, was acknowledged by Albert Einstein as the genius on whose shoulders Einstein stood when he developed the theory of relativity. Of course, people such as Alexander Fleming and James Watt demonstrated the excellence from which Scotland's wealth and economy developed in previous centuries. There are many good scientists in Scotland now. The minister mentioned the fact that we are third in the world in relation to citations. There is the work that is being done in Dundee by Professor David Lane and the school of life science research. A few months ago, I had the pleasure of visiting the centre for science at extreme conditions here in Edinburgh—I always think of it as the centre for extreme research, which has slightly different connotations. The centre's research is exciting and is likely to produce unusual, novel materials on which future generations of information technology can be based. Some excellent work is being done in Scotland. There are collaborations between university departments. Some time ago, Alex Neil hosted a presentation by the Scottish universities physics alliance. Physics departments at universities across Scotland are linking together to get a competitive advantage over bigger nations such as England and the States. In chemistry, the same thing is being done through the ScotCHEM collaboration between chemistry departments. We need to examine the structure of support, funding, career opportunities and stability of employment for scientists. Professor Bernard King of the University of Abertay Dundee has identified a number of issues. Last month, he wrote to me in my role as a member of the Finance Committee—he may also have written to a number of other members—expressing some concerns about the way in which the Executive supports science structurally. In his graduation address, which he copied to me, he stated: "Scotland has inherited from devolution an incoherent system for formulating and implementing science, technology and research policy", because there is "no single central function of government". He contrasted that with the role of the Office of Science and Technology at Westminster. We may need to revisit the political structures of support, to bring things together so that we can offer greater support. Professor King also referred to the system of university research funding, which is more a UK issue than a Scottish issue. The research assessment exercise funds universities on the  basis of the amount of published research that they have already done. That is fine, but it is self-perpetuating. Research that is intended for commercialisation is not necessarily published, because the researchers do not want to give it to other people. If scientists concentrate on published research to attract funds to their university, they may not get involved in the commercialisation exercises that we would like to see.

That is the problem. It is possible that people are being diverted from the effort that they should be putting into commercialisation. Professor C K Prahalad, who is an adviser to the Indian Government on global business strategy, coined the phrase "legacy thinking". The idea is that if we keep on doing the things that we did, we will keep on getting the same results. We may need to consider doing things a bit differently if we want to change and to increase the amount of commercialisation that we manage to achieve. As well as reconsidering support structures and research funding mechanisms, we need to encourage students to study science at school, college and university, which is vital. In his speech, the minister spoke about promoting science to young people and the choices that young people make about what they will study. I welcome the increase in the number of science teachers, especially in chemistry, but we started from a low base. In the curriculum review, we must consider introducing more flexibility in the school curriculum, university admissions policy and, possibly, the recruitment of trainee science teachers. The challenge at school is to encourage young people to gain core scientific skills in areas such as problem solving. In my view, the issue is problem identification. When I taught science, I found that people often had difficulty in identifying the problem and that if they knew what the problem was, they would know how to solve it. People should know where to look for information, how to select what is most relevant, how to apply it, how to present it and pass it on to others, and how to explain things. Such transferable scientific skills, which are relevant to mathematics and all the other sciences, are probably more important than knowledge of specific disciplines. They are certainly much more important than the rote learning of facts that went on in science when I was a young person and a student.  I wonder whether the university entrance qualifications for sciences are a bit too prescriptive. When the Education Committee was examining the curriculum review, one contributor—I cannot remember who it was—asked why it was necessary for someone to have higher chemistry in order to study chemistry at university, given that it is possible to take a university degree in philosophy without having studied philosophy at school. Perhaps universities should look at the way in which they use entrance qualifications, which deters people from studying science. I can provide members with an anecdotal example from my family. My daughter decided that she wanted to study ancient history at the University of St Andrews. She had not done any history since secondary 2, but she was allowed to study ancient history and has enjoyed the subject greatly. Her younger brother has discovered in fifth year that he has both a passion for and an ability in biology. However, as he gave up chemistry in second year, he will not be able to study biology, because he does not have standard grade chemistry. Such restrictions on studying sciences at university do not encourage people to get involved in science or provide them with the opportunity to do so. Universities need to consider the issue, just as schools need to examine the way in which they develop scientific skills. Other members have raised the issue of progression and lifelong learning. In his speech, the minister mentioned the merging of the funding councils. I want briefly to refer to what is happening in my constituency, where the Crichton university campus has brought together on one site a number of higher education institutions. The local further education college will also be relocated to that site. It is a novel project in Scotland that has been extremely successful in bringing into higher education people who would not otherwise have become involved in it, such as women who want to return to the labour market. The project has given opportunities to people who are unable to leave the area to study. However, we need to progress it. There is a need for capital investment to improve the student experience and to bring in students from outside the area. Because of the way in which higher and further education is funded, all the higher education institutions that collaborate on the campus must fund the project from within their current funding envelope. That means that money invested in the Crichton campus must be taken away from the University of Glasgow and the University of Paisley, which is a problem in its development. The project is extremely important locally and is providing training and skills in areas where we have regional shortages. At the conclusion of the first year of social work training, there was a major  shortage of social workers in Dumfries and Galloway. Now we are training them in-house and are able to bring on local people as social workers. I hope that we will do the same in teaching, as we have a shortage of teachers. I have often nagged ministers and the funding council to examine ways in which such unique projects can be developed, because the Crichton campus works differently from university and further education institutions elsewhere in Scotland. It has made a valuable contribution to the local economy, which promises to be even more valuable in future. However, our funding structures must be flexible enough to cope with such a novel project.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is evaluating the effectiveness of the community warden scheme  and Executive funding in diverting young people from antisocial behaviour. (S2O-9238)

I will be interested to hear the results of the evaluation. I know that the minister is aware of the success of the community warden scheme in north-west Dumfries, in my constituency, which was recently the subject of a brief television report. Not only has the scheme made people feel more secure in their homes, it has engaged with local young people and supported them in finding alternatives to antisocial behaviour, such as midnight football. How will the Executive ensure that other areas of Dumfries and Galloway and Scotland benefit from the introduction of community warden schemes? Other communities in my constituency are keen to get a piece of the action.

I draw to the member's attention a quotation from David Cameron about a just say no campaign for children. He said: "I don't believe it would work. But if we tell children the facts and the dangers, they might just listen." Does that represent a difference in policy north and south of the border or is it just Mr Cameron's verbal gymnastics?

I have quite a lot of sympathy for the Tory motion and have been arguing along those lines for many years—a lot longer than some of my colleagues down south—but I question the Tories' motivation, which is, I suspect, to split the coalition. With Nicol Stephen doing such a good job of that, I am surprised that they are bothering to try. The debate is about a reserved policy matter. Although the Scottish Executive has powers in planning, the UK Government will determine energy policy and I have every confidence that our colleagues down south will come to a sensible conclusion. However, as Nora Radcliffe pointed out, the Tories are slightly at odds with each other north and south of the border. Mr Cameron, their leader, has said that he is open minded about nuclear power and has appointed Zac Goldsmith, the editor of The Ecologist magazine and a well-known critic of nuclear power, to be deputy  chairman of the Conservative party's wider quality-of-life review.

They are not my Executive ministers, because I am not the First Minister, so I cannot guarantee anything. I am one of those who were pleased to support the Amicus and National Union of Mineworkers motion on coal and nuclear power that the Scottish Labour conference agreed to. I support ambitious renewable energy targets; I do not include nuclear energy as a renewable source. We need to have energy efficiency targets and targets for non-carbon-generated energy. The most recent statistics show that Scotland has been using 175TWh of energy a year. We have six major generating stations, three of which are nuclear. Just under 40 per cent of our current power generation is nuclear. I do not think that we can keep our industries and services running without a nuclear power component and a clean coal component.

I am sorry—I do not have time. The alternative, which was not supported by the Scottish people according to the recent BBC poll, is importing oil and gas or energy that is generated by nuclear means in Europe. I do not support that, either. I draw the Parliament's attention to the comments of Professor Lovelock, a fundamental green. He was one of the first people to point out the problems with the ozone layer and one of the first people to mention the likely impact of global warming. He has pointed out to us that if we had 50 years to bring on renewable technology, we might be okay, but we do not have 50 years. The problem is far more imminent. We cannot tackle climate change unless we accept that nuclear power has to play a part, at least for the next generation. That will allow us time to develop renewables and to develop nuclear fusion technologies, which mean that, in the longer term, we might not require nuclear fission. The Sustainable Development Commission, which has been mentioned in the debate, states: "nuclear is a low carbon technology, with an impressive safety record in the UK. Nuclear could generate large quantities of electricity, contribute to stabilising CO2 emissions and add to the diversity of the UK's energy supply." There are a number of reasons why the Sustainable Development Commission came out  against nuclear power generation on balance at the moment. I think that there are questions about some of the issues that the commission has. However, the commission was not nearly as damning of the nuclear generation capacity as some of the reports in the media have suggested. If we have a UK energy review that accepts new nuclear generation, I do not see why my constituents at Chapelcross should be excluded from the benefits of new-generation nuclear power if, just across the Solway, the people at Sellafield and Calder Hall are not.

As we have to declare interests, perhaps I ought to declare that I am a member of the SSPCA, the Dumfries and Galloway Canine Rescue Centre and Dumfriesshire Greyhound Rescue, as well as being a horse, dog, cat and fish owner. I am grateful for the opportunity to make a short speech in the stage 1 debate on a welcome and important bill. I am not a member of the Environment and Rural Development Committee, nor have I been able to attend any of its meetings due to the clash of timetable with the Education Committee, but I welcome the bill's general principles. However, as one whose constituents were particularly badly affected by the foot-and-mouth outbreak five years ago, I ask the ministers to reflect on the important points that Maureen Macmillan made on whether the powers of slaughter need to be amended. I will confine my comments to a particular animal welfare concern to which Rosemary Byrne has just referred: common ragwort. That will be no surprise to the ministers. Ragwort is a common wild plant—many parts of the Scottish countryside are covered with its yellow flowers during the spring and summer—but many people do not recognise  it. When I was a child, it tended to be found on cliff tops and near the sea, where its population of cinnabar moth caterpillars was always a source of fascination to me. However, nowadays, it can be seen on rough ground and in fields and hedgerows all over the countryside. For any members who do not know what it looks like—it is amazing how many people do not know what it is—I have a picture of it with me. Unfortunately, ragwort contains a highly toxic alkaloid that is especially poisonous to horses. It is also, to a lesser extent, poisonous to cattle and even sheep, which always rather worries me, because some people use sheep to control it. A horse may die if, over its entire lifetime, it consumes only 0.5 per cent of its own body weight in ragwort. As the average horse weighs half a tonne—if it stands on your foot, you are fairly sure that it weighs half a tonne—that means that a horse has to consume only about 1kg of ragwort to die. Ragwort poisoning is cumulative and its effects can be delayed for weeks or months. It attacks the animal's liver and causes a slow and painful death, but it is difficult to prove that it was the cause of death. At the moment, that tends to require a liver biopsy, but many people do not instruct one when a horse dies. However, I understand that a skin test is being developed, which should make it easier to prove the extent of the poison. Ragwort is also poisonous to people, who ought to protect their hands when pulling the plant. If I have liver damage, it was caused by looking at those cinnabar moth caterpillars and is nothing to do with my subsequent lifestyle.

I will talk about that, because there are issues with the bill on that. The control of ragwort is currently covered by the Weeds Act 1959, the Environmental Protection Act 1990 and the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997. John Scott mentioned the contamination of forage by ragwort. That is particularly dangerous to horses because, although horses might eat ragwort in the field, they are more likely to eat dried ragwort in hay. Forage contamination is covered in the Agriculture Act 1970 and the Feeding Stuffs (Scotland) Regulations 2000 but, despite that legislation, ragwort still grows in fields that are grazed by horses and cattle and it is still found in proximity to forage crops. The bill presents an opportunity to provide information and education on the hazards  of ragwort to horses and other vulnerable animals and it will give more force to the existing legislation.

Sorry. I have only a minute and a half left. In evidence to the committee, the British Horse Society suggested that statutory improvement notices could be used when a horse is being exposed to ragwort and it is likely that it will ingest the plant. It proposes the application of enforceable notices that state that either the horse or the ragwort must be removed. It also suggests that section 20 should be amended to refer specifically to ragwort poisoning, although I note that the minister responded by observing that section 22 places a greater onus on people who own or work with horses to take steps to avoid ragwort poisoning. The BHS stressed that there is an opportunity to use animal welfare codes and the regulation-making powers in the bill to regulate ragwort control. That might involve statutory guidance that is similar to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs code of practice that was introduced south of the border by the Ragwort Control Act 2003, so we might be able to bring our legislation into line with the English legislation. I seek clarification of the responsibilities of the owner of the horse when the horse is on loan to other individuals or is kept in livery stables and maintenance of the land is not the responsibility of the owner. The bill suggests that it is solely the owner's responsibility to remove ragwort from forage. It suggests that the owner should go through the hay to look for ragwort. In the winter, horses consume large amounts of hay and it is difficult for owners to go through it and look for bits of ragwort. I think that the person who produces the forage has a responsibility to ensure that it is not contaminated with ragwort. I ask the minister to provide some clarification on that.

Will the member take an intervention?

The bill intends to do exactly what it says in the title: to promote the involvement of parents in the education of their children. It replaces a system that was introduced by the Tory Government in the School Boards (Scotland) Act 1988. Despite the way in which Lord James Douglas-Hamilton describes it, that piece of legislation was designed to assist and encourage schools to opt out of local council control. As far as I know, that policy is still championed by the Tory party, although one can never be sure with David Cameron. In that regard, the 1988 act was an unsuccessful piece of Tory legislation, as it did not have the desired effect.

I am talking about the intention behind the Conservative legislation that was introduced in 1988 and 1989, which, in Scotland, was unsuccessful at encouraging schools to opt out of local authority control. It was successful in another regard. Although many local authorities and head teachers were, initially, suspicious of the intentions of the legislation, over time, many school boards have been successful, working well with head teachers and making a valuable contribution to local authority education policies. Perhaps Brian Monteith should have listened to the rest of my speech before starting to shout. The bill builds on the success of school boards but introduces a more flexible framework that will allow parents, if they wish, to continue with their current school board structure as their parent council or to change that structure if they feel that that is appropriate for their school. For example, in a small rural school—I have some in my constituency—the parent council and the parent forum may be the same thing. I agree that parental involvement is not just about structures; I do not think that anybody in the Executive parties is arguing that. The fact that we have introduced the bill does not mean that we are not concerned about the children who do not achieve, the 20 per cent of children who could do better than they do or the specific problems of looked-after children. The number of ministerial statements that there have been on those issues surely illustrates the importance that ministers attach to them. Parental involvement is very much about the culture of schools and local authorities, about  making parents feel welcome and about encouraging them to be involved in their children's education. That is easier for some parents than it is for others. Many parents may have been alienated by their own experiences of school. They may feel intimidated or have preconceived views that are based on unhappy school days. They need to be involved too. Indeed, it is particularly important to involve those parents because their children need to fulfil their potential too. A more flexible approach to parental involvement will allow school communities to develop a structure that is appropriate to that school community, so that people feel ownership of it. The system is not centralised and, as the minister said, it is not ideologically driven and it is not a case of one size fits all. At the moment, at any one time, only around 1 per cent of parents are involved in their school board and they tend to be middle-class parents. Scottish Consumer Council research of 2002 found that parents with degrees—

No, I am sorry, but the member's ex-colleague had rather a long intervention. Parents with degrees were five times more likely to be school board members than those with no formal qualifications. It is just as important that parents who do not have degrees feel involved in their children's school. The Education Committee noted a number of issues from its evidence sessions. As Fiona Hyslop mentioned, one of those was that school boards involve not just parents and head teachers; they also have representation from other members of staff and pupils, and local councillors are entitled to attend. We felt that it was important that wider representation should continue and that parent councils should draw members from staff, pupils—in particular—and the local community. I know that ministers are reluctant to include that provision in the bill because they feel that it could be restrictive, but we should consider ways to encourage wider representation and ministers have said that they are prepared to do so. The bill introduces a power for parent councils to make representations to HMIE as long as they have already made such representations to the head teacher and the local authority and have received replies. In evidence, concerns were raised about that, because the provision was not in the original proposals. Some witnesses felt that there had been inadequate consultation, the Educational Institute of Scotland was concerned that HMIE might be used as an arbitration service, the Scottish Parent Teacher Council did not feel that there was any great demand from parents for  the power and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities feared that the power might be used either frivolously or vexatiously. The minister clarified in evidence that the proposed provision would be an extreme measure. I say again to ministers that there could be a case for parents having the power to go to HMIE about their local authority rather than the school. I am thinking particularly of all the work that we have done on additional support needs, because the provision of such needs is the responsibility of the education authority rather than the school. If parents are concerned about that, they should have the opportunity to go to HMIE. I welcome ministers' assurances that they are willing to consider amendments that arise from the committee's report, but I finish by asking a question that other members have raised: will the results of the consultation on senior staff appointments and the Executive response to that be available to the committee in advance of stage 2 consideration?

As members have said, for many years social workers have got the blame for society's failures. There have been a number of appalling cases, some of which have been mentioned, in which professionals such as social workers and social work departments have deservedly received a fair amount of criticism because they failed to act or to work together. Unfortunately, there has been a perception that social workers have a magic wand to sort out all the problems that everyone else is unable to sort out and that they are at fault when they fail to do so. That has been the case for a long time. Adam Ingram and Christine Grahame came close to suggesting that there was a golden age of social work. My mother was a social worker, so I can assure members that the lot of a social worker has never been particularly happy—it has always been a stressful and difficult job. However, we must acknowledge that issues relating to alcohol,  substance and drug abuse have made the profession even more difficult than it has always been. I agree with Susan Deacon, Carolyn Leckie and others that social workers get the blame for what everyone else does. We are all reluctant to accept responsibility as individuals and as a society. There is too much of a culture of "someone should do something about it", rather than "we all ought to be doing something about it". The review group was established two years ago against a background of problems in recruitment and retention. Councils were competing to attract social workers, and some were offering financial incentives to poach them from neighbouring authorities. There were also wide differences between authorities. Dumfries and Galloway Council is in a state of extreme flux at the moment. I apologise for the rather rude noise that my mobile phone made earlier; I was getting updated on the crises in the council. I discovered not only that the council had vacancies in social work but that it had a smaller number of posts per thousand of the population than other councils. I found that rather extraordinary, given that the area has a fairly elderly population that needs support. When I pointed that out to the director responsible, he seemed unaware of the fact that the council had a smaller number of posts than other authorities. It is perhaps surprising that, despite all the problems in social work, there has been a high level of interest in the social work training that has been offered recently. We have heard about the fast-track training that the Executive has introduced. The University of Glasgow offers a master of arts honours degree in social work, which was introduced at the Crichton university campus in Dumfries in September last year, with support from Dumfries and Galloway Council to fund a lecturer. The course attracted a large number of applicants, including some who were not quite in the last five years of their working life but were more mature. The only slight disappointment was that the vast majority of applicants were women. Fewer men than we would like are demonstrating an interest in social work training. If we are to keep new graduates in social work, the profession—and the public's perception of it—must change. People who take up careers in social work do so because they want to help and support people who are in need for a variety of reasons, just as people who take up teaching do so because they want to help children to learn and people who take up nursing do so because they want to care for people who are unwell and to help them to improve their health. Professionals in the public sector take up their jobs because they want  to help other people in society. They do not do it for fame or recognition, but because they have a fundamental desire to help their fellow man and to contribute to society. That must be acknowledged, because we often hear the public sector condemned as a drain on the nation that does not contribute. Public sector professionals are extremely important people. It is incumbent on us to ensure that the structures that support them are modernised and that we support them in their aims. If we consider the ways in which we are modernising the public sector—for example, through the Kerr report and the debates that have taken place on the national priorities and legislative change in education—we see that many similar things are happening in different parts of the public sector. The priorities are similar, but the methods of achieving things differ between disciplines. For example, we are developing national priorities and strong leadership. Individual social workers sometimes end up with problems because line managers have not taken responsibility. We need strong leadership and people who are able to take courageous decisions, but it is difficult for them to do that in a blame culture. We need to move away from a blame culture, so that people can make the decisions that need to be made. We are developing personalised services that meet individual needs. In education, we need to respond to the needs of the child; in social services, we need to respond to the needs of the client. Despite the problems that Trish Godman mentioned, we need earlier intervention so that we can prevent crises. That is important in social work, just as it is in health and education. We need to strengthen the profession through continuous professional development and to enable experienced social workers to progress in their careers while remaining in front-line services. We should not lose people who have the valuable hands-on experience that is so important in ensuring that the right decisions are made. We need to work in partnership with users and carers and to involve people in the decisions that are made about their futures. We need to foster joint working between sectors and to develop a culture of improvement and excellence, rather than a culture of blame. I accept that, as Trish Godman said, some people in the profession are a bit disappointed by the review and think that it is not radical enough. For example, there is no designated minister for social work. I do not think that any of us would argue for more ministers, and I am sure that the First Minister would not want a larger number of ministers than he has at the moment. However, it may be possible to bring together portfolios and to  give one minister responsibility for social work, rather than splitting it up between ministers. That is happening to a certain extent in any case. There has been criticism of how long it took to carry out the review, but it is part of a more general reform and modernisation of public services to make them fit for the 21 st century. Christine Grahame and others referred to a silo mentality that resulted in people in health, social work and criminal justice not speaking to one other, but we are gradually getting rid of that. It is difficult to change cultures and to require people to work together, but that is essential if we are to provide seamless services that meet the needs of individuals. Individuals do not care who gives them support—they care about whether the support that they need is available. The public sector has much to deal with. It must adapt to the challenges of demographic change and addiction, but the way forward that we have identified of trying to modernise public services is to be welcomed. I am sure that the journey will not always be easy, but it is worth while for us to progress along the road. I hope that we will work together in a spirit of consensus to achieve the objectives that we all have.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers safety on trunk roads in Dumfries and Galloway to be adequate. (S2O-8960)

I am a trifle surprised by the minister's reply. I am grateful for the interest he has shown in the safety concerns arising from recent fatal accidents on the A76, but, sadly, I have to advise him that there have been several other serious and fatal accidents on other trunk roads in the Dumfries constituency—on the A75, the A701 and the A7—in recent months. Not a week has gone by recently without one of those trunk roads being closed due to a serious accident.  What will the minister do to bring forward implementation of the improvement schemes for the A75 and the A7? Those schemes have been subject to repeated delay. Does the minister agree that a strategic review of the trunk road system in Dumfries and Galloway is required, to respond to increasing traffic flows and associated safety issues?

To ask the First Minister whether discussions have taken place between the Scottish Executive and Scottish Gas in respect of proposed utility charge increases. (S2F-2110)

I am sure that the First Minister shares my concern over the effect that fuel price rises of possibly up to 25 per cent will have on many residents in my Dumfries constituency. It will affect people on fixed incomes, such as pensioners, and those in low-income households. Will he encourage the utility companies to extend programmes such as the winter rebate and here to help, which assist vulnerable households? Will he ensure that those schemes are publicised as widely as possible? Further, does he agree that the current situation demonstrates the perils of overreliance on one source of energy and the need to develop a balanced and self-sustaining energy policy that should not exclude the possible contribution of nuclear energy?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that qualified nursery teachers make a valuable contribution to pre-school education. (S2O-8874)

The minister will be aware of research undertaken in England and Wales—the effective provision of pre-school education study—that demonstrated that not only did input from nursery staff with graduate-level qualifications improve children's attainment in their later years, but the effect was particularly marked when a staff member was trained in teaching. Does he therefore share my concern that some local authorities, including Dumfries and Galloway  Council, have been considering removing teachers from nursery classes as part of the current savings exercise, albeit that councillors have now rejected the most extreme options placed before them by officials?

Forests and forestry products are extremely important in Dumfries and Galloway—I include timber industries for biomass power production and the use of forests for leisure. I should mention that the 7stanes project is located in my constituency as well as in that of Alex Fergusson. My question relates to Rosemary Byrne's question. Much of the correspondence that I receive is about timber transportation. Is the Executive able to report on the success of the first year of operation of the strategic timber transport fund or to advise whether demand for funding exceeds supply with respect to the proposed routes?

How long do I have, Presiding Officer?

Thanks very much. I thought that we had had this debate on 21 December and it was only on reflection that I realised that that was the debate on the Finance Committee report at stage 1. Perhaps the case could be made for bringing the two debates together to deal with some of the problems that John Swinney referred to about who can make amendments at what time. It is a little confusing to have a group of budget debates together because it is difficult to know who is discussing what at what time. That is especially the case today because the motion seeks approval for spending plans that have already been announced and discussed. Indeed, there have been plenty of opportunities over the past year to question ministers after ministerial statements and during Executive debates about the way in which the Executive structures its expenditure. The minister was right to flag up the transparency of the process. When the committee met in Elgin, transparency was one of the points raised during the public session. There is a lack of understanding among the general public—possibly even in the Parliament—of how transparent the budget process is in Scotland compared with how it is elsewhere. I will comment briefly on Ted Brocklebank's totally selective and suspect use of figures. Attainment in education in Scotland is increasing. I do not deny that there is a problem with the bottom 20 per cent and the Executive has policies to address that, but it is not the case that attainment in education is not increasing. I was grateful to the Executive for its response to the Finance Committee's report. I flag up one or two points to which I appreciate the minister might not be able to respond immediately although they have arisen from the way in which the Executive responded. I am grateful to the Executive for agreeing to continue to investigate the way in which health boards' allocations are presented to make them more transparent and for agreeing to review the presentation of the cross-cutting  information—to which Ted Brocklebank referred—to make it much clearer how portfolios contribute financially to the Executive's cross-cutting objectives. However, there are one or two things about which I would like to know more. For example, ministers stated in their response that the health board savings of at least 1 per cent are not being deducted "from any existing plans". Does that mean that they are not being deducted at source from the baseline budget before any increases are added for spending pressures or specific projects? That is not exactly the same thing. Des McNulty mentioned the mechanisms for monitoring the delivery of the partnership agreement and the fact that they are being informed by the approach of the Prime Minister's delivery unit. The Finance Committee took fairly detailed evidence from Professor Barber about the focused way in which progress towards particular targets is being monitored and overseen by the Prime Minister himself in England and Wales, and I wondered how that informing was being translated into practice in the Executive's monitoring of its progress towards implementing the partnership agreement. It has been clarified that pay provision in education is excluded from efficiency savings, but that is not the same thing as education being excluded from them. At one point, the Finance Committee thought that education itself was excluded. There are issues with making efficiency savings in education, because some councils—including Dumfries and Galloway Council—are making proposals that would reduce the education services that they provide, such as the support for children with additional support needs. We need to monitor that and ensure that cuts in councils' services do not run counter to the Scottish Executive's intentions. It is still the case that councils are treated differently from Executive departments in having to find the £197 million of efficiency savings from their budgets by 2007-08. The Finance Committee is conducting a short-term inquiry into the effects of the single status agreement and retrospective equal pay claims and I assure the ministers that all members of the committee will be just as rigorous in interrogating council officials and councillors as we are in interrogating ministers. We will not roll over and say that councils should be paid all the money that they demand, but there is definitely an issue with their ability to afford the equal pay claims. COSLA has agreed that the single status agreement is the responsibility of the individual councils, but the councils have a problem in finding what could be larger than anticipated amounts of money for equal pay claims. I call on the ministers and COSLA to have realistic  discussions about that. There is no point in councils presenting the Executive with a huge bill and, without substantiating that bill, demanding that it pay up, but it is necessary to continue to have realistic dialogue about how that might be resolved.

Labour's manifesto in 2003 stated: "The measure of the society we are building will be the quality of the protection it offers our children." When three-year-old Kennedy McFarlane of Dumfries was murdered in 2000, the subsequent inquiry revealed a serious lack of communication between the different agencies that should have been involved in her protection. Despite the concerns of her playschool, reports—by health visitors and her general practitioner—about injuries and admissions to hospital, she was killed before a case conference could be convened. The bill is part of the solution that will prevent such tragedies from happening in the future. Original advice to ministers was that joint inspections could be achieved only by administrative means. However, the minister said in his evidence to the Education Committee on 26 May 2004 that if there was a need to legislate, the Executive would take the powers to do so. The three pilots that were run last year have proved that such legislation is necessary. As we have heard, the BMA has concerns about the sharing of information that is contained in young people's records. However, such information can already be shared if it is required for the purposes of protecting an individual child or young person. Indeed, Morgan Jamieson of the Scottish Executive's Health Department advised the committee on 23 November last year: "If the records of a family member were pertinent to a child's safety, that circumstance would override the confidentiality duty towards other family members as well."—[ Official Report , Education Committee , 23 November 2005; c 2805.]  I should mention the view of other professionals, for example Dr Hammond of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, who stated: "My colleagues and I feel that to inspect services properly we have to have a 360° look round." She also said that "the tracking of the chronology of events from the raising of the first concerns about the child right through to successful protection—we hope—or unsuccessful protection is critical in allowing us to identify where things went wrong or went well so that we can improve our services. Without joint consideration, we will not be able to do that."—[ Official Report , Education Committee , 23 November 2005; c 2808.] There have been more general concerns about the sharing of such information during the inspections of children's services in general, rather than the forthcoming child protection inspections. The committee heard evidence from the chief executive of the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care, Jacquie Roberts, that "there are children who are not in the child protection system but who need to be. Unless we consider services in the round, we will not find out about such children and whether the systems in children's services generally are in place to identify effectively the children who are at risk."—[ Official Report, Education Committee , 23 November 2005; c 2819.] Sadly, children such as Kennedy McFarlane and Caleb Ness will continue to require protection. The passing of the bill will enable the provision of systems to ensure that we can effectively identify children who are at risk. The legislation will assure people that systems are in place in each local authority area and that they are joined up throughout Scotland. We need to be able to do that to ensure the much-needed protection of vulnerable children and young people. I am pleased to support the legislation.

I, too, will not support amendment 2. The Conservatives have a bit of a fashion for  sunset clauses, which they have previously tried to suggest should be introduced. I see no reason why a requirement should be placed on the face of the bill that the legislation be reviewed every three years in perpetuity, given that that does not happen with other pieces of legislation. I was intrigued by Lord James's reference to evil future ministers. I just wonder what sort of alliance he foresees happening in the Parliament in the future.

As other members have said, the issue of confidentiality was much discussed by the committee as a matter of concern. As a result, the Executive lodged an amendment at stage 2 to take on board some of the concerns that were discussed. If we go as far as Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and Fiona Hyslop wish us to go, we will make the inspectorate subject to a series of penalties to which no other inspectorate is subject. No other inspection agency in Scotland is subject to the offence of a breach of confidentiality; I question why we should have to introduce that offence for this specific group of inspectors. Some members of the medical profession do not share the British Medical Association's concerns.  The BMA has particular concerns that were not echoed by paediatricians, for example. Finally, why should we consider breaches of confidence in relation to medical records as different from breaches of confidence in relation to social work records? Social work records may contain information that could be more damaging to the individual concerned than their medical records.

To ask the Scottish Executive what capital funding may be available to the higher education institutions collaborating on the Crichton university campus in Dumfries to enable them to expand and improve the facilities at the campus. (S2O-8714) I ask that because I believe that I represent the best part of Scotland.

I will certainly be interested in obtaining further details about that. So far, the higher education institutions on the Crichton campus have received in the order of £2.3 million, which has enabled them to attract an additional 150 student places, but is the minister aware that a similar collaboration in the south-west of England involving the Combined Universities in Cornwall—the other CUC—has attracted £150 million of objective 1 funding and further and higher education funding, which has enabled it to attract another 4,000 students by 2007? Does he agree that such funding is extremely important to areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, particularly in the light of the unique work that has been done at the Crichton campus in bringing together further and higher education in line with the Scottish Executive's policies? Does he also agree that it is extremely important not only for the furtherance of the Executive's further and higher education policies, but for the local economy in Dumfries and Galloway, that there is capital investment in the Crichton campus that will allow us to attract more students—particularly from overseas—to the campus?

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I also thank the members of all parties who signed the motion, thus enabling the debate to take place. On 13 December, less than two weeks before Christmas and during one of the busiest weeks of the year for counter staff, Post Office Ltd—a company that is wholly owned by the Royal Mail Group—announced the closure of a further six town centre Crown post offices and the transfer of their functions to private sector franchises. Those post offices are in my constituency, in Dumfries, and in Perth, Bathgate, Dunfermline, Coatbridge and Hope Street. The Post Office Ltd press release of 13 December stated that there would be a seven-week consultation period on the proposals. However, subsequent meetings and communications with the Post Office's spokespeople have indicated that a deal has already been struck with CJ Lang & Son Ltd, and, in the case of Dumfries, with Malhotra & Partners Ltd, with the support of CJ Lang & Son Ltd. Management met staff and their trade union representatives the following Monday—I am pleased to see that members of the Communication Workers Union are in the gallery—and staff were then told that they had two weeks in which to decide whether they wanted to take voluntary redundancy terms or to transfer elsewhere in the Royal Mail Group. Last week, the new posts in the Spar franchises were advertised  in the local job centres. That is not what I understand by the word "consultation". There is massive public opposition to the proposals in my constituency, and since 14 December, I have been running a petition that calls for a rethink. Despite the Christmas holiday period, there are already more than 4,500 signatures on that petition. I am pleased to welcome members of Dumfries and Galloway Council, including its chief executive and convener, who are here for the south of Scotland alliance reception later this evening. The council has expressed grave reservations about the effect of the proposals on its town centre regeneration proposals. It has offered to take over the shop; indeed, it could even help to run the post office from its own premises. However, for reasons that I do not understand, the council has been told that a conflict of interests would be involved in its doing that. It has therefore offered to help Post Office Ltd to find more suitable premises that are nearer to the centre of the town. The Crown post office is currently located at the main local bus service interchange in the town centre. Post Office Ltd has said that the new location will be 300m away, but the distance as the pedestrian walks rather than as the crow flies is more like 500m and it includes a steep descent down Bank Street from the High Street. The location would be far less convenient for older and disabled people, who make up a significant proportion of the post office's customers. Indeed, after the announcement, I observed a disabled man in a wheelchair attempting to get up Bank Street. If it had not been for a friend of his who ran out of the bookies to help him, he would not have been able to make it up the street. A 70-year-old constituent of mine whose wife is disabled told me that there are 17 car parking spaces for disabled people in the vicinity of the current site, but there would be only two spaces within 200m of the new site. The location is not good for the service. We have been told that a full range of post office services will be protected, but I cannot see how that can happen. At the moment, the Dumfries post office employs 14 staff, but the new adverts are for only six staff, only two of whom will be full time. The other posts are part-time posts. So far, the maximum number of hours that have been advertised at any of the new locations is only 122 hours per week—there will be fewer hours at some locations. As far as I can see, that will mean that there will be fewer counters and longer queues for customers. Furthermore, all the posts except for the post office manager's post are advertised as paying only 30p an hour above the minimum wage. The manager will be offered the princely sum of £16,000 a year for a 42-hour week. Those amounts do not compare with the  wages that post office staff currently receive—they do not even compare terribly well with the wages that other retailers offer. My daughter's 18-year-old friend who works for Tesco earns more than that. The experienced and dedicated staff who currently work for the Post Office will not work for such wages. I cannot believe that the same service that the general post office currently offers will be on offer. We know that Post Office Ltd has financial problems and that the transfers are being undertaken to cut down on staff costs. However, the current proposals do not stand up to scrutiny on that basis. Post Office Ltd has told us that nobody will be made compulsorily redundant and that everybody will be able to take voluntary redundancy terms or to transfer elsewhere in the Royal Mail Group. The nearest Crown post offices to Dumfries are in Ayr and Carlisle, which are 60 miles and 35 miles away respectively. Even if staff could travel those distances, they would have to rely on people at those post offices wanting to take voluntary redundancy terms in order to obtain employment. It is unlikely that 14 people would do so. If staff transfer elsewhere in the Royal Mail Group, it will not make the savings that it needs to make. If the process continues, a point must come at which it must be recognised that people will have to be made compulsorily redundant. In those circumstances, staff should receive compulsory rather than voluntary redundancy terms. I am not confident that, in the light of its actions so far, Post Office Ltd will reverse its decision, but I urge my constituents to write to Andy Bayfield of Post Office Ltd and to copy their representations to Postwatch Scotland. I ask people to stress the total unsuitability of the proposals for Dumfries and the effect on the post office's business if it moves to the new location. Many of my constituents have told me that they are unlikely to transfer their business if there is a new location. They are likely to use the high street banks and their own local branches. We saw something similar happening about a year ago when Safeway was taken over by Morrisons and the in-store post office was closed. At that time, we were told that the Dumfries town centre post office was safe—but it was not. We were told recently that only 15 per cent of the in-store business had transferred from Morrisons to the new Crown post office. What if that happens again? What happens if the business does not transfer from Great King Street—its current location—to the new office in Whitesands? It is quite possible that the footfall that underlies the business plan that Spar has put together just will not happen because people will not go there. Then what happens? We have been told that CJ Lang is tied in for five years, after which it has to give 12 months' notice, but how can the small business  franchisee who operates the store do that? He might be bankrupt by then. Post Office Ltd, the Royal Mail Group and the Department of Trade and Industry, which owns the shares, need to reflect on whether the Post Office offers a public service or whether it is just a business. If the Post Office is no longer to be a public service, it cannot count on the loyalty and affection of the public as it does at the moment. Since the 1980s, there has been a long-term programme of conversions and closures of post offices, and only 42 remain in Scotland. To those 42 locations that still have a GPO, I say this is coming shortly—just wait. It is coming to a post office near you, too.

I would like to echo something that Mark Ruskell has just said—[ Laughter. ]

Sorry, I mean Mark Ballard. I agreed with him that we have a far superior method of scrutiny of the Executive's budget than Westminster has. Therefore, I was disappointed when I heard Donald Gorrie's comments on "Good Morning Scotland", which suggested that the Scottish Parliament is letting down the Scottish people because of the poor way in which it scrutinises the budget. The reality is quite the opposite. I do not know about Norway or wherever, but we scrutinise the budget process much more than Westminster does. That was one of the things that impressed people in Elgin, who had not realised the amount of effort that is put into the process not only by the Finance Committee but by the subject committees. The Finance Committee was particularly impressed by the scrutiny by the Local Government and Transport Committee and the Health Committee. I wanted to put my views on the record because I think that the report that I heard on the radio this morning was misleading. Obviously, areas of dissent are more interesting than other areas and make for better debates. However, we have to record that the committees feel that ministers have responded to the concerns that have been raised with them in previous years, although the treatment of health and local government compared to Executive departments was an important area of discussions. I regret that the Finance Committee's report was hijacked and misinterpreted at First Minister's question time last week, but that does not detract from the fact that there is anxiety about how every level of government can make the savings that were identified in "Building a Better Scotland" and the associated efficiency technical notes. Reference has been made to the fact that built into the spending review settlement was an efficiency assumption for local government of about 2 per cent over three years from the financial year 2005-06 and that that was intended to exclude pay provision for education, police and fire services.  The Finance Committee's report notes a number of issues of concern. One is that local government and health are funding the majority—more than 90 per cent—of the total reallocated savings. That is not really a surprise because they are, of course, the big spenders, but in terms of cash-releasing savings, local government and health are funding 82 per cent of the savings with only 70 per cent of the budget. It looks as though some of the savings from those areas are being reallocated elsewhere, but there is no mechanism by which we can trace what is saved in those areas and what is spent elsewhere. We are not quite sure how that can be tracked. Councils and health boards are responsible for setting their own budgets, so there is no mechanism by which we can force them to implement efficiency savings rather than cuts. The baseline reductions by the Executive might be used as an excuse for cuts in services or above-inflation increases in council tax. Tom McCabe might be the guy who gets the blame for not making the efficiency savings, although I am aware that he is engaged in discussions about a modelling exercise that will help councils to save money by working together. I am also concerned that the requirement for efficiency savings has come when there are significant additional pressures on local government because of equal pay and single status. I will illustrate that with a local example from Dumfries and Galloway. I do not argue that Dumfries and Galloway Council could not be more efficient and I do not think that a single resident of Dumfries and Galloway, including the chief executive of its council, would argue that there is no scope for the council to be more efficient. We see money being wasted when roundabouts are replaced with traffic lights and then changed back, or when road humps or nibbings are taken out and put back. Anecdotally, we hear that there are opportunities for savings. Dumfries and Galloway Council did reasonably well in the aggregate external finance increases for next year. It got an increase of 3.7 per cent, which is equivalent to almost £9 million more than this year's allocation, and it will get a further £5.6 million in 2007-08. However, if the council was able to keep the 2.4 per cent that was removed at source, it would have another £5 million. That would help, given that it is facing costs of £5 million for equal pay and a recurrent £6 million for single status. Last week, Dumfries and Galloway Council's education committee considered a programme of £4 million in cuts to education and social services. That programme does not comprise efficiency savings; it includes rationalisation of pre-school provision, reductions in staffing in secondary  schools, savings on school meals, savings on continuing professional development of teachers, school closures, closures of rural libraries, reductions in opening times and increases in charges at sports facilities, and a reduction in the spend on care packages for elderly people. Those are not efficiency savings. They are frightening because they cut across the programmes that the Executive is trying to implement, such as higher teacher numbers, continuing professional development, healthy lifestyles and better school meals. The steps that councils are taking are contrary to what the Executive is trying to achieve, but the problem is that the Executive will get the blame. The fact that local government has not been allowed to make efficiency savings and reallocate them will simply add to the pressures that it faces. I remind ministers that, as a consequence of the chancellor's pre-budget statement, we will get an extra £49 million. That is a small sum compared with the problems, but I hope that the Executive will consider using it to relieve some of the pressures.

To ask the First Minister how the measures in the Chancellor of the Exchequer's pre-budget statement will affect Scotland's economy. (S2F-1991)

The First Minister will be aware of the burdens placed on individuals and businesses in Dumfries and Galloway and throughout Scotland by the high price of petrol and other fuels. Therefore, does he welcome the Chancellor of the Exchequer's announcement that petrol and fuel duties will be frozen for the whole of the financial year? Does he also believe that Scottish consumers, businesses and taxpayers who have paid those high prices deserve to share some of the benefit of the increased profits made by the oil companies through high oil prices? Does he agree that the UK, with its marginal taxation rate of 50 per cent, still offers economic advantage over Norway, with its 78 per cent rate, and most other oil-producing countries?

): I congratulate Alex Fergusson on securing the debate and for the very impressive case that he made for improving the A76. Sadly, since the motion was lodged there has been another fatality, that of an eight-year-old constituent, Joseph Lock. He was on his way to Closeburn Primary School in the school bus on Tuesday 22 November when an accident took place in thick fog on a stretch of the A76 that, as Alex Fergusson said, was being resurfaced. The A76 is a road that I knew well when I used to travel between Prestwick and Dumfries. Unfortunately, in the five years since I left, things seem to have got worse: there have been more accidents and more fatalities. I thank Amey and the Scottish Executive for agreeing to meet me in a couple of weeks to discuss the issues around the accident and I invite to Alex Fergusson and other members to attend that meeting if they wish to do so. Clearly, the circumstances of any fatality are a matter for the police to investigate, but there must be concerns about a road being left in such a condition at a time of year when the weather can be extremely bad. I wrote to one of the minister's predecessors many years ago about the safety of the A76 and the matter has been raised on a number of other occasions by me and others. Sadly, it was only a couple of weeks before the most recent fatality that we last discussed the matter in Parliament. Officials from Dumfries and Galloway Council and East Ayrshire Council met MPs and MSPs during the summer to discuss how we can get the upgrade of the trunk road onto the Executive's agenda. Sadly, the incidence of three fatalities has ensured that the matter is now up for discussion. I  pay tribute to the campaigns that are run by local newspapers the Dumfries Courier and the Dumfries & Galloway Standard . I am pleased that the minister has agreed to meet local MPs and MSPs to discuss their concern about both the A76 and the A75. In my final couple of minutes, I will make a more general point about road safety, particularly on trunk roads. Six people have died on trunk roads in Dumfries and Galloway in six weeks. Road design is clearly a factor, but driver error and failure to drive according to road conditions are also often factors. The Scottish Executive has set targets for councils to reduce the number of road accidents and, in particular, the number of child fatalities, but I wonder whether more measures can be introduced to alert drivers to the dangers on roads that have bad records for serious accidents. That is no substitute for improvement schemes, but it will take time to introduce such schemes and in the meantime we need to do more to alert people to the dangers. A constituent has provided me with photographs of measures that are taken in France, which also has a bad record of road accidents. The French erect black silhouettes by the side of the road to alert drivers to sections of road where fatalities have occurred. That might be a little too explicit for our tastes, but I wonder whether we can do more to remind drivers, who perhaps lack the imagination to realise the dangers in which they may be placing themselves and other road users, that they are in charge of lethal machines. I urge the minister to take action to tackle both the specific problems of the A76 and the more general problems of driver awareness. I finish with the words of Joseph Lock's mother: "I know nothing will bring back my little boy, but something must be done before there are any more accidents."

Back in 2004, the Education Committee reported on progress on "It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright". At that time, we acknowledged the complexity of the task of multidisciplinary inspections and expressed concern about the length of time that was being taken to develop the  inspections and put them into practice. Officials did not then think that there would be a need for legislation. In response to Fiona Hyslop's point about the committee's views, I will quote what the Minister for Education and Young People, Peter Peacock, said to the committee then. He said: "If we think that there is a need to legislate, then we will legislate. We are not going to let anything get in our way on this issue. We think that we can achieve our aims and do what we need to do by administrative means, but I will not rule out the possibility of legislation if that is what we ultimately conclude is necessary. ... if we think that new powers are necessary, we will undoubtedly take them."—[ Official Report , Education Committee , 26 May 2004; c 1469-1470.] At that point, the minister showed his willingness to learn from the pilot scheme and to legislate if that turned out to be necessary. Therefore, it is unfair of Fiona Hyslop to say that the committee suggested at that point that legislation was necessary and that the minister ignored our advice. Fiona Hyslop also referred to the situation in England. We must make it clear that the inspections in England are inspections of children's services, consequent to the Children Act 2004, in respect of their success in meeting the five key outcomes of children being healthy, staying safe, enjoying and achieving, making a positive contribution, and achieving economic well-being. The Office for Standards in Education has said, regarding proportionate inspection in those terms: "we cannot and nor should we attempt to inspect everything. ... One of the key tasks for us in judging where to put our inspection time and activity is to get to the right places". Ofsted recognises that the inspections in England will be fairly limited. I was pleased to hear from the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People that the inspectors in England are interested in what we are going to do in Scotland. On child protection, we are ahead of our colleagues south of the border. The committee expressed concern over the length of time that it has taken to get this far. Although we acknowledge the restraints on consultation that were caused by the tight timescale, the committee agrees that the bill should be progressed as soon as possible. We are grateful for the increased time that has been made available for its consideration at stage 2, which will enable us to consider the proposed amendments in more detail. I was not convinced by the BMA's evidence. Some of it was a little precious and some was contradicted by evidence that we received from paediatricians and others. There is an issue about consent and the genuine concern of individual GPs that their relationships with patients could be  compromised. I am glad that the Executive has agreed to look at implied consent, but we must bear in mind the fact that child protection has to override other considerations. The committee also discussed whether the police should have access to medical records when evidence of an individual's previous offence or an unrelated offence is uncovered and whether that could lead to prosecution. I am pleased that the minister has agreed to consider that. I was convinced by Jacquie Roberts of the care commission when she pointed out to Ken Macintosh that there are children who are not in the child protection system who need to be. Unless we are able to inspect children's services in the round, we will not find out about such children and whether systems are in place in children's services generally to enable those services to identify effectively the children who are at risk. That is why we need to have sections 1 and 2 in the same bill. The bill is one of a train of measures that have been put in place after the murder of one of my constituents, Kennedy McFarlane, by her stepfather. Lack of communication between the agencies was identified as a key factor in the failure to prevent that tragedy. I therefore welcome and support the bill as one of the tools to prevent such a tragedy from happening again.

I welcome the annual report on the progress of "ambitious, excellent schools". It is a pity that some Opposition speakers have not done any homework; indeed, some of them appear not to have been paying attention in class. The SNP's contribution included a strange and woolly five-point plan. I had some difficulty working out where one point stopped and another started. Fiona Hyslop seemed to suggest that the imposition of a Scottish history exam would be a solution, not that I am necessarily opposed to that. Rob Gibson was oddly anti-choice. Indeed, the SNP seemed determined not to understand the minister's commitment to history, as did Rosemary Byrne. Well, read his lips. He said that he is committed to history in S1 and S2. As far as the Tories are concerned, I am sorry that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton will not be with us after the 2007 election. I will miss him when I return in May 2007. Lord James repeated the Tory education policies that were so unsuccessful with the Scottish electorate at the general election this year that it returned one Tory MP, at a cost of £1.3 million.

The member may think so—I could not possibly comment. I cannot reconcile the Conservatives' commitment to a market-led model of self-governing schools with the retention of small, rural schools that cost far more per head of population. I am afraid that that does not compute. Alex Johnstone commented that the Executive was driving councils to close rural schools. That is not true. That is the excuse that many councils, some quite close to home as far as I am concerned, have tried to use in order to drive through closure of rural schools, but it is not the Executive that is forcing that on them. To return to Scottish history and culture, I was interested in Frank McAveety's comment about Professor Tom Devine's views. Too often, middle-aged people judge today's education on the basis of what they received and not on the basis of what is being delivered today. What might be interesting—and might address some of the SNP's concerns—would be the grouping of subjects and themes in early secondary school. Bill Butler referred to the need for a national consciousness in order to have an international consciousness. In other words, if I understand where I am coming from, I will be able to understand and have pride in where someone else is coming from. Children often have preconceived notions about subjects—based on what they are told by siblings, parents or friends—such as that history is boring or that science is difficult. It always amazes me that history and science programmes on television are extremely popular, but that people think that they will not enjoy such subjects in school. Perhaps in early secondary school we need thematic teaching, whereby subjects are grouped together. For example, we could have Scottish studies, but the teaching would still be delivered by specialist teachers. If subjects were grouped together for one term, the pupils could be told, "We are studying Scotland this term." If children studied Scottish history, culture and science at the same time, they might better engage with those subjects. They could then go on from studying Scottish history to want to learn about UK history or European history. How we present subjects in schools is important.

Sorry, I am a bit short of time. Such change might address some of the concerns that have been raised in the debate so far. Thematic teaching is already offered in primary school. All teaching was subject based when I was in primary school, but nobody would think of having subject-based teaching in primary  schools today. We need to move the argument on by grouping subjects in secondary school to see whether that will engage those children who are disengaged. Some children enjoy learning for its own sake, but many do not. The challenge is how we engage the 20 per cent of children who do not achieve. They are not engaged by our labelling subjects so that they seem to be academic exercises, rather than something relevant to their lives. As might be expected, I want to say something about maths and science. I am pleased that, compared to other OECD countries, Scotland has some success in those extremely important areas, but I sometimes get slightly confused when we say that we want to put numeracy along with literacy at the heart of education. I do not disagree with that aim, but numeracy must not be narrowly defined as the ability to add or subtract or to deal with a problem that one has been told how to solve. In an economy that will be based on advanced technologies and quality economic development, it is important that we have skilled workers who have the problem-solving skills that are developed by the study of maths and science. Again, we need to consider how we present those subjects to our young people, who will be the skilled workforce of tomorrow, in a way that engages them and allows them to develop those extremely important problem-solving skills. Let me end by saying that I am pleased that we have returned to the subject of "ambitious, excellent schools". Sometimes we have apple-pie debates that we could do without, but debates on annual reports on what progress the Executive is making on its policies are extremely important. I welcome today's debate and I welcome the advances that have been made towards achieving the goals that were set out a year ago.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made in identifying an improvement scheme for the Hardgrove to Kinmont section of the A75. (S2O-8215)

Three years ago, the construction start for the scheme was expected to be autumn 2006 and the cost £6.2 million. In January this year, the earliest start date had slipped to 2006-07 and the cost had risen to £9.2 million. I was advised in a letter from the minister's predecessor in April that further problems with the scheme had been identified and that a new scheme would have to be proposed. When does the minister expect construction of an improvement scheme for the Hardgrove to Kinmont section of the A75 to commence and what is the current estimate of cost? Can he guarantee that sufficient funding will be available to enable the improvement scheme to go ahead?

Will the member give way?

I note what you say, Presiding Officer. Of all the issues that constituents have presented to me over the years, the lack of access to dental services, NHS or private, is among the most common. It is also one of the most  frustrating. Over the past few years, the situation in Dumfries and Galloway has worsened, despite the efforts of the Scottish Executive and Dumfries and Galloway NHS Board. A steady stream of dentists, working under contract to the NHS, have decided to terminate their contracts, abandoning thousands of loyal patients as they shorten their lists. We have then seen the unedifying spectacle of those patients, many of whom are elderly and including adults on low incomes, being forced to queue for hours in the hope of being accepted on to private lists.

The Conservatives—that is who is to blame. Adults on low income, who include pensioners, are each being charged anything from £12 to £18 per month, without the option of paying for their treatment as they go or making their own insurance payments. One pensioner couple told me that they were being asked to pay almost £450 for two check-ups a year, with any treatment incurring further costs. Unfortunately, As Richard Baker has mentioned, many dental practices are now also requiring patients to pay an additional insurance premium. A practice, which might have 1,200 patients, could be taking in £250,000 before it performs any treatment on patients. I would not want to be a dentist, and I have much sympathy for dentists, but I want them to come back to the NHS. The people I care about are my constituents who cannot get a dentist and who sometimes cannot get dental treatment even if they are in pain. I stress again: my primary concern is not for the dentists, but for my constituents. Why should somebody who takes in £250,000 before they carry out any treatment get extra money off the NHS because they treat one or two children for free? We all know the history of the sorry problems, which arose from decisions taken by the Conservative Government. In fact, I will not altogether blame the Conservatives. As it happens, they were supported and advised by the British Dental Association, on the ground that the BDA wished to avoid "either underemployment or unemployment of dentists". Heavens above—what a successful trade union! The BDA obviously had considerably more clout with the Government than the National Union of Mineworkers did. Am I being uncharitable in thinking that the BDA helped to engineer the problem to the profit of its members and that the dental schools at University College London and the University of Edinburgh were closed as a consequence? The decision was questioned at the time and, indeed, opposed by the senate of the  University of Edinburgh. We all know what the consequences have been. I am not saying that we can rewrite that dismal history. The problems that it caused are not easy to solve, not least because it takes seven years to train a dentist. Opposition politicians have talked a lot of nonsense about the Scottish Executive and Dumfries and Galloway NHS Board being complacent or failing to act, which is simply not true. I have been in touch with Executive ministers on the issue regularly over the past few years and I am aware of the many incentives that it has offered, such as golden hellos, additional payments for designated areas and grants to dentists who want to establish new practices, to try to tempt more dentists to join the NHS. Sadly, many of those efforts have been countermanded as yet more contracted dentists opt for the golden road.

I have absolutely no idea, because I have not asked that question. The minister has addressed the Executive's approach, which I support fully. I will say a bit about what Dumfries and Galloway NHS Board is doing. It has applied for permission to appoint a number of salaried dentist posts—I believe that six have been filled and one is pending. It is also finalising negotiations with Integrated Dental Holdings to provide 10 NHS dentists, who will be located in three fully equipped surgeries. I hope that they will be in place within the next six months. A recruitment drive was held in Scandinavia at the end of last month. I understand from the medical director that the board is now considering how it can translate the interest shown by dentists there into permanent NHS dental posts. I admit that I was disappointed when I heard that NHS Dumfries and Galloway had not received any of the first 15 Polish dentists. However, again, we find a lot of nonsense being talked by Opposition politicians who say that Dumfries and Galloway was being ignored. It was not, because the health board did not ask for the dentists. I wondered why not, but the reason given in a letter from Dr Angus Cameron dated 3 November is that it did not feel able to provide accommodation for any of the first tranche, but it is interested in the second tranche. I say to the minister that Dumfries and Galloway is a seriously affected area, so he should please give favourable consideration to any request from NHS Dumfries and Galloway for the second tranche of Polish dentists. The board is also in negotiation with the chief dental officer and a recruitment agency in Czechoslovakia regarding the possible recruitment  of dentists from that country. In addition, I understand that the full business case has been drawn up for a dental centre in Dumfries, which, when fully operational, will have 16 dental surgeries. Another interesting approach is the proposal to develop local training for dental technicians, who would be trained to undertake routine procedures that do not require the expertise of a dental surgeon with seven years training. We can go down that road. Approaches have been made in general practice to allow other professionals to take on some of the more routine work and to liberate the highly trained dentists for more difficult procedures. All in all, there are a number of things about which to be optimistic. There have been so many disappointments for people over the years. I appreciate that at the moment people might be taking it on trust that some of the things will work, but I believe that if we work together we can improve this desperate situation. We need to do so, because if we do not, the oral health of people in Dumfries and Galloway, which is already poor, will just deteriorate.

Will the member give way?

Mr Ballance either must be mistaken or must have been misinformed. What he claims to be energy waste is used to dry willow and other forestry products for the next batch of biomass.

I am pleased to have another opportunity to debate energy policy. It is an important issue, which tends to provoke fairly lively debate. I note that there has been some attempt to include the perpetual debate about the constitution, but I am pleased  that most members have chosen to stick to energy matters. I am pleased that the Scottish National Party has chosen to have only one Opposition debate this morning, rather than the customary two, because energy is an issue that is important enough to require the development of ideas. As the minister and Alex Johnstone did, I agree with many parts of the motion. I will say more on that in a minute. The minister referred to the Executive's ambitious targets for energy generation from renewable sources.

The minister has made clear our commitment to the eradication of fuel poverty. We all appreciate that it is an exceedingly important issue. The target for renewables is 40 per cent by 2020. The SNP has said that it would prefer that to be increased to 50 per cent, and its motion calls for Scotland to be "the world leader in renewable energy and carbon capture and storage technology". I do not disagree with that aim, but I remain to be convinced that such a target can be achieved under the SNP's current plans. If the SNP wants a target of 50 per cent to be met in the next 15 years, why do SNP politicians so often voice their objections to wind turbine developments in their back yards? Christine Grahame, Roseanna Cunningham, Fergus Ewing and Angus McNeil have all objected to such developments.

Christine Grahame objected to wind farms in her own back yard. Why has the SNP's economic policy over the past decade been predicated on the exploitation of a non-renewable carbon-generating source of power? I return to the part of the motion with which I agree.

No. I am sorry, but Christine Grahame made a rather long intervention.  The motion says that we should develop "an energy policy for Scotland that will deliver security of supply, affordability, self-sufficiency and energy efficiency". I argue that we should develop a policy that will deliver the export of power. The motion is right, which is why I support the development of a balanced energy policy that includes a wide range of renewables—other members have said that—including tidal wave power, clean coal, biomass, energy efficiency measures and nuclear power. Whatever side of the argument a person takes, the time is coming when difficult decisions about nuclear power will have to be made. I am afraid that the wriggle room in the partnership agreement will not exist for much longer.

No. I am sorry, but I must make progress. The Committee on Radioactive Waste Management report on management of our existing nuclear waste is due next July and I understand that it will suggest a solution that could encompass disposal of future nuclear waste. We must dispel the myths about the new generation of nuclear power stations. They do not have to be linked to the production of nuclear weapons. That was true of the Magnox reactors, such as the reactor that is currently being defuelled at Chapelcross in my constituency. That reactor was not viable without the sale of tritium, but that does not have to be the case for Chapelcross 2. Unlike the Magnox reactors, the new reactors—such as the advanced passive reactor—do not produce large volumes of irradiated graphite in the reactor cores. Over 60 years, an AP 100MW reactor would produce approximately 2,000m 3 of low-level radioactive waste and 700m 3 of medium-level waste. The solutions that must be found for our existing nuclear waste could encompass the disposal of some of that nuclear waste. I fear that, without nuclear power, we will not only struggle with our base-load capacity, but that we may become increasingly dependent on imported sources of fuel over time. I fear that the country may change from being an exporter of fuel to being an importer of fuel and that we may have to import from countries such as France and Finland, which have decided to include nuclear generation in their energy portfolios.

I am sorry, but I have only another minute and a half left. I do not want to talk only about nuclear power; I am sure that my colleague John Home Robertson will return to the issue.  I whole-heartedly support the development of a variety of renewable technologies. Nora Radcliffe referred to the contribution that hydroelectricity has made over the years and the contribution that it will make to the achievement of our 2012 target. Offshore wind has its place, too. I have voiced concerns about proposals for large-scale developments that would use huge turbines in locations in my constituency, but I do not oppose wind power per se, and I have an alternative solution. [ Interruption. ]

Biomass is an increasingly important and interesting opportunity. We have heard concerns about E.ON UK, but it has recently been given the go-ahead for a 44MW dedicated biomass power station at Steven's Croft in Lockerbie, which should commence generation in December 2007. That power station should support 40 jobs directly and an estimated 300 jobs in forestry and farming. It will provide a use for by-products of the forestry industry and offer an opportunity for farmers to diversify into willow production. Therefore, I was a bit surprised that the Green regional list member, Chris Ballance, attacked the proposal in the local press. Perhaps that demonstrates that it is not only SNP members who are inconsistent on energy policy. I support the Executive's amendment, but say to members that serious debates and difficult decisions are looming on the horizon about the place of nuclear power—which is the alternative to big wind farm developments—in a balanced energy policy.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to implement the A76 route action plan. (S2O-7959)

The minister will be aware that my colleague, Councillor Jim Dempster, recently wrote to him with suggestions for improvements after there were two fatal accidents within a week. Is he aware that, although the original route action plan was drawn up about 10 years ago, many sections of the road remain dangerous and have above-average accident statistics, including the section from the Dumfries bypass to Auldgirth in my constituency? Will he address my concerns and those of other MSPs regarding the safety of that road, which are shared by Dumfries and Galloway Council and East Ayrshire Council,? Will he revisit the question of what action needs to be taken to prevent further fatalities?

How long do I have, Presiding Officer? Do I have four minutes?

Okay. I agree whole-heartedly with what the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People said. Nobody denies that some children with special needs will thrive better in a special school, while others will benefit from inclusive education, provided that adequate and suitable resources are in place to offer the necessary support. It is a little hypocritical to make the comments that have been made about the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004, which is not yet fully in force. The whole principle of the act and the associated investment to underpin its measures is to ensure that  adequate and suitable resources are in place to support young people and children with special needs who go to mainstream schools. There is a fundamental difference between a child being thrown into a mainstream classroom for the entire school day and not being able to cope and a child being placed in a mainstream school that has suitable support bases and caters for the needs of children with significant difficulties. Many fears that parents have arise from situations in which children have not been adequately supported. Councils that are considering mainstreaming need to reassure parents of their determination to provide proper facilities, and the key to doing that is genuine and participative consultation with parents. Exclusion is not necessary or beneficial for the majority of children and young people with additional support needs. They live in their community when they are not at school and after having left school, and they are entitled to be educated in their community. When I was on South Ayrshire Council, I was involved in the provision of mainstream facilities for children who were previously boxed into three different categories of special needs and on whom the door was closed. At first, the parents of those children were concerned about mainstreaming; they were worried about what would happen to their children. However, we undertook a long and detailed consultation in which we listened to the children about their fears and, over the piece, the parents came on board with the council and saw the situation as better. In fact, one parent said, "I'm really pleased because my son will have the same uniform as the rest of the kids and he won't be marked out as attending the daft school." Later, I had the honour of being asked to give out prizes at an awards ceremony, and I was proud to see children with special needs wearing the same school uniform as the other children in their community, receiving their awards on the same basis as everybody else. I am proud of mainstreaming and proud of the fact that we have an inclusive policy. That does not mean that other children who cannot benefit under those circumstances should be forced into it; however, the principle of mainstreaming should be established. As Children in Scotland pointed out, the removal of the presumption of mainstreaming that the Conservative party proposes would contravene article 2 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. We must not confuse the presumption of mainstreaming with not providing alternatives when mainstreaming is not suitable for certain children.

I am sorry, but I have only a minute left. I was a bit surprised by Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's figures. Children in Scotland says that, although 33 special needs schools have closed since 1997, many others have opened. The Conservatives' proposal for a moratorium on closures would mean that unsuitable special schools would have to remain open and we would not be able to develop more suitable special schools, such as that which the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People will open in the near future. There are now 34 special schools in Scotland, compared with 33 in 1997, according to the figures from Children in Scotland.

Sorry, but I have only 10 seconds left. We must recognise that additional support needs are often related to disadvantage and deprivation, although they may also have a genetic component. Therefore, tackling the needs of young people with special support needs often means tackling the needs of those communities, and we will not do that by removing those young people from their communities.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to increase the availability of dental services in Dumfries and Galloway. (S2O-7884)

I know that the minister is aware of the serious shortage of dentists, both NHS and private, in Dumfries and Galloway and that he has similar problems in his constituency. Why is Dumfries and Galloway not to receive any of the 12 Polish dentists who were recruited by the chief dental officer? Did NHS Dumfries and Galloway not apply because it is undertaking its own recruitment drive in Europe, as well as being in negotiation with Integrated Dental Holdings to  provide 10 dentists in three centres in the region? Will NHS Dumfries and Galloway be able to apply for future allocations of dentists recruited by the chief dental officer should it wish to do so?

I, too, congratulate Euan Robson on securing the debate, which is attended by the usual suspects—except that Mary Scanlon and the minister are here as well. It is good to have the opportunity to reflect on the significance of objective 2 funding for the south of Scotland. In Dumfries and Galloway, almost £6.5 million has been invested by the South of Scotland European Partnership since the Parliament's second session began. That is leaving aside the money that was invested before then. On top of that, we had a share of the £1.127 million for the business loan scheme, which added to the money Scottish Enterprise gave during the foot-and-mouth outbreak. Initially, it was intended to help the businesses that had been affected by foot-and-mouth, but it was retained as a loan scheme for businesses in the south of Scotland. I know of a number of businesses that have benefited from it. In addition, £1.3 million has been invested in tourism. Originally, that was match funding for Executive money; thereafter, it was match funding for funds that Dumfries and Galloway put in. The investment was designed to help the area recover from the ravages of foot-and-mouth. More recently, £320,000 has been provided towards Dumfries and Galloway Council's proposed leisure complex, which I hope the council will get on with building. At least there has been a commitment of funding. An allocation of £331,000 has been made for the development of conference facilities at Easterbrook Hall at the Crichton in Dumfries. That, allied to the fact that Dumfries and Galloway Council has approved a planning application following Historic Scotland's lifting of its objections, will enable us, for the first time, to have significant conference facilities in the south-west. Those facilities will be big enough to hold Scottish party conferences. I know that the Conservatives have held a smaller conference there, but I look forward to welcoming my party and members of other  parties to the new facilities once they have been built. The north-west resource centre in Dumfries, which is not far up the road from where I live, has received nearly £900,000. That centre developed when many voluntary sector organisations came together with the council to renovate an old people's home and make it into an important facility in a slightly more deprived area of Dumfries. It makes training possible, provides employment opportunities, acts as a meeting centre and offers facilities for young people. Recently, £100,000 was given to Buccleuch Hall in Langholm. Although that is a smaller sum, it is nevertheless important in that it will allow the community in Langholm to have up-to-date facilities and to build on the significant arts experience that is available in that town through the work of local people. In spite of the political differences between the members who represent the area, we all agree that the south of Scotland is special. It is different. It is distinct in that it has its own culture, its own traditions and a very special landscape that changes as one goes from east to west. It has its own wildlife, which includes red squirrels, golden eagles, ospreys and red kites. The area has a tremendous amount to offer. I think I have said before in the Parliament that Pip Tabor of the Southern Uplands Partnership has suggested that the south of Scotland should be renamed the southern uplands, to reflect what the area is. It is not the southern lowlands, nor is it the south of the central belt. Unfortunately, the current NUTS boundaries seem to treat the south of Scotland as if it is the south of the central belt. I invite the minister to comment on whether it would be possible to persuade the DTI and the EU to revise the boundaries. The suggestion that my colleague Euan Robson is making, which is that the number of NUTS areas should increase from three to four, would not in any way disadvantage Glasgow or Edinburgh; it would advantage the south of the Scotland, but it would not disadvantage anyone. In advantaging the south of Scotland, it would advantage Scotland, because more money would come into the country. I urge the minister to see whether the matter can be reconsidered. NUTS boundaries have been redrawn in the past. For example, in 2003, changes were made in Germany, Spain, Italy, Portugal and Finland. Cannot changes be made here? Let us bring more funding into the south of Scotland—indeed, to all Scotland—to fund extremely important projects in local communities.

Thank you, Presiding Officer; your apology is accepted. I am also grateful to "Good Morning Scotland" for advising me this morning of the Executive's policy on the issue. I was pleased to hear it. When I read through the Green party motion, I did not find a great deal in it with which I could disagree. I, too, was shocked to hear the report on the way in which the Vucaj family were removed from their home in Glasgow—a move that involved an 18-year-old young man being handcuffed as if he were a violent criminal and his 13-year-old sister being removed in her pyjamas. As soon as I became aware of it, I signed Bill Butler's motion on the subject. I also congratulate the schoolchildren who supported the family in the way that they did. If the reports are correct—and there has been no real denial—the officials who carried out the operation did not act in accordance with the statement on the removal of failed asylum seekers that a Home Office spokesperson made, which I found on the BBC website. The statement said: "This is always done in the most sensitive way possible, treating those being removed with courtesy and dignity." Clearly, that did not happen in this case and the failure to do so should be investigated. Advice and guidance should be issued on how to deal appropriately with families whose asylum application has been refused. However, we need to acknowledge that most people in this country believe in controlled immigration and asylum policies. I get far more representations from constituents who think, mistakenly, that we are too soft on asylum and immigration than I do from people who are concerned that we are too tough. Unfortunately, asylum seekers are often exposed to prejudice and racism. Often, that is fuelled by inaccurate reporting in the section of the press that tends to be of the more conservative disposition. If the UK does not have an open-doors policy—for which, as I said, there is little support in this country—we have to find a suitable mechanism to deal with cases where asylum is refused.  We also have to recognise that, as some asylum seekers have been in this country for many years, the circumstances in their country of origin may have changed and may now be safe. However, the memories of the asylum seekers will be of the country as it was when they left. They may need reassurance—perhaps from the consulate of their country of origin—that things have changed. They may also need some form of assistance and counselling.

I am sorry, but I do not have much time. I would give way if I could. Four and a half years ago, I removed my children from their school in Prestwick to a school down in Dumfries. My two younger children were distraught beyond my expectations about having to leave their school friends and move 60 miles away from their home. Imagine the situation of the child of an asylum seeker who may have been in Scotland for many years. They will have been educated in this country and have little memory of the schooling and other aspects of the country from which they came. They will also have become used to speaking in English with their school friends, yet they will be sent back to a country where they do not speak the language. They will probably never see their Scottish friends again and may completely lose contact with them. People in those sorts of circumstances need to be treated with understanding, sensitivity, compassion and support and not with handcuffs or body armour. On "Good Morning Scotland", Patrick Harvie asked when the UK Government takes responsibility, as did Robin Harper in the chamber. The Government takes responsibility at the time at which the asylum application is refused. I believe that Scottish Executive agencies have an important role to play in supporting those families as they prepare for their return to their country of origin. We need to focus on the ways in which we can help and support those families. We do not accept that people should be thrown out of the country as if they are criminals.

I, too, congratulate Margaret Jamieson on having her motion accepted for debate tonight. I concur with many of the sensible suggestions that she made. I do not always agree with Kenny MacAskill, but I very much agree with him that something is out of kilter when the rights of a perpetrator of crime seem to count for much more than a victim's rights. That is why I welcomed much of what the First Minister said in his statement on the legislative programme about the improvements to the justice system that will take place, including action on remand and bail and reform to sheriff courts. I will not speak much about financial compensation, which has been well discussed; I will talk about other instances in the justice system where victims' human rights seem to count for less than others' rights. I will refer to local issues and local cases. The Minister for Justice is well aware that when Adam Carruthers appealed against his sentence for the rape of two women constables, I was concerned that the justice system seemed to let down those rape victims by the continual protraction of the case and of the appeals system. I know from replies from the minister that action was taken to try to prevent that from happening in future, but we still have a problem in the sheriff courts. I hope that the action that we will take will deal with what happens in sheriff courts. More than two years ago in the Parliament, I referred to a case in which a nine-year-old girl was sexually assaulted by a 15-year-old boy. I was concerned about the way in which the case was being protracted in the sheriff court. The young man was eventually convicted, sent to residential accommodation for a year and then returned to  Dumfries and put into accommodation far from his victim. Unfortunately, he broke his bail conditions and went back to court. In his infinite wisdom, the sheriff decided to rehouse the young man with his family, which meant that he was housed opposite the school that the young girl still attends. The young girl has moved home—her parents took her to another community—but her parents thought that it was in her interests to remain at the primary school because she had been so traumatised by her experience. Her granny lives just down the road from the school. There are conditions on the young man's bail and he is not allowed to go into the school, but they will not prevent the young girl from meeting him when she visits her granny or leaves school. Where are the young girl's rights? Her granny came to see me during the summer recess in a fair state of upset. Nobody had told her about what was happening—she had found out from a neighbour. She said to me, "When I heard about what was happening, I was physically sick." Where are her rights? Something is still wrong and out of kilter if we do not sufficiently consider victims' rights. I do not agree with everything Margaret Mitchell says, but I agree with what she said in this debate. I want to see a lawyer take somebody to court over a victim's rights. I challenge the real community out there to make an offer to a victim to take the perpetrator of a crime to court over the suffering that has been caused to that victim. It will take a hell of a long time for the little girl who was sexually assaulted to recover from what the young man did to her. At present, the system does not stick up for her rights.

There has been a bit of doom and gloom in this debate. Perhaps we should not be surprised by that. However, let us return to what we are debating and what we are celebrating. Apart from anything else, we are celebrating 2,770 newly qualified teachers this year, bringing the total up to 51,287. In my own region of Dumfries and Galloway, there are 36 primary probationer teacher induction places, and 21 in secondary. Only eight secondary teaching vacancies have been unfilled for over three months, and none in primary. Those figures are for the beginning of this term, not for February. I thank the minister for meeting new teachers at Dumfries High School on their first day at work. I am sure that, like me, he was impressed by their commitment and enthusiasm. They were not all new graduates; they included people who had retrained from other professions. One gentleman had been in manufacturing and had decided that he wanted to be a teacher and to take on the challenges of this extremely important profession. The older new teachers will bring additional skills with them from their previous employment—skills that they will be able to pass on to their pupils. The figures from my region tie in with the figures from Strathclyde, which tell us that the average age of a PGCE graduate is 30. People are coming into teaching with a bit of extra experience. As members know, because I am a former scientist I have always been interested in science teaching. I agree with Dennis Canavan on the importance of science and maths, so why do we not celebrate the 270 per cent increase over three years in recruitment to teacher training in chemistry? Chemistry is my subject, and I have always worried about the lack of people who want to be involved in it. Interestingly, the increase coincides with a sharp increase in the number of students studying chemistry at degree level this year. That figure was up by 17 per cent in Scotland, which must be welcomed. The census of teachers in Scotland last year revealed that 47 per cent of chemistry teachers are over the age of 50. We have ground to make up, but let us be pleased that things are going in the right direction.

The member would have to know what the base was; she would have to be able to quote me the base. We also have to consider the continuing professional development opportunities for existing science teachers to develop their skills.  The Scottish Schools Equipment Research Centre offers to science teachers workshops, summer schools and links to networks in the science sector—things that can inject additional enthusiasm into our science teachers. Last year, I saw the mobile sci-fun programme for S2 pupils when it came to Annan. It is part of a £10 million investment in science equipment and teacher training over three years, and it enables young people at that level to see how exciting and what fun science can be, rather than seeing it as a rather dull subject. Some comments have been made about the performance of Scottish pupils in science. Yes, that may be an issue of concern, but I think that I am right in saying that the science curriculum will be one of the first to be reviewed, in 2007-08. It may be that we no longer need quite so many of the rigid divisions between physics, chemistry, maths and so on. It may be that some of the old barriers could be removed in a new curriculum, which could be more flexible to make it more attractive.

I am sorry, but I am getting bit behind in my allotted time. The problem that we have in science attainment in schools is not simply a matter of teaching and learning; unfortunately, I think that it reflects attitudes towards science and scientists in this country. Many of us—not only politicians, but the media and the scientific community—need to address that. Young people have to see science as something exciting and innovative, and something that can solve problems, rather than as something that is the preserve of geeks and in which other people would not want to get involved. As Wendy Alexander suggested, there seem to be a lack of distinctive Opposition policies. On occasions, members have been talking about their own teaching experiences many years ago, or even about their experiences in school, but not actually about what is going on today. James Douglas-Hamilton and Margaret Ewing both made play of the problems of new teachers standing in front of a class, and Bill Butler told us about his own experiences in front of a class and about how it felt when he was young—although I am not suggesting that he is not young now. However, as Wendy Alexander pointed out, the new, much-lauded induction programme in Scotland means that new teachers have much more mentoring from experienced teachers and much less class contact time until they are sufficiently confident to cope with a class. Adam Ingram warned against reducing standards to improve recruitment, as happens in  England, but that is not happening here. As the minister highlighted, for every applicant who is accepted for teacher training, two are turned away, so standards are not being lowered to attract new teachers. Recent experience is increasingly that older graduates are applying, which shows that people actually want to become teachers. In part, that is due to the esteem in which society now holds teachers, which has increased as a result of many of the initiatives that, as the minister said, have taken place since the devolution settlement in 1999. Tory members have quoted from the Headteachers Association of Scotland bulletin. I accept that the association has highlighted some concerns, but its bulletin also states: "The National Teaching Agreement has conferred some serious benefits on the teaching profession and to education". It also wants to engage in a debate "to allow schools to move forward on the improvement agenda, and to ensure further benefit to young people." Far from saying that all is wrong, the association has simply expressed some concerns, as trade unions do, while welcoming many of the advances that have been made. Rosemary Byrne seemed to confuse the responsibilities of local authorities and ministers. I must now sit down as my six minutes are up, but I welcome the immense improvements that have been made in teaching and learning over the past six and a half years. I hope that we continue in that vein.

This year, comprehensive education will be 40 years old. It is worth reflecting on how the perception of the purpose of education has changed over the period and on the contribution to that change of the legislation that has come before—and will come before—the Parliament. Prior to the introduction of the comprehensive system, education was based on the failure of the majority. A small number of people, usually from better-off and more privileged backgrounds, had the opportunity to succeed academically and to go on to higher education, but the vast majority of people were offered a uniform and standard education that stopped when they left school, because the jobs that they were going to do for the rest of their lives did not require them to have more than that. Forty years on, our education system is based on success. It is based on evaluating what children can do, not what they cannot do. Unfortunately, a lot of people who were brought up under the old philosophy do not like that. The change is often referred to as dumbing down. I will get on to one of my hobby-horses. During the summer, I get really annoyed that a lot of people decry the efforts of young people and teachers in achieving exam success; when exam success is reported, they try to belittle the efforts of those people. The Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000 embodies the current ideal that "education is directed to the development of the personality, talents and mental and physical abilities of the child or young person to their fullest potential." We no longer have the hierarchy that states that academic success is more important than creative success or success in vocational subjects—and thank goodness for that. Part of the motivation for the sea change in education philosophy has been a recognition of the rights of the child. It has also been about the needs of our country—to be a confident and successful country, Scotland needs to have successful and confident citizens.

I did not intend to develop it today, but I agree with what Fiona Hyslop says. Lifelong  learning has been very much part of the philosophy of the Scottish Executive and the Parliament over the past six years. We need an education system that recognises and supports the abilities, learning styles, development patterns and individual circumstances of each pupil. I, too, attended the session on burning issues and looked-after children in West Lothian yesterday and I agree with the many people who said that we are not delivering for looked-after children what we promised in the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000. I was impressed by Euan Robson's speech on hidden talent, because I agree that it is essential that we develop hidden talent. School is not a place for parents just to deposit their children in the morning and then resume responsibility for them after the school day is over. We know that parental involvement in children's education improves achievement and develops and reinforces the ethos of the school. The child has to be the centre of education policy and child care policy. We know that, when parents and pupils are included in and understand the decisions that affect schools, they are more likely to abide by those decisions. Adam Ingram made a good point about parents who have had a negative experience of school. There is a challenge in bringing in parents who did not like school. It is important that they get over that, so that they can engage with their children's school.

Sorry, I have only a couple of minutes left. School boards have been a success in many schools. I acknowledge the concerns of the Scottish School Board Association and others, but if a school board is successful and parents want to keep it, it can continue. The legislation is being repealed, but school boards are not being disbanded. It is important that more parents are brought into the school board system. I wish to comment on health promotion in schools, because just as the habit of lifelong learning to which Fiona Hyslop referred in her intervention is engendered in school, so must be the habit of maintaining a healthy lifestyle. Many of us Scots find it difficult to re-educate ourselves later in life to eat sensibly and to take more exercise, so that pattern must be laid down in school. School meals in Scotland have been favourably compared with those in the rest of the country. I was slightly puzzled by Nanette Milne's mention of school cooks, because I have a friend who is a school cook and she is fed up with people going on about Jamie Oliver. She says, "In my school, I'm Jamie Oliver." That is down to  programmes such as hungry for success. I was pleased to hear yesterday that a further £70 million will be invested in that programme. I am sorry that Alex Fergusson is not with us any more, because I wanted to ask him about a statement that he made in The Galloway News , urging Dumfries and Galloway Council and the Scottish ministers to enable people to opt out of hungry for success. I wondered whether the Tories were in favour of the programme and whether they think that there should be a mechanism to allow people to opt out of health promotion in schools. Investing in health promotion will save money on expensive treatments later on. It will enhance the quality of people's lives as they get older and it will increase their ability to work and to contribute to the economy and the prosperity of the country. Investment in health promotion is investment in many of the Scottish Executive's priorities.

The First Minister has drawn our attention to the importance of schools and parents working together. The new legislation is designed to encourage parents who are not involved in their children's education to become active members of the school community. I was interested in the First Minister's statement that the new parent bodies will have powers to request inspection by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education. Can he advise us whether that will include requests for inspections of local authorities as well as of individual schools if parent bodies are dissatisfied with the standard of education provision in their locality?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the provisions in section 20 of the draft Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Bill will improve the protection afforded to horses and other grazing animals vulnerable to ragwort poisoning. (S2O-7372)

I thank the minister for directing me to the provisions in section 22 of the draft bill. Am I right in assuming that those provisions would impact on the person who owns the horse rather than on, for example, people in neighbouring lands who might allow ragwort seeds to fall on the land and be grazed by the horse?

I congratulate Mr Brownlee on making his maiden speech. However, I will resist the impulse to make any remarks about his predecessor. The Finance Committee's report says: "This has been a complex review and has shown that there are no easy answers to the question of how resources can best be allocated to promote economic development." For that reason, the inquiry was rather frustrating. Although everyone felt that economic growth was a good idea, there was no real consensus about the best way of investing money in order to promote it. As Andrew Arbuckle has pointed out, it was difficult to identify the relative importance of what Peter Wood described as "primary spend" and "support spend" on economic development. For example, does the £418 million that Scottish Enterprise received and the £75 million that HIE received last year contribute more to the economy than the £242 million that was put into the roads budget or the £1.724 billion that was invested in higher and further education? Just because such investment is classed as primary spend, it does not mean that it is any more effective. The Executive also argued—with some justification—that other parts of the budget contribute substantially to its top priority. Ted Brocklebank pointed out that the majority of health spend might be aimed at our retirement years. However, later today, we will discuss the prevention of smoking. Health improvement spend can contribute significantly to economic growth by prolonging people's working life and enabling them to work more productively. The committee found that there was no subsyst—syste—systematic—[ Interruption. ] Sorry. It is the day after the Scottish Parliamentary Journalists Association dinner. The committee found that there was no systematic analysis of how spending is prioritised. Des McNulty made some important remarks about transport in that respect. As evidence from across the UK shows, investing in the transport infrastructure makes areas more economically successful. In my remaining two minutes, I will comment on two rather parochial issues. We did not touch in great depth on the concept of city regions, but I  know that the Executive believes that they are important drivers of economic growth. I do not doubt that that is true in much of Scotland, but it is not applicable to Dumfries and Galloway, so my plea is that we should not go too far down that route. If Dumfries and Galloway looks towards any city at all, it is Carlisle, which is not in Scotland. We need to think about town regions. Eventually, Dumfries may become a city and at that point we can have a city region; at the moment, however, that analysis is not particularly helpful for us. My second point concerns the idea of rural and urban spend. I was rather less persuaded by some of the arguments that were presented to us than some of my colleagues were, because I felt that the information was based on a rather crude categorisation of whole local authority areas. For example, the 34,000 people who, like me, live in the town of Dumfries are all classified as rural, whereas the farmers and fishermen of North East Fife are all classified as urban. I did not find that analysis terribly helpful, although some of what Wendy Alexander said bears further examination. I noticed that, even in some of what was identified as rural primary spend, £128 million was spent on research. Most of the Scottish agricultural and biological research institutes are based in or near towns, so the research workers live in the towns and the expenditure on their salaries benefits the local economies of those towns. Although the research may be of an agricultural nature, its consequences do not necessarily contribute solely to the rural economy. Indeed, the not insignificant expenditure on scientific equipment probably does not benefit Scotland at all, because much of it is manufactured elsewhere. I do not think that we should overinterpret Peter Wood's finding that, for example, 47 per cent of the primary spend, excluding the CAP moneys, is being spent on 27 per cent of the Scottish population. However, there must be a much deeper analysis and a better understanding, for both urban and rural areas of Scotland, of what actually makes the difference. That applies both to the inquiry into economic development and to our next inquiry, which is on deprivation, where we may find that a similar set of equations needs to be made.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to extend the central heating programme beyond March 2006 and whether it is consulting on options for extending the programme. (S2O-7280)

The minister will be aware of the success of the scheme. Indeed, it surprises me that there is still a high demand from the over-60s for the initial scheme. In the consultation, will ministers give consideration to extending the provisions for pensioners with inadequate and obsolete central heating by reducing the age at which they are eligible for support to somewhere below 80?

I thank the minister for his kind words about the Finance Committee. He is clearly a man who enjoys a  vigorous argument. I am sure that there will be more vigorous debates in the future. I welcome the changes in the budgetary process that have been made in the past year, and I welcome ministers' acceptance of the Finance Committee's recommendation to establish a biennial cycle so that in years in which there is no spending review we do not have stage 1 of the budget process. That has freed up a fair amount of time for the Finance Committee, and for other committees to scrutinise spending on their remits more closely. It has enabled the Finance Committee to initiate its in-depth and on-going inquiry into the efficient government initiative, and the Education Committee aims to include financial interrogation in its forthcoming inquiry into early years education. In time, it might enable committees to suggest alternatives for budget expenditure, which we have not been particularly good at doing in the past. More committees are appointing financial advisers, which means that Parliament as a whole is gaining a base of independent advice, so we should be able to improve the quality of scrutiny of the budget in future years. I hope that that will help the Executive to continue with its improvements in financial management. I agree with the Executive motion; there has been improvement. It is a little churlish of those who have lodged amendments to try to delete that statement, because it is clear that there has been improvement in financial management and a fall in underspend, which we should welcome. The Scottish Executive's departments have reduced their underspend by 67 per cent since last year to £183 million. The Executive as a whole underspends only 1.2 per cent of its budget, which compares well with the European Parliament and with Westminster. We need to say that the Scottish Executive is doing well. As members have said, the arm's-length bodies have not done quite so well. Their underspend is down by 23 per cent, but it is still more than it was two years ago. Last year the underspend was reduced significantly by an overspend in national health service and teachers' pensions. As Des McNulty said, we need to highlight and welcome the improvement in Scottish Water's performance, because in previous years it exercised the Finance Committee and Parliament that Scottish Water was unable to meet its expenditure allowances. The fact that it has brought its underspend down to only £18 million this year should be welcomed. Of the total £281 million that has not been spent across Executive departments and arm's-length bodies, 86 per cent is money that could not be spent on capital programmes in one year and is therefore being carried forward to other years. That leaves only about £40 million to be  redistributed, which is a really small amount of money. Alasdair Morgan, who is not here at the moment, suggested that we hand that money back to taxpayers, but that would not make a great deal of difference. That is an example of the Executive's managing its finances more efficiently. I agree with what has been said about transport. I hate to rain on Nicol Stephen's parade on what is probably an exciting day for him, but the performance of the transport department is lamentable compared to that of other departments, with £93 million of slippage. I will not talk about the M74, but I will use an example that is more local to me: the A75. In September 2003, Mr Brownlee's predecessor was told in a written answer that one of the seven projects to improve the A75 was to start in the winter of 2003-04, four were to start in 2004 and two were to start in 2006. On 27 February 2004, I was told that one was to start in 2004-05, three were to start in 2005-06 and two were to start in 2006-07. At the beginning of this year, Alasdair Morgan was advised that four of the remaining six projects were to start in 2005-06 and the final two were to start in 2006-07. Since then, I have learned from correspondence with the Minister for Transport that the work on the Hardgrove to Kinmount stretch in my constituency—the cost of which had increased between 2004 and 2005 from £6 million to £9 million—will now not start for another two years. That sort of thing causes a great deal of frustration to communities and to elected representatives. We have a similar problem on the A7, on which a commitment was made two years ago—of which Mr Robson will be aware, because we welcomed it at the time—to upgrade approximately 3km of the A7 at Auchenrivock, but we still do not know when the work will commence. I have lodged another question, so perhaps I will elicit that information. It is frustrating when we see such projects slipping: we need to do better. I turn to the amendments from the Tories and the SNP. Ted Brocklebank might want to do better than Gershon, but we have heard evidence in the Finance Committee that part of the reason why there are different approaches in the Scottish Executive and at Westminster is that we do not have the great big departments such as the Ministry of Defence and the Department for Work and Pensions, which can make large job cuts. When the Tories and their coalition partners in the SNP, and maybe even the Greens, because there was a wee bit of agreement there, come into office in 2007—ha ha—what jobs will be lost? They cannot discuss Gershon and not tell us how many jobs they would cut. How many jobs will they cut?

The Executive has indicated that a small number of jobs might be lost, but Mr McCabe has never come to the Finance Committee and said that he was going to do the same as Gershon. Ted Brocklebank needs to answer the question. There is interesting agreement between the SNP and the Tories now that they want to give money back. It is interesting to hear the SNP calling for reduced public expenditure, which makes a pleasant change from its normal long list of spending commitments. Given that Mr Morgan wants to give the money back, is he suggesting that the slippage from the A75 projects should not be spent on the A75 in Dumfries and Galloway, but should be handed back to the business rates payer and the council tax payer? Is he really suggesting that the money be handed back and will he stand up in Dumfries and Galloway and say that the A75 improvements are not going to take place?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is aware of the work of the delivery unit at Whitehall and whether the Executive undertakes a similar approach with regard to achieving its priorities. (S2O-6987)

The minister will be aware that Professor Barber addressed the Finance Committee on 17 May. He described to the committee a process by which monthly reports on key milestones for the 20 top priorities, such as waiting time reductions, are monitored so that progress can be tracked and ministers know whether they are on target to achieve objectives. Is there a similar element within the Executive's distinctive approach that enables ministers to know whether they are on target to achieve what  they want to achieve?

I, too, welcome the opportunity to hold another positive debate about young people—this time about young adults aged between 18 and 25. However, I have a concern, because I did not have a high level of awareness of the third meeting of the world youth congress, which is to take place in Stirling, until the Executive scheduled the subject for debate last week. If people such as me and my colleagues—a few of whom I have spoken to about it—are not all that aware that the congress is coming up, I fear that the general public might not know that this important event is to take place in Scotland. In particular, young people might not be aware that the congress is coming up. The young men and women who lead the projects are excellent role models—the minister referred to them in his speech as inspirational. Therefore, I hope that a sufficient platform will be given to showcase their achievements and to tell their life stories. The G8 summit, to which Tricia Marwick referred and which will take place a few weeks before the world youth congress, will involve a great deal of publicity for the present leaders of the world's wealthiest countries. Given that the congress will involve possible future world leaders—the people who will inherit the mantle and the mistakes of the current leaders—it would be a terrible mistake if their achievements were not publicised adequately. It is a sad fact that the average young Scot's interest is likely to be in silly celebrities and in people whose only contribution to society is to humiliate themselves in public. Although the debate will help to raise the congress's profile, I have a fear that not many young people are hanging on members' every word; indeed, not many of our colleagues seem to be terribly interested in the debate. Therefore, the Executive, through its press office, must have serious discussion with the national and international  media about the adequate promotion of the congress and the related events that the minister said will take place in communities throughout Scotland. As Frank McAveety said, the change 05 publication has had publicity, although unfortunately it has been negative. The Daily Mail did not like it, which of course immediately commended it to me, so I had a look at it on the website. I am not sure that the entire publication is available there, but one important point that I saw is that it says to young people: "you too can make a difference". That is an extremely empowering message in an age in which young people often feel disengaged from conventional politics. Another inspiring message was: "If we want to see change in people and the world around us, the first step we must take is to ... change ourselves." None of us is too old to benefit from that advice. Those words do not seem to me to be the words of anarchists, as the Daily Mail suggested, but exceedingly sensible advice. The downloadable articles that I read mentioned sustainability and climate change, which are the issues that exercise our imaginations, too. I might take issue on some points, particularly on the reference to nuclear power, but that is a discussion that people such as John Home Robertson and I should have with younger people. There is also a fantastic article on the child's right to education, which includes the statement: "Every child in the world has a right to free education which will help lift them out of poverty." To me, that sounds like one of the founding principles of the Labour Party. Another article is about an 11-year-old girl who was sold into slavery but who managed to go to school. Now, at the age of 12, she states that her ambition is "to become something important like a teacher and feel like I am helping the community." That was a motivating article. The girl does not want to be wealthy or glamorous or on the telly, but somebody who is of value to her community. That reminded me of an article on this morning's edition of "Good Morning Scotland" about a group of pupils from an Orkney school who are visiting a school in Malawi. The teacher said that one of the valuable aspects of the visit for her pupils is that they are learning and seeing how young people can have very little, but be content. I was involved in the Anti Nazi League and rock against racism when I lived down south in the late 1970s and early 1980s, a time when, I am sad to say, extreme right-wing views were on the  ascendancy and there was a lot of concern about the rise of the National Front. Therefore, I was interested to read about the love music, hate racism campaign, especially given the background of the distasteful rhetoric that occurred during the general election campaign. It is important that young people are responding to the rise of such right-wing and racist views. I am glad that young people are still—I suppose that I was reasonably young in the late 1970s—becoming involved in such activities. I hope that the world youth congress and change 05 achieve sufficient profile to inspire young people in Scotland and elsewhere. However, the responsibility for young people's empowerment does not rest only with them. Those of us who are in positions of power in any profession must take young people's representations seriously, but that does not always happen. Even if the structures for representation are in place, young people do not always feel that they are listened to adequately. Groups such as student councils in schools must be consulted adequately when changes in school rules or dress are proposed. If the structures exist, but consultation does not take place, young people will feel disfranchised, angry and rebellious and will not feel that they are being listened to. Therefore, I am pleased to see young people serving on community councils. In four weeks' time, I will welcome Lockerbie and district community council, whose youngest member is only 14. Such participation is exciting. We need to learn lessons from the successful young people—the young leaders—who will be in Stirling this summer, and we must apply them to the aspirations and contributions of young people in every community, so that they, too, believe that they can make a difference and change the world.

I said that Dumfries and Galloway College is in the Dumfries and Galloway constituency.

Is the member aware of the exciting project in Dumfries whereby Queen of the South  Football Club and the north-west resource centre, with its education facilities, do precisely the sort of things that enable young people to become re-engaged with education through their interest in sport?

I, too, am pleased to welcome the strategy, which is part of the Executive's modernisation of the school curriculum to provide greater flexibility and choice to pupils. We must consider it in the context of a package of measures that the Executive is introducing to increase flexibility and choice. I am getting more perturbed as the debate goes on, because everybody other than me and my colleagues seems to have seen the strategy document. Unlike Fergus Ewing, I certainly did not see it last night. I was in the Parliament at 11 o'clock last night and I was here at half past 8 this morning and it still was not there, so, to a certain extent, I am talking off the top of my head. However, I will not hold ministers responsible for the vagaries of the printing system.  I notice that the Association of Scottish Colleges, which also seems to know something that I do not know, has also welcomed the strategy, in particular the increase in investment in vocational education and the promise of parity in funding for college courses that are offered to school pupils—a point that Christine May raised in an intervention. In the absence of the strategy document, I read a piece of research on school pupils' attitudes towards further education that the Executive commissioned as part of the consultation. It was undertaken by Carole Millar Research and involved 12 colleges and 26 schools. It was interesting to read that the pupils' perceptions of college were generally favourable. Indeed, 80 per cent of S4 pupils who had participated in school-college links found that college attendance had helped them to make decisions about their options for the future. The sorts of things that are being discussed in the context of skills for work will assist pupils in making such decisions. Robert Brown, who was able to go on the visits yesterday—I was unfortunately prevented from doing so by a prior engagement—referred to the fact that pupils who are disengaged from education in a school environment often gain motivation and a sense of achievement in college. Many of the pupils in the research found that college increased their awareness of lifelong learning and that attendance at college helped to ease the transition between school and higher or further education. That is particularly relevant in the context of the discussion about boys not being engaged in higher education, which has surfaced in the media again this morning. The strategy provides opportunities to address some of the issues about the balance of boys' achievements within school and further education. The research also seemed to provide evidence that there are fewer incidents of bad behaviour in college, although some pupils felt that, when behavioural problems occurred, the lecturers were not as effective in dealing with it as teachers—teachers might argue that themselves. However, I agree with Fiona Hyslop and the minister that it is extremely important that colleges are not considered to be dumping grounds for pupils who have behavioural problems. In the past, the pupils who have been sent to colleges have been those who, as Christine May said, are unable to cope or disengaged from school, but we are talking about something different: offering college education to all pupils, not only those with behavioural problems or who find school difficult. That needs to be based on the individual child's needs. The strategy is about bridging the gap between academic and vocational training, enabling students to move between academic and  vocational courses and acknowledging the vocational content of many higher education courses. As I science student, I spent many hours in laboratories. I learned not only academic knowledge in those laboratories, but practical and vocational skills. My eldest child is at the University of Abertay Dundee studying computing studies, and he is learning many vocational skills as well as academic skills. We need to break down the rather false barrier that has grown up between vocational and academic education over the years. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton referred to Dumfries and Galloway College, which is located in Russell Brown's constituency—we are all making digs at the moment. I do not think that the college was involved in the research project to which I referred, but I will make a point that the Tories have rightly made—I hate to be thinking what they are thinking, but it is correct to say that there is a problem with timetabling for rural areas. I would hate to think that, although school pupils in Dumfries are able to benefit from the links with Dumfries and Galloway College, students from Langholm Academy might find it more difficult because they have to travel an hour to get to the college. The minister talked about piloting the schemes in other areas, and I hope that some of those pilots will be in rural areas where the transport and timetabling issues can be addressed.

I am pleased to hear the minister say that, because it is extremely important. I will be a little bit parochial. Chris Ballance mentioned the unique collaboration between higher and further education that exists on the Crichton campus in Dumfries—I will not mention whose constituency it is in. If we are now to have a collaboration between school and further  education there, that will provide a great opportunity that I find exciting. The pupils who go into that environment will see not only something of what happens in colleges, but a tertiary transition that enables articulation between further and higher education, allows people to move between further and higher education, shows people the opportunities of lifelong learning and progression and helps to break down the barriers for people who, because they think that they are not terribly good at school, decide to go into a job and not take part in education after the age of 16. The partnership between the University of Glasgow, the University of Paisley, Bell College, Dumfries and Galloway College, Barony College and the Open University that exists at the Crichton campus and the wide range of courses and facilities on the site provide an exciting opportunity for Dumfries. If, as might happen, Dumfries and Galloway College eventually relocates to the same site as the university campus, school pupils who take part in education there will see people training as social workers or primary school teachers, people engaged in continuous professional development and a model of lifelong learning that could be inspirational. After a general election, we might find it a little boring to see consensus breaking out across the Parliament, but I am glad that we all regard school-college links as a way forward for education and to improve the life skills and life chances of our younger generation.

I welcome amendment 11 and John Farquhar Munro's comments. I say in response to one of the points that Fiona Hyslop made that although the plan is the responsibility of the bòrd, its implementation is the responsibility of Scottish ministers. Therefore if the bill is amended in the way that the minister suggests, the national plan will require ministers to plan for not just the preservation and promotion of the Gaelic language but the promotion of Gaelic education in its widest sense, which includes, as well as Gaelic-medium education, learning Gaelic as a second language in schools and in adult education. In areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, the second and third aspects might be a more important part of the plan than GME. The bill will also require ministers to promote Gaelic culture, which we all know is important to Scotland's cultural heritage and international image. I see the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport sitting in front of me and I am sure that she would confirm that Gaelic culture makes a valuable contribution to all three parts of her portfolio. I urge members to resist any amendments that would restrict the way in which authorities such as Dumfries and Galloway Council and Scottish Borders Council can make provision to meet parents' demands for Gaelic-medium education. Members will know that in areas of the south of Scotland, there is concern about the structure in the bill being too rigid. We have tried to make the bill as flexible as possible so that the local plans  can reflect the needs and aspirations of each community. I urge members to resist amendments that would restrict local authorities in the south of Scotland in developing those plans.

To ask the Scottish Executive what actions it is taking to tackle health care-acquired infections. (S2O-6460)

I am pleased to hear about the steps that the Executive is taking to combat this serious issue, although it is unfortunate that some prominent Opposition politicians have sought to exaggerate the problem for political purposes. The minister referred to the role that hospital visitors can play in combating HAI. Can he advise whether the HAI task force is looking at the problems that may be caused by open-ended visiting arrangements, such as extended hours or unlimited numbers of visitors at beds, which may cause difficulties for hospitals in controlling infections that are brought in from the outside community?

I am pleased to have the opportunity to discuss nuclear power again, not least because nuclear power generation has made an important contribution to the local economy of my constituency over the past five decades. The SNP's reasons for bringing the issue to the chamber at this time are twofold: to perpetually attack the constitutional settlement and to drive a wedge between the coalition partners, which the general election could do more successfully than any debate in Parliament. The Labour policy is a balanced energy policy that keeps all options open. The SNP, on the other hand, rejects the need for a new nuclear power station in Scotland. We heard a lot of scaremongering from Richard Lochhead, but he consistently refuses to support the alternatives, such as wind farms. The actions of people such as  Roseanna Cunningham and Fergus Ewing, and particularly of Christine Grahame in the Borders—

I am sorry, but I do not have time. Every time there is a wind farm planning application, Christine Grahame opposes it. The SNP cannot have it both ways. The SNP's target is that 25 per cent of our energy will be generated by renewables by 2010, and 50 per cent by 2020. At the same time, the SNP wants Scotland to rule out nuclear power while countries such as Finland, Canada, France, Romania, Japan, Russia, China, the USA and many others throughout the world are either planning or proposing new reactors. Those countries will be able to replace carbon-emitting power stations with non-carbon-emitting nuclear power stations. However, in the UK, which currently uses nuclear power for 25 per cent of its needs—indeed, Scotland uses it for 32 per cent of its need—if we rule out the nuclear option we will be in danger of using the emerging renewables technology simply to replace nuclear power stations that are coming to the end of their lives, rather than using them, as we would all wish them to be used, to reduce carbon emissions.

No, I will not. I acknowledge that the general public have many fears that are based on problems with the old technologies to which Alex Johnstone referred and—in particular—because of the link to nuclear weapons. Indeed, Chapelcross is one of the older generation of nuclear power stations that had some of those problems. However, the nuclear waste problem exists now because of the current stations. The issue is not what might happen in the future; we have to deal with nuclear waste now. In doing that, we can deal with nuclear waste issues that may emerge if new nuclear power stations are built in Scotland or the UK. We are now on the third generation of nuclear power stations and research is being done on the fourth generation. Chris Ballance is wrong to describe the AP1000 as unproven; it is one of the technologies that is being developed throughout the world. Third generation power stations produce far less waste. The AP1000 would have five times the power generating capacity of Chapelcross and, over its 60-year life span, would produce only 2,000m 3 of low-level waste and 700m 3 of intermediate-level waste. It would also use passive safety measures using gravity, natural circulation and compressed gas and would avoid many of the safety problems that are associated with pump failure and overheating. The new systems will be 60 times more efficient and will  therefore require far less subsidy than current systems. The discussion that we are having is based on the past, not the future. I will support the Executive amendment. Decision time is coming, because options to resolve the nuclear waste disposal issue will be suggested and, when the time comes, we will have to make decisions that are based on logical, sensible, scientific and factual discussion, rather than on opinion polls or scaremongering. When the time comes, we must have sensible discussions and debate.

I, too, welcome the minister's long-awaited statement on  this substantial investment. The minister and her predecessors will be aware from my correspondence of the serious situation in Dumfries and Galloway, where no dentists—private or NHS—are taking on patients at the moment. Patients who phone the health board to ask to be put on a list are just put through to a recorded message. Is the minister sure that there is enough capacity within—[ Interruption. ] Members are laughing, but this is serious in my constituency. It is not a laughing matter. Is the minister convinced that there will be sufficient capacity in areas such as Dumfries and Galloway to enable dentists to reopen their lists? If they are unable to do so, what further measures are available to enable NHS boards to fulfil their obligation to provide NHS dental treatment to children and other vulnerable groups?

The motion is long and rambling, so I intend to focus on the Tories' proposals on parental choice and publicly funded independent schools. My apologies to the Scottish National Party and the Scottish Socialist Party if I do not address their amendments, but, as this is a Tory debate, I particularly want to consider the Tories' suggestions. I have looked at the Tory party policy document "Action on Education", which is available on the website of the United Kingdom Tories—the UK Tory leader has made it clear that the only way is Howard's way. The document promises parents of all school-age children the right to choose.

No, I will not take an intervention at the moment. "Action on Education" says that parents will be able to apply to any state-funded school. It says that parents will be able to send their child to any independent school that offers a "good" education for the cost of a place at a state-funded school and that those independent schools will not be allowed to charge fees. It also says that funding will follow the pupil. I have a few questions on those proposals, which I hope that Tory members will answer in their contributions. First, how much money will follow each pupil? The Scottish average is £3,500 a year to educate a primary school pupil and £5,000 to educate a secondary school pupil, but figures released in January show that that varies significantly between local authorities. In Shetland, for example, it costs £5,800 to educate a primary pupil and £9,500 to educate a secondary pupil. In Glasgow, the figures are, respectively, £4,200 and  £5,800. In Dumfries and Galloway, which is either worryingly cheap or particularly efficient, the figures are £3,000 and £4,500. However, within those local authorities there are significant variations between individual schools. In small rural schools, which usually cost much more per pupil, the figures can be two or three times the local authority average. If those schools were to be independently managed but publicly funded, how would the funds be allocated? Would they be based on the Scottish average? Would they be based on the local authority average? Alternatively, would the funds be the actual cost of sending a pupil to that school? If the answer is either of the last two, what funding will follow the pupil: the cost of the education that they were receiving or the cost of the education that they will receive? I ask the self-styled champions of rural Scotland what the effects of their education policy will be on small, rural primary schools.

Mr Monteith can answer in his contribution. I want to make progress. How feasible is the Tories' choice in rural communities? I was in Annan Academy on Monday morning, seeing the sci-fun programme. Annan Academy is a good school, but let us assume that a parent wanted to send their child to another school. Where could the child go? The nearest choices would be Lockerbie, which is 13 miles away; Dumfries, which is 16 miles away; Carlisle, which is 18 miles away; Langholm, which is 23 miles away; or Moffat, which is 29 miles away. Who will be responsible for school transport to exercise that choice? That question applies in urban areas, too. I suspect that the third of Edinburgh parents who ship their children to schools outside their local area are contributing fairly significantly to congestion in the city. Let us consider the parents who want to send their children to independent schools—

No, I want to make progress. I still have quite a bit to say. Let us consider the independent sector in Edinburgh. St Serf's School, which Tommy Sheridan mentioned, costs £4,000 for a primary child and £4,600 for a secondary child—not terribly expensive. Erskine Stewart's Melville schools—when I went to Mary Erskine School, it was still a direct grant school—are now much more expensive: at primary 7 level they cost £6,200 and at secondary level they cost £7,600. At Fettes, which has a well-known former pupil,  primary costs £9,300 and secondary costs £14,000. I do not think that any of those schools will offer to take pupils for the cost of a state-funded place or that they will offer many bursaries.

Sorry, Christine, but I am still trying to make progress with my points. Let us consider uptake and whether attainment is improved in the international comparisons where state funding follows pupils into the independent sector. Do children from low-income families benefit? What about Milwaukee and Cleveland in the United States, which have had voucher-based programmes for 15 years? Helen Ladd's testimony in the House of Representatives is that the programmes have resulted in no difference in achievement among students from the same socioeconomic background. Thirty per cent of students return to public education after initial experience of the independent sector and fewer than 7 per cent of those eligible bother to apply. Let us consider Chile, where the voucher system was introduced in 1980, under Thatcher's great friend, General Pinochet. There has been no improvement in achievement among students from lower-income backgrounds in private schools and 72 per cent of students from the lower half of income distribution remain within the public sector. The only people who benefit are the privileged. Let us consider the Netherlands, where 70 per cent of pupils are in subsidised private schools but where there are extensive waiting lists for "better" schools, which have started to charge fees. The 30 per cent of pupils remaining in the public sector are from low-income families. Even in Sweden, where 800 independent schools have been created, the independent sector educates only 6 per cent of pupils. Are colleagues thinking what I am thinking? When it comes to education policy, the Tories do not seem to have done their homework. Tory policies will not work for rural schools, which are more expensive to run. They will not offer parents in rural communities any real choice. They will not work for children from low-income families. They will not raise attainment. They will not offer parents the choice of the current independent sector. Zero out of five. In my book, that is a fail.

I was delighted to receive the compact disc of the infrastructure investment plan at the end of last month. I suppose that members might think that I was something of a sad character to be so pleased to see it. The reason is not only that I thought that it was of a singing duo of Tom and Tavish, but because time and again in conversation with people in the private or public sector, infrastructure investment is identified as a top priority and the most important measure for economic success. It is therefore to be welcomed that the Executive has produced a publication on that. Jim Mather slightly missed the point of the debate, which is the essential contribution of infrastructure investment. We are talking not about fiscal autonomy—although he probably is—or population decline, but about how the public sector can invest in the country's future.

I am not denying that population decline is an issue; I am pointing out that we are debating the important contribution of infrastructure investment. There was a massive decline in public sector net investment from 5 per cent of GDP in 1963-64 to only 0.5 per cent in 1997-98. That is a tenfold decrease in the proportion of GDP that was allocated to public sector infrastructure investment over 34 years, during which time GDP almost doubled. Should I be surprised that the Tories were in power for 23 of those 34 years? Despite what is mentioned in Brian Monteith's excessively wordy amendment, we had an inadequate road system, crumbling school buildings, disastrous privatisation of the rail network and hospitals that were unfit for purpose. The Tory Government was clearly determined to clamp down on public expenditure.

I disagree. My recollection of the late 1990s is that there was a serious need for investment in school buildings and hospital buildings, but it did not happen. I am not convinced that the Tories have much affection for the public sector; my fears were reinforced by Ted Brocklebank's speech. He seems to doubt that health is important for economic development. Why, if that is the case, does the Federation of Small Businesses in Scotland identify health as one of the top priorities for economic success and keeping the workforce economically active? The Forum of Private Business in Scotland found in its latest survey that 78 per cent of respondents thought that banning smoking in public places was essential to success. They realise that health expenditure is important; I do not know why the Conservatives do not. In saying that the public sector is too big, right-wing commentators do not seem to realise that investment in the public sector creates opportunities for the private sector, such as for companies that are subcontracted to build houses, improve roads and install central heating. Marilyn Livingstone made an important point about capacity. During the quality and standards II programme, Scottish Water was initially unable to  spend its borrowing consent because of lack of capacity. I know that that is now being rectified and I hope that we will learn something from those problems, because there needs to be a fair amount of lead-in time for large-scale investments to ensure that the money gets out the door. Mark Ballard made comments about PPP. I hope that school buildings would last a great deal longer than 30 years, but during the 30 years of the contracts, which Mark Ballard is so concerned about, the private sector investor takes the risk. What is different is that the local authority does not take the risk; the private sector investor does.

No. I am sorry. I will have to press on, because I am getting to the end of my time. I am pleased that the plan mentions investment in transport infrastructure, affordable housing, water infrastructure and flood-defence mechanisms, all of which are important in Dumfries and Galloway and which I am glad to see have been flagged up. How will decisions be taken to allocate the available funding? The document says that "Effective investment requires arrangements for consultation with consumers, trade unions, professional and voluntary bodies and other stakeholders." I presume that those stakeholders are local authorities, local enterprise companies and the private sector. On reading the document, I could not get a handle on the mechanisms for how that will be achieved, although it was promised that it would be outlined in chapter 3. Councils and enterprise companies are asking how the decisions will be made. The document mentions community planning and the example of good practice that is the north-west resource centre in Dumfries. The information in the document is a wee bit out of date in stating that "a funding package has been confirmed" for the centre. The money has been spent; the centre is up and running and is entering phase 3. I know that some of the minister's predecessors got the opportunity to see that example of good practice in community planning and I hope that the current ministerial team will also have an opportunity at some point to see what is going on there. I welcome this first ever infrastructure investment plan for Scotland and look forward to monitoring progress over the years.

I thank the SNP for the opportunity to debate early years education because Labour in local, Scottish and UK Government has made a huge difference to it in the past 10 years. I thank the SNP for the opportunity to celebrate Labour's success and look forward to what we can achieve in the future. My children were all born when Mrs Thatcher was Prime Minister—under a Tory Government, people had to do something to cheer themselves up. At that time, only 25 per cent of pre-school children who lived in Ayrshire—the part of Strathclyde in which we lived—were offered a half-day nursery place in the year before they started school. A parent had to put the child's name into a ballot in the hope that they might get something.  No choice of establishment or time was available and many areas of South Ayrshire had no provision. I probably used up all my lottery luck—I must have, because I have never won in the lottery—by having all three of my children being offered a place through that ballot. As a working mother, I appreciate that problems existed at that time in organising wraparound care, but that provision was still valuable and its extension is still a tremendous success. Addressing the issue was a key priority for Labour South Ayrshire Council—Murray Tosh will remember its election in 1995, only 10 years ago. At that time, local government had to consider the Tories' voucher scheme, but the council decided not to become involved in it. I hope that the Tories will give us the opportunity before the general election to debate their proposals, because they will find that we are ready for their arguments. We in South Ayrshire Council established nursery classes in primary schools that had capacity and by building additional classrooms. As convener of education services then, I was extremely proud to open nursery classes in areas that had previously had no nursery provision, such as the class at Kingcase Primary School in Prestwick, which my children attended. Those are among the moments of which I am most proud in my time as a politician. Of course, things became a great deal better when Labour was elected to power in 1997, because we had the commitment to provision of free half-day nursery places for four-year-olds, and the establishment of child care partnerships that meant that for the first time the public, voluntary and private sectors worked together to provide a service for all families. Bill Aitken talked a load of unsubstantiated tripe about the Executive's attitude to the private and voluntary sectors—valuable partnerships have been established up and down the country.

No. I am sorry; I must press on. The introduction of child tax credits and working tax credits has assisted families who are on lower incomes. Support has been provided for the first child in a lowest-income family, which will be £60 a week from next month. That is far more than was available under the Tories. We have also introduced a statutory right to paternity leave. Things have become even better under the Labour-Liberal Scottish Executive. We have the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000, which placed a duty on local authorities to secure a pre-school education place for every three and four-year-old whose parents want one. Other members have mentioned the sure start programme, which operates on both sides of the  border. This year, £23 million will be spent on the programme and £50 million will be spent in 2006. We also have the review of the early years and child care workforce. I agree with Maureen Macmillan and Rosemary Byrne that the review needs to address a number of complex workforce issues. More will come if Labour is re-elected at Westminster this year. We will see extension of the entitlement to statutory maternity pay to nine months by 2007 and to 12 months by the end of the next Parliament. There will be increasing flexibility to allow both parents to share maternity leave entitlement or to take leave when the child is older. We also have a commitment on both sides of the border to expand both the right to nursery education and opportunities for early learning to all young children and their families. I thank the SNP for giving me a chance to run through just a few of the achievements of the UK Government and the Scottish Executive in serving Scotland's young families. As many other members, including Scott Barrie and Robert Brown have said, the SNP motion is full of worthy aspirations, but there is no cost analysis of how they would be achieved. I reject totally the constitutional guff at the end of the motion. Labour and Liberal Democrat members will continue to make progress to secure the best possible learning opportunities for our youngest citizens, by working in partnership with Westminster colleagues. I agree strongly with Rosemary Byrne and Maureen Macmillan that we need to address behavioural problems as early as possible, but we are making progress. That progress must not be halted by the election at Westminster this year of a Tory Government, with its stated intention to make £35 billion-worth of cuts.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It is about the sound system in the chamber. I might be a little more fragile than most members today—through illness rather than alcohol—but when people shout as loudly as Mr Sheridan was doing, I find it painful. My ears are really sore. Can something be done to turn down the volume?

First of all, I apologise for the state of my voice. I could probably start a health scare by saying that I caught it off a seagull, but I do not think that that is true.  There is nothing very objectionable about the SSP motion. Obesity is an issue of major concern and it is extremely important to encourage a healthy diet in children, but the content of Frances Curran's speech, as other members have said, seemed to be rather different from that of the motion. We need to recognise that, as others have said, diet is only one part of the equation. As I was cooking my tea last night, I thought back to what primary school children ate when I was young. I remember being told off for not eating the fat on meat, because it was supposed to be good for us. We ate butter and we had two-course dinners with puddings. I can remember coming down the stairs and looking at the dinner table thinking, "Please let it be a pudding spoon that's on the table." Who remembers high teas, when we used to get a plate of fish and chips with bread and butter followed by a great big platter of cakes and biscuits?

And scones, yes. It is true that we ate more vegetables and much less in the way of additives and processed foods. The incidence of childhood obesity was very much lower then than it is now. I hate to agree with the Tories, especially so near to the possible date of a general election, but Brian Monteith is right to say that, although the Scottish lifestyle has changed, our diet essentially has not changed. I remember having a 20in waist—the only reason why I am still wearing a size 10 skirt is that a size 10 is a hell of a lot bigger today than it was 35 years ago, just like me. The problem is common across Europe. I was sitting outside a café in Spain at about 3 o'clock in the afternoon during the October recess, enjoying a glass of vino blanco, when I spotted a crowd of rather sturdy young people leaving school and heading for the bus. I looked at them and thought, "Heavens! They look about the size of Scottish children." It is a problem all over Europe. The solution has to be about diet and exercise, as the Executive's amendment suggests.

I am sorry but, if Rosie Kane's party wants a debate, it should use its allotted time to hold one debate. If the SSP wants to hold two debates, it cannot have debates in which there is time for interventions. That is it. The SSP makes those decisions. Robert Brown made an appropriate comment about school milk. I absolutely hated the stuff. I also hated school dinners and got out of them by telling my parents that everybody threw them under the table, so they allowed me to take sandwiches. I have never noticed my children being much more enthusiastic about school dinners than I was. Just getting children to eat better is not enough. We need to do that, but we  also have to establish from an early age, at pre-school, the habit of physical exercise. That is what we have lost over the past 30 or 40 years. We cannot get away from the role of parents. There is a whole range of factors and a whole range of educational issues. There is also an issue of personal responsibility, of how we feed and exercise our children—it will not do to say that the state should do all that for people. There is also an issue of corporate responsibility. Many of the supermarkets want to say that they are socially responsible, but how do they market food? What sort of profits are they making on healthy foods? That debate has to take place. A number of members have mentioned "Jamie's School Dinners". Poor Jamie Oliver was nearly in tears trying to get secondary school kids to eat a healthy diet and, in last night's programme, he got the primary kids to do so only by encouraging them to grow the food themselves. We must not be complacent about the health of young people. It is an extremely complex issue, which the Executive is attempting to address by a number of interrelated priorities and policies. That is the best way forward. I congratulate the Executive on what it is doing, but let us not be complacent. We have a hell of a problem to tackle.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it ensures that modern science equipment is provided for schools. (S2O-5481)

Does the minister share my concern over the decline in popularity of some subjects in schools and, in particular, in universities? Does he agree that pupils are motivated through being able to engage in interesting and relevant experiments and that provision of opportunities to undertake experiments—not just to see other people  conducting experiments—is essential in attracting school students to the study of science?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Executive will take to improve staffing levels in NHS 24. (S2F-1469)

I thank the First Minister for his reply and for his advice about the review group. Only last week, I was advised that a parent who was worried that their young child might have meningitis had to wait several hours for a return call from NHS 24. I am sure that the First Minister will agree that that is quite unacceptable. Will the review group consider what steps can be taken to recruit nurses who are not currently employed in the NHS so that the staff shortage problem does not just shift from NHS 24 to the NHS? Will it also consider the recruitment of other specialists, such as psychiatric specialists? When I visited NHS 24 last summer, I was advised that about a quarter of calls relate to mental health problems rather than physical health problems and that those calls are time consuming.

Will the member explain whether the Conservative party is in favour of or opposed to ID cards in principle?

Will the minister confirm my understanding that the Tweed fishery is regulated under schedule 6 to the Water Resources Act 1991, which enables Scottish ministers to agree to the byelaws that regulate the fishery, but the introduction of the rod licences comes under the Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries Act 1975, which is a separate piece of legislation? Is he aware that Dumfries and Galloway Council believes that there is some dubiety about the legislation? Will he join Dumfries and Galloway Council in requesting the Environment Agency to defer the introduction of the rod licences by one year so that those legal issues can be further examined?

I am the only member from the South of Scotland to have spoken in the debate so far. There is a stretch of the A71 between Moffat and Dumfries, by St Ann's bridge, which is regularly frequented by deer grazing at the side of the road. Unfortunately, sometimes they cross the road, and on more than one occasion I have found a hind and fawn in the middle of the road when I came round the corner; fortunately, I have never had an accident. In all my time in my constituency, I have only ever seen one dead deer on the road, although I have seen a great many dead foxes, rabbits and badgers, so I do not believe that deer are among the types of wildlife that are most often involved in road accidents. As Nora Radcliffe said, only two species of deer are native and the other two are imported species, but deer in general are now strongly associated with Scotland's natural heritage. It may be the case, as Eleanor Scott said, that that is down to the Victorians, but many visitors to Scotland hope to see some of our native creatures, whether they be red squirrels, golden eagles or red deer. They are probably a lot more likely to see red deer, which contribute to our tourism potential, as indeed do field sports. I know that some people disagree strongly with field sports, but field sports contribute a lot to some local economies, including the economy of Dumfries and Galloway. That needs to be borne in mind, as does the fact that venison is an important, but unfortunately undervalued, food source, which could be far better promoted than it is in the marketing of Scotland's food produce. I am not denying that deer can be destructive and have to be managed. They can be destructive to other species and to economic activities. As many have said, the control of deer has to be humane. It has to take account of the fact that deer are wild herd animals that at times live in inhospitable conditions and need to seek shelter. The Scottish Gamekeepers Association has made a number of suggestions on the management of deer, including designated deer forests, deer fencing and deer corridors. In its briefing, RSPB Scotland expressed concern about the erecting of high fences because of the danger to species such as woodland grouse and capercaillie. However, I am assured by the Scottish Gamekeepers Association that the types of fencing that are available now are not so dangerous for some of those species. I hope that dialogue will take place between the different stakeholders on what can be done. The British Deer Society welcomes a revision of attitudes that means that the erecting of new fences will be considered on its merits. Previously,  there was an assumption against all fencing. The society's point of view is very sensible. Fencing must be appropriate to particular conditions and environments. Reference has been made to a film produced by the Scottish Gamekeepers Association. I have seen the film; it purports to show deer being herded with helicopters towards waiting guns. If that has happened, I could never in any way condone that type of behaviour. We would not herd cattle with helicopters; we would not herd sheep with helicopters; we would not herd horses with helicopters; and I do not believe that deer should be herded in that way either. I repeat what I said earlier: deer culling has to be done as humanely and as acceptably as possibly. I want to finish on a more optimistic note. As far as I can see from the various contributions from the various sectors in this debate, there is a general view that deer management groups should be more representative and should include members of the community. The Scottish Gamekeepers Association has suggested councils and other groups. If there were a widening of the membership of deer management groups so that they included more people with an interest in the various industries that are affected by deer, people might be able to get together and find mutually acceptable solutions and a consensus that would allow progress to be made.

I too congratulate Susan Deacon on securing the debate. I agree with some of Tricia Marwick's comments about the relevance of the topic to members' business debates. I also thank Susan Deacon's office for drawing to my attention an LGBT event that will be taking place in my constituency shortly. In my brief contribution I will draw attention to the LGBT Youth Scotland national gathering, which will be held in Dumfries from 18 to 20 February, and an associated event. At the national gathering, the LGBT Youth charter of rights will be launched and endorsed by Kathleen Marshall, the commissioner for children and young people, and elections will be held to the Scottish Youth Parliament on the Sunday. I am looking forward to taking up my invitation to go along and give advice to the prospective members of the Scottish Youth Parliament, although I suspect that they might be able to give me advice. There will also be elections to the youth council and a range of funding activities, which are described on LGBT Youth's website and which will "range from trash drumming, games and drama to workshops on subjects like the scene and feeling good ... to dancin', prancin' and generally muckin about". I might give the last bit a miss, but I am pleased to hear that these groups of young people are coming to the gathering. I was particularly impressed to see that LGBT—I actually find it easier to say the longer term, lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender—Youth Scotland will not just pay for the accommodation for young people under 26 in friendly bed and breakfasts in Dumfries, but will help with their travel costs and that the event is completely free to the young people who are taking part. That is excellent.  I hope that the young people get a friendly and warm welcome from the people of Dumfries. From the town's point of view it is good to have a number of people coming to stay in bed and breakfasts at a time when the tourist trade is not at its height. I draw to members' attention the fact that I have a motion wishing the event every success. I hope that everyone here who has not signed it yet will do so, as that would send a good message to the young people. The event is preceded by a community planning event, which was organised by LGBT Youth Scotland and Dumfries and Galloway's inclusive communities forum at Browne House at the Crichton university campus. Among other things, it will focus on services and facilities for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people of all ages in Dumfries and Galloway and will include a presentation by local lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender young people. It is a good event to be happening. Susan Deacon mentioned her birthday, in relation to which we wish her all the best. I am a wee bit older than she is, unfortunately, and entered my sixth decade at the end of last year. My age enables me to reflect on the considerable advances in the promotion of equality and the celebration of diversity that have taken place since I was young. In those days, there were gay bars in Edinburgh and Glasgow, but there were no events in places such as Dumfries such as the one that will take place there this month and no discussions between community planning partners on services for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people in predominantly rural areas such as Dumfries and Galloway. Although, as Margaret Smith says, there is still much to be done, much progress has been made. I welcome that and congratulate organisations such as LGBT Youth Scotland that have been part of the process of making those improvements.

Tapadh leibh, Presiding Officer. I am sorry that I am not able to make more of my contribution to the debate in what was at one time the language of the majority of people in Scotland. Gaelic was brought to Scotland more than 1,500 years ago. It gradually displaced the other languages until, around the 12 th or 13 th centuries, it was spoken by the majority of people across Scotland. Unfortunately, as we have heard, the language then began to decline. It was supplanted from the south by Scots and English and suffered as a result of official persecution. Places in many parts of Scotland, including Dumfries, still have Gaelic names. Indeed, I understand that the name Dumfries derives from the Gaelic for the castle in the wood, although my daughter once misread the name as the fort of the corpse, which puts a rather different perspective on the town. Gaelic plays an important part in Scotland's linguistic and cultural heritage. I believe that it is relevant to all Scotland and not only to the areas in which it is still spoken. I warmly welcome the general approach that the Executive has taken in the bill. The preservation and future growth of the Gaelic language and culture are the responsibility of all public agencies in Scotland. I am delighted to hear today that Whitehall has agreed to co-operate with Bòrd na Gàidhlig in the spirit of the legislation. Of course, a number of areas need further discussion. Reference has been made to the status of the language. I was interested to read the minister's response of 17 December 2004 to my written question in which he said: "There is no legislation that recognises English as an official language of Scotland."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 17 December 2004; S2W-12769.]  Obviously, not being an official language in law has not held English back, which probably reinforces the point that was made earlier that Gaelic needs more than just legislation to give it further life. In my contribution, I want to concentrate on the fact that I represent a part of Scotland in which two thirds of one percent of the population has a knowledge of Gaelic. Many of us who do not speak Gaelic have an affection for—and, indeed, an historic link with—the language. The part of my own varied and mongrel heritage that gave me my surname originates from Elgin and Perthshire. I presume that those Murrays were Gaelic speakers. As a result of the Highland clearances, many Gaelic speakers ended up in the central belt and the south of Scotland. Although many of their  descendents lost the language, many feel, like me, that the Gaelic language and culture is part of their culture and heritage today. There is some anxiety in Dumfries and Galloway about what a Gaelic plan might be about. People wonder whether it will be relevant to most of the people in the region and whether resources will be diverted from Scots, for example. I believe that the Gaelic plan for Dumfries and Galloway will not be the same as the Gaelic plan for the Western Isles. We will not see Gaelic signposts on all the roads in Dumfries and Galloway—that would be a bit like seeing English-language signposts all over the south of Spain. A Gaelic plan for Dumfries and Galloway could include Gaelic classes for people like me who would like to learn the language but find it difficult to get classes. When the council is purchasing new material for its libraries, it could think about purchasing some resources in Gaelic. The council's education service could consider how to respond positively to parents who desire Gaelic-medium education for their children—such provision might not necessarily be made in the region. In the council's recruitment of language teachers, consideration could be given to the recruitment of teachers who can offer Gaelic as a second language at either primary or secondary level. The everyday language of the majority of my constituents is Scots and an interesting parallel can be drawn between Gaelic and Scots. Nowadays, people speak Scots with confidence and pride. Scots is no longer considered a degraded form of English but a language in its own right. Young Scots feel that it is cool to speak in Scots and I understand that the same thing is happening with Gaelic. That said, the state in which the language is in means that we need to accelerate the pace at which that happens. Evidence from my area showed that Burns did not speak Gaelic. That may be so, but I believe that the spirit behind the bill is very much the same spirit that inspired Burns and his violinist partner to go round the Highlands of Scotland seeking out bits of music and poetry. Burns knew that changes in Scottish society meant that much of Scotland's traditional musical culture was at risk of being lost. He made a positive determination to collect it and relaunch it with new words and so on. The bill will do the same sort of thing. Were he alive today, Burns would approve of it, even if he was not a Gaelic speaker. With the bill, we are trying to preserve and encourage part of our cultural heritage that would otherwise, without action, be lost. More than that, we are attempting to breathe new life and vigour into what is Scotland's ancient national language.

There are some aspects of the Tory motion with which I agree. I, too, commend the political leadership that has been shown by the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Allan Wilson, in his pursuit of a mature debate on the future of nuclear energy in Scotland. To those who held up their hands in horror at his views, I point out that Allan Wilson has promoted that argument for many years. It was his view before he was appointed to the Scottish Executive, so nobody should have been surprised that he supported his constituents in the nuclear industry. Likewise, I support my colleague John Home Robertson's desire to establish a cross-party group to examine many of the issues in much greater detail. I disagree with the motion's initial premise, which is: "that the Scottish Executive's renewable energy policy is unduly biased in favour of wind power to the detriment of other renewable technologies". An issue arises over how the power companies have reacted to the Executive's challenging targets on energy generation from renewable sources, in that they have been over-reliant on onshore wind power, which has produced a plethora of planning applications for wind farms, particularly in areas that are accessible for connection to the national grid. Some proposed locations, such as Ae forest in my constituency, are highly inappropriate. I do not oppose wind farms per se; they will have a part to play provided that they are situated in suitable locations and have most of the local community's support. I accept that some nimbys will always want nothing in their back yards at any cost, but what matters is what the majority of a community believes. Many reasons are possible for the flurry of onshore wind farm applications. The obvious reason—to which Shiona Baird referred—is that wind technology is far further advanced than other renewable technologies are, so it is quicker and easier to develop. Of course, there could be more devious reasons. Stirring up of public reaction to vast numbers of applications might persuade public and political opinion to support other forms of energy generation, such as other renewables or nuclear power. If the outcry is sufficient against proliferation of large-scale wind turbines, Governments might be persuaded to subsidise other alternatives more. Perhaps we cannot blame the power companies if they have that at the back of their minds. I had the good fortune to discuss with Allan Wilson's predecessor, Lewis Macdonald, my concerns about the number of wind farm applications in Dumfries and Galloway. I was relieved to learn that councils can take a  cumulative view of such applications. I believe that after that discussion, the Executive wrote to councils to ensure that they knew that they could do that. The Executive supports research and development in tidal and wave power and in marine and solar technology. It is committed to achieving a diverse spread of renewable energy sources. For example, I recently wrote to the energy minister to support a potentially very large biomass power generation plant in my constituency—David Mundell referred to that. I received an extremely supportive and helpful reply that left me in no doubt about the minister's commitment to developing other forms of renewable power generation. Moreover, he said that he expected the forthcoming forum for renewable energy development in Scotland report to address the different subsidies for biomass crops north and south of the border, to which Alex Johnstone referred.

I am happy to agree with the minister. Biomass also has great potential in areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, which has a concentration of forestry and great potential for growth in biomass crops. That is one future for us. I say that despite being one of several Scottish Labour Party members who support a balanced UK power generation policy that includes second-generation nuclear power. I accept that waste disposal is an issue, but once we have the scientific evidence about the potential for disposal not only of existing waste, but of the waste that second-generation nuclear power will produce—which will be in much smaller amounts, as John Home Robertson said—we must not run away from the fact that differences of opinion exist not only between parties, but within parties. The argument will be difficult, but we must have it.

No. I am sorry; I am nearly in my last minute. I question to an extent the Tory party's motivation in lodging the motion for the debate fewer than 100 days before the likely date for the next UK general election. It is notable that two speakers so far happen to be candidates for that election. I suspect the possibility of some political motivation in lodging the motion at this time. However, I am grateful for the clarification of the SNP and Liberal Democrat positions on nuclear power and wind energy. I am sure that some of my  constituents in areas such as Annan will be very interested to hear David Mundell and the Labour candidate Councillor Sean Marshall—who works at Chapelcross power station—point out those views to their potential constituents. I am sure that, when he is the Labour member of Parliament for Dumfriesshire, Clydesdale and Tweeddale, Sean Marshall will argue for future nuclear generation persuasively and with deep knowledge from his previous career. He will be an excellent successor to Russell Brown.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to reduce further carbon emissions and air pollutants from road transport. (S2O-5016)

The minister will be aware that in many rural areas, such as parts of my constituency, the private car is the only feasible means of transport. Does he agree that more effort is required to develop alternative technologies for private transport? If so, what steps can the Executive take to encourage that?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made on protecting wildlife habitats. (S2O-4834)

The minister will be aware that the south of Scotland is an important area for conservation of red squirrels and that the red squirrels in south Scotland project is doing vital work in guiding and promoting habitat management. Concerns have been expressed to me—and to other MSPs, including my colleague John Home Robertson—about continuation of funding for such projects. Will the minister assure me that the Executive will continue to support the red squirrels in south Scotland project?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether qualifications gained at English universities will be accepted as suitable qualifications to teach in Scottish schools. (S2O-4831)

I thank the minister for his helpful response. He will be aware that many of my constituents find it much more convenient to study over the border in Carlisle than in Scotland and that Open University students can take a postgraduate certificate of education course using distance learning. However, the Open University's website seems to suggest that the qualification that is gained in that way is accepted in England and Northern Ireland, but not in Scotland. Is he sympathetic to the idea of making it easier for teachers who have an English teaching qualification to convert to teaching in Scotland, which would increase the number of teachers who would be available to teach in areas of teacher shortage, such as Dumfries and Galloway?

During the debate in the Parliament on child protection on 13 November 2003, I referred to the tragic and preventable event that prompted the Executive's review of child protection. That was the murder of one of my constituents, the three-year-old Kennedy McFarlane, on 17 May 2000 by her mother's partner, Thomas Duncan. The murder happened despite the fact that staff at her playgroup had raised concerns and despite the fact that she had been admitted to hospital many times suffering from a range of injuries. The collaboration between agencies was not sufficient to allow action to be taken on the concerns. Although a case conference was called, the girl was dead before it took place. The subsequent inquiry by Dr Hammond identified a lack of effective communication between the agencies that ought to have protected that little girl as the key contributory factor in the failure to prevent her murder.  I make no apology for referring to that tragedy again, because we must keep remembering that if we and the various agencies that operate with us fail to get the protection of children right, terrible and tragic events can occur. That is why Labour's manifesto for the Scottish parliamentary elections stated: "The measure of the society we are building will be the quality of the protection it offers our children." In March 2001, when Jack McConnell was the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs, he commissioned a review of child protection services throughout Scotland, following the inquiry into Kennedy McFarlane's death. The review resulted in the report "It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright", which was published in 2002 and made 18 recommendations. The Education Committee's purpose in conducting an inquiry was to try to find out how well the recommendations were being implemented. Unfortunately, in the period between the commissioning of the review and the publication of the report, a number of other children were murdered, which reinforced the need to ensure that we get the system right. As has been said, the committee's report was published in July last year. The Executive, in responding to the committee at the end of September, accepted and welcomed the majority of the committee's recommendations. I pay tribute to the way in which the Executive responded to some of the concerns that the committee raised. Various other significant activities have been taking place. Members have referred to the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003, the core provisions of which came into force at the beginning of this week. Of course, the act deals with people who work with children and does not address the sort of situation that caused Kennedy McFarlane's death. Other aspects of "It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright" address such situations. The minister referred to the report of Sir Michael Bichard's inquiry, which was commissioned in the wake of the tragic murders of the Soham girls. Those murders would have been prevented by the sort of provisions that are contained in the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003. The report of that inquiry was published on 22 June 2004 and, as the minister said, a progress report has just been placed in the House of Commons library. Members have raised a number of issues, including the time that is taken for disclosures to be issued and the serious problems that occurred in September and October. Part of the problem was that basic disclosures were being carried out for the Department for Transport in relation to employees at airports because of security issues. At that time, the Education Committee was  concerned that people who had not gone through the disclosure process might be working with children. We received assurances from a number of agencies that such people would not work unsupervised, but we were concerned about the issue. Since then, Disclosure Scotland has taken action to reduce the waiting list: it has doubled the number of telephone lines from 10 to 20 and it has created an e-mail address, which I have used on behalf of constituents. Those measures have helped to improve the situation. Donald Gorrie and others mentioned the problem of multiple disclosures. We have heard stories about people who volunteer with more than one organisation or who move from one registered body to another. People must register separately for each post, or, if they change jobs, they have to go back to the beginning and register again. Bichard's recommendation 19 was that a central register be set up of all persons who wish to work with children. In a sense, that proposal is the other side of the coin from the measures in the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003, because the recommendation relates to people who have been disclosure checked and who want to work with children. The proposal is to produce a licence or card for people to take to prospective employers to show that they have been disclosure checked, which might get over some of the present problems. Ken Macintosh referred to the problems of erring on the side of caution. That is understandable. Agencies need to be sensible, and there is a role for the Executive and its officials in working with local authorities. There has been a bit of an overreaction. We can understand why people and local authorities might overreact, given some of the stories and concerns that are around, but officials need to work with authorities and the voluntary sector to ensure that a proportionate response is given. The Executive responded to the report, and it referred to the sort of circumstances that Ken Macintosh described. If an individual has occasional or short-term involvement with children, that is okay if the person who is leading the group has been disclosure checked. The problem with a walking bus is that, if nobody is disclosure checked, there can be no group leader. There is an issue there: it is possible that three bad characters could get together to take kids to school. That is very unlikely, but it is possible. Our response has to be proportionate—that is where the issues lie. I am pleased to add my support to the Education Committee's report. We have made a commitment to do a bit of post-legislative scrutiny of the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003, which is important. We must ensure that legislation that  the Parliament has passed, which involved the Executive responding to concerns from the committee—some of the measures came from the body of the Parliament—works in the way in which we all intended it to do when we passed it.

To ask the First Minister how the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003 is affecting volunteering. (S2F-1322)

I am grateful to the First Minister for his reply and to the Executive for agreeing to delay the commencement of section 11(3)(a) of the 2003 act until 11 April 2005 to meet the concerns that the Education Committee has expressed on behalf of the voluntary sector. Will the First Minister reassure members that Scottish Executive officials will work closely with local authorities to ensure that the 2003 act, in conjunction with the Police Act 1996, is interpreted sensibly and proportionately? Will the effect of the 2003 act on the voluntary sector, in particular, be monitored? If so, and if that act proves not to be appropriate or proportionate, will the First Minister consider amending it?

The debate has been much more entertaining than I expected it to be. Des McNulty welcomed the fact that Rab McNeil is not in the gallery and I must admit that I am quite pleased about that, too, much as I was entertained by his columns. If he had been here I would doubtless have been subjected to the usual canine comparisons in tomorrow's edition of The Scotsman.  Rab McNeil is not the only journalist who has upset me; Tom Gordon upset me very much last week when the Finance Committee's report was published,  because he did not include me in his club of bad ex-ministers—I am quite offended about that. Jim Mather started his speech by telling us that all the good ideas in the report came from the SNP, which was quite refreshing, because normally our good friends the Liberal Democrats claim that the good ideas are all theirs. However, he went on to make his single transferable speech about the constitution. Brian Monteith, Murdo Fraser and Phil Gallie made an important political point about the proportion of public spending. There is a genuine political argument about public versus private spending and I would welcome that debate. However, I was disappointed that Brian Monteith went on to say: "I am not proposing anything today". That seemed a bit pointless. Wendy Alexander made a number of impressive Christmas analogies. It struck me that the Finance Committee's budget adviser is particularly appropriately named in relation to reports that are published at this time of year, but I hope that he does not feel bleak when he has to attend committee meetings. Mark Ballard seemed disappointed that economic growth features so much in the committee's report. However, the committee was scrutinising the Executive's budget and as economic growth is the Executive's top priority the report was bound to focus on that. Phil Gallie, who is no longer in the chamber, made the point that the report is not forward looking, but the report's purpose is not to be forward looking but to scrutinise the Executive's proposals. I am disappointed that Ted Brocklebank is not in the chamber, because he could have fed into the debate from his experience. I hope that he is not unwell—

I am relieved to hear that. I am happy to associate myself with John Swinburne's remarks about the budget adviser, SPICe and the clerking team. I was interested to hear him express his support for the poll tax—I suspect that that will come back to bite him.

Pensioners are able to get council tax benefit and housing benefit if they are on low incomes. That is a debate for another day. We must welcome the important developments in the budget scrutiny process, which is producing better budgets. That is a result of co-operation between the Finance Committee, the other committees and the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform; the fact that more committees are employing independent experts as budget advisers is also extremely helpful. I wonder whether we could structure contact between different committees' budget advisers in a helpful way; they could form a panel of independent experts, for example. The template helped with the co-ordination of committee responses this year and allowed the Finance Committee to analyse those responses more effectively. I give credit to Jim Mather for that, because it was his idea. We welcome the reduction in the number of targets and the fact that the number of process-based targets has been reduced to 20 per cent of the total number of targets. However, we believe that the number of such targets could be reduced further. We suggest a hit list of another 16 process-based targets that could be removed. The committee noted that further improvements in the presentation of information would be possible. Some of the priorities that are presented in the budget document are not actually budget priorities, because no costs are attached to them. We suggest that a different format could be adopted—the non-budget objectives could be included in a more general section of the budget, while the budget priorities could be contained in a separate section. A perennial difficulty that we face in scrutinising the budget is the proportion of spend that is at the discretion of other agencies. We suggested that the grant-aided expenditure that the Executive provides for education, social work, roads and transport should be published in the draft budget, just as the expenditure that it provides for police and fire services is. That would assist committees in examining the Executive's allocations. Des McNulty and Wendy Alexander referred to the planned efficiency savings. If the Executive saves £166 million on health in year 1, I do not mind it saying that, after three years, £498 million that would not otherwise have been provided will have been put into front-line services. What I object to is the fact that that three-year aggregated saving was converted into a percentage of this year's one-year budget. It was not mathematically correct to do that. I cannot believe that the First Minister saw that because I am sure that, as a former maths teacher, he would have reached for  his red pen and crossed it out. That resulted in an erroneous comparison with Gershon. As Des McNulty mentioned, the Executive's approach, which is about identifying what is achievable rather than specifying a rigid percentage, has advantages. No large-scale redundancies are planned. The Executive should have been proud to argue for its approach; a claim should never have been made about equivalence with the UK. I will finish on a more cheerful note. I welcome the progress that is being made in the way in which the budget is reported. It is not an easy task to reconcile level 3 departmental budget lines with the Executive's overall priorities. The interrelation of targets is complicated—they do not necessarily relate to just one objective.

Progress is being made and I am sure that it will continue to be made in future years.

I am pleased to support Patricia Ferguson's motion. As she has already pointed out, tourism is very  important to rural areas and, indeed, to Dumfries and Galloway. The effect on the local economy of the great damage that foot-and-mouth disease caused to tourism in the south of Scotland in 2001 bears witness to tourism's importance, if any evidence were needed. Dumfries and Galloway has bounced back well, and the two-year funding that the Scottish Executive provided to the tourist board—which was matched by European objective 2 funds—played a vital role in that recovery. I was, of course, disappointed that the Executive could not be persuaded to allocate further specific funding for the third year. It argued that that money was already in VisitScotland's budget, but VisitScotland denied that it was. However, Dumfries and Galloway Council stepped in and provided a sum of £250,000 to the tourist board. I often disagree with Dumfries and Galloway Council, but I think that it was to be commended in that instance. That proves that councils are prepared to support local tourism and to see its value. There is no doubt that the tourist board has made excellent use of that funding, as can be seen on its very professional website at http://www.galloway.co.uk. My only complaint about it is that it is called "Galloway" and not "Dumfries and Galloway", but there it is.

I agree that Scotland as a whole must be assertively marketed. I agree that niche marketing of types of holidays, rather than of destinations, is a powerful tool in raising awareness of what Scotland has to offer and of where in Scotland those pursuits are on offer. At the same time, I hope that the reorganisation of the tourist boards into a VisitScotland network will still retain a strong local voice that is capable of representing the distinct features of the industry and of different parts of Scotland. That echoes what Mike Watson said. I want to use this opportunity to bring to the minister's attention a couple of local developments that I recently discussed with Pip Tabor of the Southern Uplands Partnership. Incidentally, Pip argues that the south of Scotland should change its designation to the southern uplands, as he believes that that would give the region a more distinctive identity and one that is comparable with the Highlands. I think that that is an interesting idea. The minister will be aware of the making tracks in southern Scotland project, under which heading the Scottish Executive provided £300,000 to help farmers and land-based businesses to develop a network of sustainable nature-based tourism projects in Dumfries and Galloway and in the Borders. That funding was supplemented by the  European Commission's LEADER + programme for the region, and it provided grants to cover capital and start-up costs for new visitor attractions and nature tourism businesses. Quality, collaboration, sustainability and customer care were the key focus. One of the projects that received early funding under that programme was the Galloway red kite trail. It is in Alex Fergusson's constituency, which seems to be second only to Fife in the number of mentions that it has had today. I have had a considerable interest in the project, which established a circular trail around Loch Ken to complement RSPB Scotland's red kite release programme in the area. I was fortunate, back in 2002, to substitute for the then Deputy Minister for Rural Development, Rhona Brankin, in releasing the first group of young red kites to be reintroduced into the area. It was an extremely secretive operation, which involved me meeting secretly with RSPB representatives at a remote location and then stealing through the forest to the area where the birds were going to be released. At one point, we met a bunch of walkers and we all talked loudly about forestry to try to put them off the scent in case they suspected that we were there to release the red kites. It was great fun. The red kite trail now features on the RSPB and Dumfries and Galloway tourist board websites, and the latter highlights the fact that it is actually easier to see red kites during the winter. Going to see them is advertised as a winter activity, as is watching the thousands of geese that overwinter at Caerlaverock in my constituency. Nature-based tourism is helping to extend the tourist season in Dumfries and Galloway outwith its normal span. The scope of nature-based tourism projects has expanded and now involves a whole range of partners. I was going to say a bit about them, but I think that I am probably going to run out of time. However, the point that I want to make to ministers is that there is strong concern that the making tracks project is due to finish in July, and I would be grateful to the minister for her advice on whether it might be extended or replaced by a similar dedicated project for southern Scotland. I also want to draw the minister's attention to the exciting developments that are taking place in equestrian tourism in the region. A number of agencies got together to commission market research, which was presented at a seminar last month when the riders welcome scheme was launched. However, I have been told that it has been difficult to persuade Scottish Enterprise that equestrian tourism is a real opportunity. Perhaps Scottish Enterprise should have a look at the official website of north-west tourism in Ireland, on which equestrian tourism features prominently. However, I have to say that there is a rather amusing typo on that website, which says:  "It might be that one forgettable hour of your holidays when you sit on a horse for the first time." That does not really market it terribly well. However, there is clearly an opportunity in that type of tourism, and I hope that Scottish Enterprise will come on board with those developments. To conclude, I am pleased that the Executive is ambitious for tourism in Scotland. However, I ask the minister to ensure that the southern uplands, as we should now possibly call ourselves, are fully recognised for the contribution that we could make, both to the local economy and to the national economy in the tourist industry.

I make it clear from the start that, as I have only four minutes, I do not intend to take any interventions. Members can barrack as much as they like; I will not give way. We need to face the fact that nothing that we  say in the chamber this morning will make one iota of difference to the announcement that is due to be made by the Secretary of State for Defence later today. We had the opportunity to make our views known during the members' business debate that Murdo Fraser secured on 23 September. Indeed, some members who are in the chamber today took the opportunity to state their positions at that time. Today's debate, on a reserved issue and in core parliamentary time, is all about the Conservative party making political capital out of whatever happens later today. I can understand the Conservatives doing that in the context of the probable general election in the next few months, especially given that they do not appear to be making much headway with the electorate. I speak in support of the amendment in the name of my colleague John Home Robertson. Whatever Roseanna Cunningham said about him, John Home Robertson has made his position clear: he made it clear on 23 September and he has done so again today. I expect to be disappointed today, especially if we hear of the merger of the King's Own Scottish Borderers and the Royal Scots. If that was not going to happen, I think that we would have heard more hints by now, unfortunately. As I said in my contribution to the members' business debate, I whole-heartedly support the retention of the identity of the KOSB, which recruits from Dumfries and Galloway, the Scottish Borders and Lanarkshire. I believe, as John Home Robertson's motion states, that the KOSB's traditions, community links and identity should be maintained. However, that may not happen. I make no bones about the fact that I will regret the merger deeply. If it happens, I believe that the KOSB will have been made the victim of recruitment and retention problems elsewhere. Nevertheless, no amount of posturing by the Conservatives or by any other party in the chamber will assist the KOSB. Let me return to the facts. The debate is not about cuts in defence expenditure, even if it is portrayed as such. This year's UK spending review settlement will provide a 1.4 per cent increase in real terms per annum for the next four years in defence spending, which amounts to £3.7 billion. The settlement means that planned defence spending will have increased by 7 per cent between 1997 and 2008. On the other hand, planned defence spending fell under the last three years of the Tory Government by 15 per cent or £4.2 billion. In 1994, as John Home Robertson said, the Queen's Own Highlanders were merged with the Gordon Highlanders. That was the second merger of regiments under a Tory Government in 35  years. In 1961, the Queen's Own Highlanders was formed by the merger of two other regiments. Defence reorganisation has occurred under Governments of both political persuasions. Oliver Letwin has made a commitment that all departments should have 0 per cent growth in budget over the first two years of the spending review period. That means that, under the Tories, the Ministry of Defence would have its budget reduced by £2.6 billion, which would put even more pressure on the Scottish regiments, rather than less. Peter Duncan, Murdo Fraser and anybody else who speaks today can posture all they like about reversing those decisions; the Tories' shadow secretary of state for defence does not think that that is possible. I have no experience of the military. It may well be that the creation of one Scottish regiment, with battalions retaining an individual identity, will have some benefits to serving infantry soldiers. I do not know. Like John Home Robertson, I continue to support the retention of six distinct battalions at the very least. I will say one thing, though. I will not vote for a Tory motion that will achieve absolutely nothing for the Scottish regiments. The vote will be taken after the announcement has been made and it will make not one bit of difference.

I congratulate Eleanor Scott on securing the debate. I concur particularly with the remarks that she made about the role that the transportation of animals up and down the country played in the spread of foot-and-mouth disease. That in itself, not only animal welfare, is a reason to consider more local slaughtering. I will make two points that have been made to me recently. I bring them to the debate and to the minister's attention. There may or may not be much that the Executive can do about them, but they could do with being aired. The first point concerns the problems that small abattoirs have. A local farmer and constituent raised the point that small abattoirs with small numbers of staff have particular problems in coping with red tape, which puts them at a competitive disadvantage to the larger abattoirs. I ask the minister whether there is some way in which regulation and bureaucracy can be streamlined so that small abattoirs are not disadvantaged. The second point was made to me by the British Horse Society Scotland, which pointed out that the matter is also an equine issue. When horse passports were introduced earlier this year, many of us wondered why. A horse passport is not for taking a horse on holiday, but is a record of all the medication that the horse has taken, and whether that horse will enter the food chain, to ensure that animal medicines do not get into the food chain.  To my surprise, 200 Scottish horses are slaughtered for meat every year, and there are only two specialist equine abattoirs in the United Kingdom. They are in Cheshire and Essex, which means that the horses have to travel for at least eight hours before they are able to get to their place of slaughter. The British Horse Society and the International League for the Protection of Horses have been campaigning for a Scottish abattoir to be fitted out for equine use—perhaps monthly or quarterly—to prevent the horses having to go through those long journeys. Alex Fergusson made the point that it is loading and unloading that cause distress to animals. That is true, but although some horses, such as race horses, become used to long journeys, not all horses are used to travelling for long distances. If members ever inspect the interior of a horse box that has been inhabited by a horse that is not used to travelling, they will see that there is evidence that horses find that quite stressful—I hope that that is not too indelicate. I do not know whether there is an awful lot that the Executive can do about equipping an abattoir in Scotland for horse use—there would clearly have to be discussion with the specialists who are involved in processing and chilling horse meat for export—but if it could be done, it might help to sustain one of the smaller Scottish abattoirs by enabling it to diversify into a different market. I leave that thought in the debate as a point that might be worthy of comment or further consideration.

I welcome much of what was in the statement, especially the consultation on the improvements in the small business rate relief scheme, the dropping of the 1km rule, which I am sure will help many people in my constituency, and the examination of the case for expanding rate relief for companies that are involved in research and development. However, council tax in Dumfries and Galloway has risen by 3.5 per cent in the current financial year and there are reports that it may increase by 4 or 5 per cent next year so that financial pressures can be accommodated. Does the minister believe that rises in council tax of that magnitude are indeed as low as possible and, in the context of today's announcement, is it justifiable for Dumfries and Galloway Council to increase council tax by that amount?

Will the minister revisit the guidance that was issued to the Eaga Partnership regarding the replacement of obsolete central heating systems for the over-80s? Only last week an 84-year-old constituent of mine was told that his radiators would have to be shifted, because some of them were under windows. Eaga told me that it has no flexibility because of the Executive's guidance. Could not a balance be struck between energy efficiency, which is important, and the not inconsiderable inconvenience that would be caused to elderly and possibly vulnerable people who might have to undertake extensive redecoration and would experience delays and expense as a result of such unwanted extra work?

I am pleased to sum up in the debate. As others have said, there is a clear consensus in the chamber on the value of foster carers—although I agree with  Donald Gorrie that that probably means that the media will pay absolutely no attention to the debate, because they prefer our rows. It is good that approaching a third of all looked-after children are being cared for in a family setting. That can mean anything from an overnight stay in a crisis or short-term fostering to a longer-term relationship in which a young person is also able to maintain a relationship with their natural family. I was pleased that the minister was able to refer to the fact that 80 per cent of foster-children have contact with their natural families. I think that Frank McAveety said that he particularly appreciated the interest that foster carers continued to have in his adopted children. Scott Barrie mentioned that he was the chair of a fostering panel in a previous life. I served on the adoption and fostering panel of Strathclyde Regional Council and chaired South Ayrshire Council's adoption and fostering panels. I was always surprised—but not for bad reasons—by the rigour of the vetting that foster carers and adoptive parents had to undergo, which involved consideration of reports from social workers and other professionals, such as medics, and fairly intensive discussion among panel members about whether the people in question were suitable. That was done for all the reasons that Andrew Welsh articulated. As elected members, all of us have come across many sad things in our time. From my days on Strathclyde Regional Council, I always remember being made aware of an adoption placement that had broken down. Not only had the young woman's relationship with her natural family broken down, but she had gone on to have a failed relationship with an adoptive parent. Robert Brown mentioned people who have gone through many placements. That is why it is important that people who foster or adopt are the most suitable parents for the young people concerned. I concur with what Scott Barrie said about distant placements. In some of the former regional councils, such placements were a problem in that they did not help young people to maintain their relationships with their own communities. I welcome the £12 million that will be provided over two years to improve allowances and to further increase the proportion of looked-after children in foster care. That will enable young people to get the support that will allow them to achieve their potential. I note the statistics that show that 67 per cent of children in foster care achieve standard grades, whereas only 29 per cent of children in residential care do so. I also welcome the support that will be provided for training, which will mean that the very complex skills that foster carers require and manage to develop in the course of their work as foster carers  can be accredited. I know that the Fostering Network already offers 112 courses, in which 1,400 participants took part in 2003. Level 3 Scottish vocational qualifications are offered, but we want to build on such accreditation so that it becomes more recognised. I certainly hope that the measures that have been announced today will address the shortfall of 700 places that the minister referred to in his speech. A number of members mentioned kinship carers and I am pleased that the ministers have written to local authorities about that. A constituent of mine who cares for her sister's three children—unfortunately, her sister had an addiction problem and was unable to look after her children any more—as well as her own children came to me because she was having difficulty in getting financial assistance to build an extension to her house. Rather than receive a sympathetic response to her request, she was told that her own children, who were a bit older, would grow up. Scott Barrie made an interesting point about how foster carers must relinquish the role that they play. Those of us who have children who have grown up into adults sometimes have difficulty in relinquishing our role in looking after them. How much more difficult that must be for people who have put so much care and attention into looking after a young child or a baby and the child goes on to another placement. It is important to acknowledge their situation publicly. Christine May and Frank McAveety stressed the importance of maintaining the family unit, which often involves the provision of short-term fostering support. As Christine May said, respite care is especially necessary for children who have profound needs. I want to mention the good work that Quarriers does in my constituency of Dumfries and in Galloway. It offers respite care for parents of children with emotional and behavioural difficulties or physical disabilities and so enables them to maintain the family unit. Alex Fergusson spoke movingly about the feelings that young people have when their families break down, but I should mention that looked-after children are not necessarily removed from their families; many young people are looked after and supported within the family unit. We do not want people to think that because children are looked after they carry the stigma associated with children being removed from their families. In relation to John Swinburne's speech, although it is unusual for me to praise the Conservatives, I want to say that the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 was a good piece of legislation. It does not force caring duties on relatives who are unwilling or unable to provide them; it means that any relative who is able to provide such care is looked for before non-relatives are sought.  Frank McAveety mentioned the four Rs. Given that he was an English teacher, I was a little concerned that he apparently does not know how to spell "writing". The four Rs of recognition, recruitment, retention and restoration offer a good, succinct way of examining the issues. I concur with Frances Curran, who made the important point that foster-parents do not have to form a nuclear family, as many other people have the right skills and abilities to provide a stable home to young people from a variety of different backgrounds. I am happy to join all the members who have acknowledged and praised the work of foster carers, and I wish the ministers well in their forthcoming action to increase the number of foster carers in Scotland.

I am pleased to lead this debate on the evening of an annual event in the Scottish parliamentary calendar: the science and the Parliament event, which is organised by the Royal Society of Chemistry. In previous years, the event was held in the Signet library but, following the opening of our new Parliament complex, it has moved to the particularly appropriate location of Our Dynamic Earth, across the road from here. I thank the Royal Society of Chemistry and the other scientific organisations that bring together this increasingly successful event. In particular, I thank Willie Rennie for all his efforts. I welcome to the gallery a large number of participants in the event, which finished slightly early, who have come to listen to the debate. After the debate, the exhibition and reception at Our Dynamic Earth will recommence. I hope that as many MSPs as possible will be able to pop in to visit the exhibition and to attend the awards ceremony, which will start at about 6.15 pm. As we know, Scotland has an extremely strong tradition in science and engineering, which were the foundation of much of the nation's wealth from the industrial revolution onwards. Although there are concerns nowadays about the number of young Scots who choose to study science at degree and higher level—a matter to which I will return—Scotland continues to punch above its weight in scientific achievement and science  continues to be important in achieving the Executive's vision of a smart, successful Scotland. For example, Scottish universities, which comprise only 12 per cent of the United Kingdom's universities, outperform their counterparts in 38 per cent of science subjects, according to the 2001 research assessment exercise. Some 40 per cent more per head of population is invested in Scotland's science base compared with any other part of the UK. In 2003, Scotland's investment in university research was only $1 per head behind that of the United States of America. However, Scottish business invests only 0.5 per cent of gross national product in research and development, which is much lower than in parts of England, Sweden and France. Consequently, the density of science-based jobs is lower in Scotland than it is in many other countries, including Iceland, Ireland, Denmark, Finland and Norway. It is also worrying that the average share price of Scottish research and development companies fell between 1999 and 2003, and that it fell more steeply than did the average share price of companies in other sectors of the Scottish economy. That should be compared with what has happened in England, where research and development share performance rose over the same period, despite the downward trend in the wider economy. Save British Science, which is a lobbying organisation, has suggested that the Executive should finance a detailed study of why research-based industry in Scotland is not currently producing the same economic growth that seems to be possible elsewhere in the UK. On a brighter note, Scottish universities are more successful in creating spin-out companies than are their English and Welsh counterparts, and the links between universities and the business community in Scotland are considered to be at least as good as they are elsewhere in the UK. Scottish pupils spend more time studying maths and science than do their European counterparts, and the scientific literacy of our 15-year-olds was ranked eighth out of 32 in a recent Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development survey. However, Scotland faces a demographic problem in relation to science teachers. Earlier today, I raised that issue with the Minister for Education and Young People. The Scottish Science Advisory Committee, which was set up by the Scottish Executive to provide independent advice to ministers, noted in its report "Why Science Education Matters: Supporting and Improving Science Education in Scottish Schools" that "one third of all science teachers are over 50 years old and over half of all science teachers are over 45 years." The report estimated that 357 new chemistry  teachers, 210 new physics teachers and 127 new biology teachers required to be recruited in Scotland between 2001-02 and 2007-08. I would be interested to learn from ministers more about what progress is being made in attracting new teachers into those extremely important subjects, although the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning might not have the figures. The issue of continuing professional development for science teachers is also crucial in an area of knowledge that can develop and advance quickly. Teachers must be kept up to speed. I was pleased to read in the Executive's document "ambitious, excellent schools", which was published last week, that the Executive intends that the science curriculum should be the first curriculum to be reviewed. That recognises that there are issues relating to attracting young people into science at the moment and it was, of course, one of the key recommendations of the Scottish Science Advisory Committee. There are also concerns about the number of applications to study science at university, which are falling slightly faster in Scotland than they are in the rest of the UK. If science is central to the Scottish economy, shortages of scientists, science graduates and science teachers are a matter of grave concern. The reasons why academically able young people are becoming less interested in a career in science need to be analysed and addressed. I think that there are three main problems. One problem is that scientists—especially scientists in the public sector—are pretty badly paid compared with similarly qualified people in other professions. Save British Science has estimated that scientific salaries lag behind those for similarly qualified professions by around 25 per cent. The career structure is also relatively unattractive. In universities, it has revolved for a long time around fixed-term grants for research of between perhaps two and five years. That tendency to rely on fixed-term contracts has increased over the years. All of us in the chamber are on fixed-term contracts, which are perhaps more likely to be renewed for some than for others, but I am sure that we can all appreciate that a situation in which a researcher may have to change posts and uproot his or her family every few years becomes less attractive as people become older and more settled. That might deter young people from becoming scientists, and it certainly contributes to the trend of trained scientists leaving their profession. The other problem that I perceive is the image that science seems to have developed in the media over the past few decades. Although the Scottish public still seem to feel positive about science—according to a recent survey, about 85 per cent of Scots still think that science and  scientists can make a valuable contribution to society—some of the ways in which scientific matters are popularly described can be quite negative. The way in which subjects such as genetic modification, cloning, nuclear power and stem cell research are reported in the media can often be melodramatic, implying that scientists are somehow without morals. It is a sad fact that people in the United Kingdom are now much less likely than they were a few decades ago to believe the information that scientists give them. There are undoubtedly moral dimensions to many of the topics that I have just mentioned, but there often seems to be a confusion between the science and the way in which scientific knowledge might be used. Too often, public debates, and indeed parliamentary debates, do not refer to the scientific facts, which ought to be underpinning the arguments. Science is popularly thought to be very difficult. Unfortunately, although television programmes about science are very popular, 48 per cent of people, according to a recent survey, believe that they are not clever enough to understand science. That is a great shame. It is a pity that science is not viewed in the same way as other creative activities such as art, music and sport. Most of us can do those to an extent and, with help, we might be able to do them very much better than we expect at first. A few people can do those things very well indeed and the rest of us take great pleasure from observing their achievements. That should be, and can be, true with science, too. It is important that we recognise science for what is. It is a creative activity and we should treat it as such. I will finish by stating the blindingly obvious: that science is crucial to Scotland's future success and that it presents many opportunities, as well as some significant challenges. If the contribution of our 40,000 scientists is to be sustained, those challenges need to be faced and met. I look forward to the rest of the debate. I know that many other members who are equally concerned about the future of science will make interesting speeches and I also greatly look forward to the minister's response to the points that will be made in the debate.

I start by congratulating David Mundell on obtaining the debate. I suppose I felt a little bit embarrassed about the fact that we were congratulating the corridor regeneration strategy steering group, since we are members of it and it might have looked as if we were congratulating ourselves. It has been a useful group and a useful exercise. The group was set up in July 2002, when BNFL announced that it had brought forward to 2005 the date at which power generation would cease at Chapelcross. In fact, power generation has already ceased, although there is still some discussion about when defuelling and decommissioning will commence. When the steering group was set up, I asked for the Scottish Executive to become involved at official level. At that time, I never expected it to become involved at ministerial level. My colleague, Russell Brown, also asked for engagement from the Department of Trade and Industry. We were a bit disappointed that there was no real engagement at that time. I hope that that will change, now that the document has been published and the work has been done. The opportunity has arrived for the Scottish Executive to get more fully involved in further development. It is certainly not too late for either the Executive or Whitehall to be involved. We came up with a glossy document. There was some disappointment with it at the time: there was a slight failure to engage with people at all levels of the community. That is something the steering group has to do better. I do not feel that we are engaging the whole community in the way we would like. I was a little bit disappointed at a meeting with some members of the Annan business community. One lady waved the document rather disparagingly at me and she had written on the front—I am quoting from her, not being rude— "This is stating the bloody obvious". That might be an indication that the CORES steering group was getting it right and it was tapping in to what a lot of people knew were the sorts of solutions that the area needed. Maybe it was a good thing that our solutions were a bit obvious, because it showed that we had engaged with what people were feeling.  We will be able to judge the success or otherwise of the CORES approach only if the prospectus does what it says on the tin and acts as a catalyst. There is no point in having this nice little document lying around; we have to take the ideas forward in the short term, the long term and in the medium term, and engage in these projects. Scottish Enterprise Dumfries and Galloway is making a bid to Scottish Enterprise for funding to implement some of the suggestions. I urge the minister to support Scottish Enterprise Dumfries and Galloway and to encourage Scottish Enterprise to provide the funding that will help some of those ideas. The document acknowledges that we have to be proactive in creating the right business environment, concentrating on what has the greatest potential to ensure that the local work force has the necessary skills and knowledge, and in promoting the area as an attractive place to live and work. There was a fair amount of discussion within the steering group about a delivery vehicle—I always thought that that was some sort of lorry until I went to those meetings—that involved the private sector implementing some of the suggestions. I welcome to the chamber some representatives of the Chapelcross work force. We have Sean Marshall, John Rogerson, Ronnie Ogilvie and Jim Tait from nUKlear 21, which David Mundell mentioned. I am pleased that they have been able to come to listen to the debate. They also met the minister this afternoon, so they were able to give him the work force's view directly, which is important. Sean Marshall and John Rogerson have both been on the CORES group with David Mundell, Russell Brown, me and others, and they have made an important contribution to the work and the production of this vehicle. My position on the second-generation nuclear power station is not the position of my party or of many of my colleagues. I believe that we need to have a balanced and secure energy policy for the UK, involving energy that is generated in the UK. That energy could be generated from renewable sources, from clean coal and from the new nuclear technologies. Scientific and public opinion is beginning to flow in that direction, and politicians must listen carefully instead of relying on outdated prejudices that refer to old technology that is long past its sell-by date. We are talking about new nuclear generation and new technology. Yes, we must solve the issues of waste, but let us get on and conduct research into that and move things forward. The UK needs nuclear power to keep the lights on in future years.  I believe that there is a future for power generation at Chapelcross. There are interesting proposals for a 250MW biomass power generation station there, and I support those as well. It does not have to be either/or; we can have renewable power generation and new nuclear power generation. We do not have to make a choice between those two. That is one way forward for Chapelcross as a site of power generation, which it always has been. We should look at new technologies to take that forward. Out of a threat that has hung over the area for a long time—that Chapelcross would cease to exist—we have created a whole load of new opportunities. It is important that the new group, the Scottish Executive and those who engage with it take the opportunities that have come out of the problems arising from the cessation of power generation at Chapelcross to re-create the area, to regenerate it and to provide more and better paid jobs in the area. I will be interested to hear the minister's response to the debate.

To ask the First Minister how the proposed changes to the Scottish schools curriculum set out in "ambitious, excellent schools" will benefit pupils and teachers. (S2F-1166)

I too am enthusiastic about the agenda that the Executive has set out, particularly its emphasis on choice within school, rather than between schools, and reducing clutter in the curriculum. However, many people remain concerned that the review of the higher and advanced higher courses that the Scottish Qualifications Authority has announced will reduce the choices that are offered to pupils. Will the First Minister reassure the Parliament that the SQA will not scrap exams if to do so would compromise opportunities for our young people?

I want to put the member right on something. I actually live in Dumfries, and not in Edinburgh. Therefore, I would not be purchasing a house in Edinburgh with any idea about catchment areas.

No.

Some members might know that I lived in the south of England for 13 years. Ten of those years were during the prime ministership of Mrs Thatcher. One of the reasons why I returned to Scotland when my eldest child was three was because I wanted my children to be educated in the Scottish comprehensive system. I did not want to lug my kids around schools, hoping that one of them might take them in; I did not want to study various schools' prospectuses, trying to work out which was best; and I did not want my children sitting an exam at the age of 11 to work out whether they were a sheep or a goat. We have heard an awful lot from Lord James Douglas-Hamilton about Sweden, but there is an example of Thatcherism and Tory policy much nearer home—down south.

I have only just started. Opting out was an absolute mess in England. If the Tories are proposing that we go back to that absolute mess, they should take their lessons from south of the border, not from Sweden.

Absolutely not. I have never looked at catchment areas when buying a house. That has never been part of my approach, because I believe in the comprehensive system in Scotland. My children have done quite well out of it: I have a son at university, a daughter in S6 and a son in S4. We do not need to talk as if Scottish education were bad—it is not. Scottish education—the comprehensive system—has delivered and it has been good. It is good for my children and it is good for the children of the class of 1997. An awful lot of nonsense is being talked about choice. Most parents do not want a whole range of schools to choose from. That would be completely unworkable in Dumfries and Galloway, as in much of the rest of rural Scotland. What parents want is a local school that will provide their child with an excellent education, that will develop their abilities to the full and that will equip them with the skills that they need for further or higher education or for work. Particularly important, they want a local  school that will develop their child's self-confidence and self-esteem, enabling them to become a fulfilled and responsible citizen.

No. The education that my children and the class of 1997 got was good. However, that does not mean to say that the system does not need to be modernised and improved, and that is what the Labour Government has been attempting to do since 1997, when it came into power. At first, we concentrated policy and resources on pre-school education, the renovation of school buildings, the modernisation of teachers' pay and conditions and the building of a legislative framework that is founded on the right of all children to receive an education that fully develops their potential. That is a pupil-centred approach. Quite honestly, I did not understand a lot of the SNP amendment, probably because the SNP basically agrees with us and with what we are trying to do. We are all trying to move towards a pupil-centred approach that is based on the needs of individual children. The time has come to move on and to ensure that the education that is offered to our young people is suited to their needs and the needs of Scotland. We must ensure that individual success and the success of the country's economy are achieved as fully as they can be. Teaching and learning are not just about facts, dates, mathematical equations and chemical formulae; they are also about learning how to learn. The individual must understand how they learn so that they can learn best. That is a transferable skill that the individual takes from their education and uses for the rest of their life. That is not dumbing down; such education is about understanding what teaching and learning are all about. Languages that are not spoken after exams often go rusty, as I know, and one often forgets quite a lot, but the successful learner of a language will know how to tackle learning other languages, whether for work or for leisure.

That is not part of Executive policy, but it does not necessarily matter which languages are learned. The skill is in knowing how to learn a language. Equally, the science that is learned at school, and the science that I learned at university, progresses so fast that much of what one learns is no longer relevant, but one has learned how to deconstruct, analyse and solve problems—again,  that is a transferable skill that can be taken from education into all other parts of life. Of course, there are certain core foundation skills that need to be developed in all children, such as literacy and numeracy, but after that the curriculum needs to be sufficiently flexible to allow teachers to unlock and encourage their pupils' learning strategies so that they learn how to learn and what their individual strengths are. That is why discussions about choice in the school curriculum are far more important than discussions about choice between schools. Teachers need an uncluttered curriculum; they need the space in the school day and the professional freedom to be able to nurture the wide range of individual young people's abilities and interests and to help them to learn about their learning. They also need to be supported by quality professional development and excellent leadership. I believe that the direction of the Executive's agenda for action is absolutely the right one. I am excited about it because it opens up the curriculum for the individual to allow the development of transferable skills. That is an important development in education and it is in accord with much of educational philosophy. I commend the Executive for taking on board the representations that were made to it by many educationists—that is why the agenda has been so widely welcomed by many parts of the education system. I have some experience of teaching and I know how exciting it can be both to learn and to help and enable other people to learn. We must concentrate on making teaching and learning exciting for teachers and pupils.

It is not clear how the establishment of yet another talking shop in the form of a national education convention would assist the educational progress of the children who started their education in 1997.

I am happy to join the ranks of the tree huggers this afternoon, and talk about forestry, in particular with reference to my constituency in Dumfries and Galloway. Forestry is an extremely important industry, as others have said and I expect will say in the debate. I want to talk about the benefits to the region, some of the potential, and also one or two concerns and how they are being addressed. Forests cover more than 25 per cent of the region's land, the region produces 27 per cent of Scotland's output of sawn wood, and the industry generates sales outside Dumfries and Galloway in excess of £80 million, according to Scottish Enterprise Dumfries and Galloway. The industry also directly employs 1,500 people, or 2.3 per cent of the work force in the region. Forestry is becoming an increasingly important means of diversification for farmers. One of my constituents still farms, but he has also diversified not just into livery stables, but into forestry, and he is running an extremely successful business from his farm. We are lucky in Dumfries and Galloway to have a centre of excellence in training at Barony College at Parkgate in Dumfriesshire. Its trainees are able to use computer simulation to learn how to drive around forest tracks and use some of the equipment, but they are also trained in the operation and maintenance of large-scale specialist equipment. Obviously, they have to be trained in maintenance as well as operation, because many of them work remotely, and if their equipment breaks down they will not be able to call out the forestry equivalent of the Automobile Association to fix their machinery for them. Having a centre of excellence in training is of great benefit to the region. The SNP amendment mentions the importance of biomass, with which I agree, although I do not  agree that we have to have a specific target, because it comes within the target for renewable energy generation.

People have different points of view. We do not have targets for other sources of renewable energy generation, so it is not necessary to have one for biomass. However, I recognise that biomass is extremely important, which is one reason why I was pleased that Dumfries and Galloway Council gave approval to Powergen to build a 40MW wood-burning power station at Lockerbie, which will create jobs and provide energy from renewable resources in the constituency. I am also pleased that in the discussions around the closure of Chapelcross power station, which has already stopped producing energy—it was supposed to do so next year—one of the matters that is being considered is the possibility of using some of the plant as a green coal-burning power station. That would enable some of the work force there to regain employment and, hopefully, enable some of the contractors who are reliant on Chapelcross to have further work once it starts being decommissioned. Forestry is also important for leisure and tourism. The Forestry Commission lists two walking nature trails, both of which are in Mr Fergusson's constituency, at Dalbeattie and Mabie, and there are many less well-documented trails. There are six forest cycle tracks and 10 forest horse-riding locations, so clearly forestry plays an important part in leisure pursuits in the region. Ae forest has been well developed as a tourism and leisure centre area. It is one of the locations for the United Kingdom sled-dog racing events. I found it rather strange to think of Siberian huskies racing through the forests of Dumfries and Galloway—and they make one heck of a noise—but it has become a regular part of the cycle of those events. We also have quad bike events and mountain bike events and the world logging championships were held outside Lockerbie in September 2002, which brought visitors into the region from all over the world and were extremely successful. Wildlife tourism has been mentioned. Dumfries and Galloway is of course one of the few areas where we still have red squirrels, so it is an important area for the conservation of that species. I was rather concerned to hear just yesterday from my colleague John Home Robertson that SNH is considering not reappointing the red squirrel officer and I will take that up in the context of the protection of the species.  As I said, there are concerns, one of which is timber transport. If we have trees we somehow have to get them out and get them somewhere. There is no point in saying, "Get the timber lorries off the roads," because if we are going to use the resource we have to find a way to transport it. Eskdalemuir village in my constituency has had significant problems over the years with increasing numbers of timber lorries coming through the village.

No. Sorry, I do not have much time left. There was a serious and unpleasant accident not very long ago in which a house was semi-demolished by a lorry. The Dumfries and Galloway timber transport group involves Dumfries and Galloway Council working in partnership with the enterprise company, the police, the Forestry Commission, landowners and private companies to agree timber transport routes and ways of maintaining and improving them to resolve or avoid timber transport problems. Dumfries and Galloway Council deserves a lot of credit for the development of the strategic timber transport fund, which Alistair Speedie from the council in particular has been proposing for a number of years. He lobbied me—I am sure that he lobbied Mr Fergusson and Mr Morgan too—and I am sure that we all took forward some of his ideas. I was particularly pleased that £13 million over three years has been allocated to that fund. I was also pleased that the annual timber transport forum conference took place in Dumfries yesterday, partly in recognition of the council's role in developing the timber strategy and proposing the introduction of the strategic timber transport fund. I will close with a small concern about Ae forest. Given all the leisure and tourism activities that take place there, it is not the best location for 96 450ft wind turbines. The minister knows that I am in favour of renewable energy sources, including wind, but where there is conflict between wind energy and the potential for tourism and wildlife, I hope that ministers will take that into consideration.

To ask the Scottish Executive what consideration it has given to the establishment of a Scottish biennale to celebrate Scottish culture and architecture. (S2O-3533)

I thank the minister for her reply and wish her well in her new portfolio of tourism, culture and sport. Her predecessors have, for one reason or another, found it to be a springboard to the back benches, but I am sure that she will break that tradition. On Saturday, the architecture of the new Parliament building will be the focus of attention throughout Scotland and well beyond. Does the minister agree that that interest should be used to promote the many examples of fine architecture in Scotland, not just in the capital city, but—as the minister well knows as a citizen of Glasgow—in our towns and cities up and down the country? Will she undertake to come back to Parliament at the earliest opportunity—she has not had much opportunity to think about the matter so far—to report on any developments that she thinks she can take forward?

I, too, congratulate Bruce Crawford on securing the debate. Although he referred specifically to Mid Scotland and Fife, the issue concerns all MSPs who represent rural areas throughout Scotland. I, too, attended the meeting that was organised last week by my rival, David Mundell. He is not here today—I presume that he is detained somewhere down south. The meeting, which was very interesting and useful, gave some of the background to the debate in Paul Hendron's exposition of the problems that BT faces in the delivery of the pay-phone service. Because of the increase in the use of mobile phones and the decrease in the use of pay-phones, BT cannot continue with the status quo and has to look at something else. There is definitely an issue about the way in which information was sent out to elected members and local people. As Sylvia Jackson said, the information was sent to members by e-mail. I did not pick up my e-mails on that Friday night and the first that I knew about the whole thing was when I heard Alasdair Morgan's dulcet tones on the radio on Monday morning saying that people should get involved. I was ready to be  insulted by the fact that BT had not consulted me, but found that it had, in fact, done so. I am not sure that e-mail is the best way of reaching people who might not have good telecommunications in their constituency offices. More concerning is the way in which the situation was passed on to local authorities to deal with through community councils. As has been said, not every area has a community council; not every community council meets regularly; and not every local authority has the address of their local community council secretary. People can slip through the consultation net. Of course, everyone has a councillor and perhaps local authorities should consider the way in which they communicate through their councillors on such matters. Councillors should attend community council and tenants and residents association meetings when such organisations exist; that is part of their role in representing their community. Perhaps a bit more attention should have been paid by the local authorities to the way in which councillors could deal with some of the consultations. We have examples of consultations from other private companies. For example, Scottish Power has been consulting on various wind farm proposals in my area. Other companies are going around with roadshows and inviting local people to come along and see what is being suggested. There are models available that BT might have considered. I agree with Sylvia Jackson and Euan Robson that the consultation in November on the provision of cashless and emergency phones could have been better co-ordinated with what is going on now. If it were properly organised, that initiative could offer a solution to some of the problems that will arise in rural areas if the pay-phones are removed. As Paul Hendron told us, cashless phones are considerably cheaper because they do not have to be emptied and they do not need to be located in a kiosk, so people cannot use them as bus shelters or for any of the other nefarious purposes that pay-phones are sometimes used for. Hopefully, if such phones are vandal-proofed, they should be considerably cheaper to operate. They allow people to make 999 calls and reverse-charges calls. It was suggested that credit cards or phone cards could be used in them, and that would allow people to make normal communication from them. It is important that the various people who run public services and the private companies that have an obligation to provide such information technology—including the new IT such as broadband and the multimedia centres to which Mary Scanlon referred—get together and speak to each other about the best way in which services  can be provided. There are examples of good practice from other parts of the UK and Scotland, but I do not get the impression that people are working together and talking to each other. That is what needs to be done.

I oppose Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's amendments on the basis that they are unnecessary. To some extent I understand Ronnie Smith's concerns, but they are already addressed in the way in which the bill has been drawn up, because ministers can give an enforcement direction only on HMIE's recommendation. The only reason why ministers would wish to vary such an order in the interim would be because the local authority or school had already carried out some of the action, and ministers might want to relax the terms of the enforcement direction. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's amendments would remove their ability to do so. There has been a lot of paranoia around the bill, which has been completely unnecessary and of which this group of amendments is one example. I cannot imagine why a minister would wish to sit in his office imposing additional constraints or recommendations on an authority or school willy-nilly. If a minister were doing that, it would suggest to me that he or she did not have enough to occupy them. The bill is written in such a way as to provide that ministers can take action only if the inspectors have directed the authority but the authority has not taken action. We need to make it clear that the concerns have been addressed and that there is no need to reduce the ability of ministers to vary the conditions if an authority has already met them.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is monitoring the performance of Reliance in escorting prisoners in Dumfries and Galloway. (S2O-3444)

I thank the minister for that information. The second phase of the Reliance contract was rolled out to Dumfries and Galloway in July 2004 and so could not be included in the Auditor General's report, which was published this morning. However, I note from the report that Reliance is required to submit a monthly monitoring report to the SPS. How will the freeing up of police and prison officer time, which was the principal objective of contracting out the services, be quantified and reported? At the end of June, Her Majesty's chief inspector of prisons identified the "unprecedented amount of escort duty" as one of the challenges that HMP Dumfries had faced in the preceding months.

I congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing the debate. I express my unequivocal support for the retention of the identity of the King's Own Scottish Borderers, which recruits from Dumfries and  Galloway, the Scottish Borders and Lanarkshire. Before I say more about the KOSB, I want to put a few facts on the record because there is a bit of misinformation around about the defence review at Whitehall and the UK Government's intentions. This year's UK spending review settlement will provide a 1.4 per cent increase in real terms per annum for the next four years in defence spending, which amounts to £3.7 billion. That will mean that planned defence spending will have increased by 7 per cent between 1997 and 2007-08. Murdo Fraser has had the good grace to admit that planned defence spending fell by 15 per cent—£4.2 billion—over the last three years of the Tory Government. In 1994, during that period, the Queen's Own Highlanders was merged with the Gordon Highlanders. That was the second merger of regiments under a Tory Government in under 35 years because, in 1961, the Queen's Own Highlanders was formed by the merger of two other regiments. The issue that we are discussing is not one that arises only under Labour Governments; it has arisen under other Governments as well. The Tories have to bear in mind Oliver Letwin's commitment that all departments should have 0 per cent growth in budget over the first two years of the spending review period. That means that, under the Tories, the MOD would have its budget reduced by £2.6 billion, which would put more pressure on the Scottish regiments rather than less.

I know. I am getting on to that. I was merely placing some facts on the record. I note that Mr Swinney has decided to stay with us rather than go to the SNP conference. Given that, in proportion to its population, Scotland has a higher number of members of the armed forces and a higher number of battalions than elsewhere in the UK, the SNP needs to say whether it has taken that into account in its calculations of the costs of independence. I know that the defence review is intended to modernise the forces and to replace old or heavy tanks with lighter tanks and helicopters, which are more appropriate to modern warfare. However, I have serious concerns about the plans to reduce the number of people in the armed forces from 103,500 to 102,000. I appreciate that that reduction is only just over 1 per cent of the total number of people in the armed forces and I have been told that it can be achieved through natural wastage and that General Jackson's intention is that retraining should enable all battalions to be  deployable rather than only the 26 or 27 that are deployable at the moment. However, at a time when there is much unrest throughout the world and a great need for commitment to peace keeping, humanitarian activity and so on, I wonder whether any reduction in Army numbers should be considered. Mr Mundell is correct in noting that the King's Own Scottish Borderers is held in great esteem in Dumfries and Galloway. It has an excellent recruitment and retention record and has served with distinction throughout the world, most recently in Iraq. The loss of that regiment's local identity would seriously affect recruitment across the south of Scotland. I concur with Donald Gorrie's view that the threat of disbandment might also affect recruitment. My friend and colleague Russell Brown, the MP for Dumfries, has spearheaded the campaign for the retention of the King's Own Scottish Borderers. He has collected more than 10,000 signatures on a petition that he is presenting to Geoff Hoon. I can do no better than to conclude by quoting a recent letter that he wrote to the Secretary of State for Defence, which I hope will reassure Mr Mundell about Russell Brown's bottom line: "What I wish to see at the end of this process, is the continuing opportunity for young men and women from my local area, and further afield, to sign up with the KOSB".

I reassure Stewart Stevenson that I am perfectly capable of walking from Waverley in high heels, and considerably further than that. I rise to speak, first because I had the good fortune to be the convener of the sport 21 review group, which reported in 2003. I notice that the chair of sportscotland, Alastair Dempster, and Lee Cousins from sportscotland are in the gallery. Lee Cousins was very diligent in the production of the review and did a tremendous amount of background work. Brian Monteith referred to vacuous and glossy brochures being produced by the Scottish Executive. I certainly hope that he does not include the review report within that definition, because it was produced through consensus and discussion with the entire sports community and it includes several extremely challenging and important targets.  One of the most hard-fought of those targets was to provide every child with at least two hours of quality physical education every week. At the time of the review, that was a contentious idea. I am sure that my colleague Karen Gillon will remember that, because she served on the review group as convener of the then Education, Culture and Sport Committee. We got strong advice that it would be difficult to deliver on that objective because of curriculum constraints and the shortage of PE teachers. However, the group continued to fight vociferously for it and it got through, and I am delighted that Scottish ministers are determined to overcome the barriers to providing children with that and are making that commitment clear again today. I am slightly surprised that, in their amendments, the SNP and the Tories exclude that commitment to two hours a week of quality physical education. There seems to be a suggestion that we are concentrating too much on the school experience, but it is essential that we get young people to adopt a healthy lifestyle when they are at school, because that is the easiest thing to do. It is more difficult to get us old fatties to turn our lifestyles around after many decades of not being particularly fit. It is important for future generations that we get young people actively engaged in physical activity from an early age, and that is why that commitment is so important. I cannot take interventions in my speech because of time constraints. However, perhaps a SNP member might be able to tell me why there is a motion at the SNP conference that suggests that money should be taken from sportscotland to fund a health programme.

I am sorry, but I have not got time for interventions. In my brief time as a minister, we were always trying to get money from the health and education portfolios, because we wanted to make the connection that sport and culture are so important to the national health of our country. They should be funded more directly and that is why we were trying to raid those budgets. I hope that the SNP does not want to reverse that. Of course, sporting excellence is essential to inspiring participation in sport and physical activity. It also encourages community spirit and identity. I had no problem cheering for Britain at the Olympics. I cheered for Scotland at the Commonwealth games, for Britain at the Olympics and for Europe during the Ryder cup. Perhaps that says something about devolution. In the short time that I have left, I pay tribute to the valuable contribution of the voluntary sector and the huge army of volunteers who give their  hours to be coaches, to serve on sports councils, and to nurture and reward young talent. A tremendous success in Dumfries has been the midnight football programme, which the local community police organised to address some of the problems of antisocial behaviour and under-age drinking that they were considering. It was well attended, although mainly by young men. A few young women took part, but more young women came along to have a look at the young men who were taking part.

Yes, indeed. I touch also on the problems of some talented young people in getting the funding to get to competitions as they get more talented. I have to direct young people who come to me with inquiries to several bodies, including the council, area committees and education trusts, and I wonder whether that could be streamlined. If there was a single portal that young people could use to get support, it would be easier for them to go to international competitions and to make progress in developing their talents. I am pleased that the Executive continues to acknowledge the huge contribution that sport makes to Scotland, not only to our cultural identity but to our national health. I hope that sport will continue to move up the list of the Executive's priorities in years to come, because it is so valuable to our nation.

Lord Fraser says in the introduction to his report: "in my book there is no single villain of the piece. Rather there has been a series of systemic failures and an unwillingness of those involved in the Project to call a halt and demand a re-appraisal." In saying that, Lord Fraser has, at least in some quarters, become the villain. He has been accused of whitewash and the curious argument has been put forward that because Lord Fraser had been a Conservative MP and opponent of devolution, somehow he would feel forced to cover up for Labour ministers in Whitehall or the Labour-Liberal Executive and the devolution project as a whole. That is about as likely as my standing up and orating about what a wonderful job the Tories did from 1979 to 1997. I am not interested in identifying villains or scapegoats. Pointing the finger of blame will not change history. It will not change the building or the amount of money that Scotland has paid for it. Where errors have been made, we must learn from them and move forward. There are of course issues to do with the culture of the civil service and the way in which it is structured, the relationships between civil servants, the information that Parliament received and clarity in lines of responsibility. There are questions that some of us in the chamber should have asked, but did not. There are questions that I should have asked, but did not. I accept my responsibility for that and for the way I voted and, like Robin Harper, I apologise for that. However, none of those things changes the past. It is clear that a desire for speed was a factor in many of the decisions that were made. We have learned that the public-private partnership/private finance initiative route, which would have transferred the risk to a private partner, was rejected because it would cause delays. The Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland felt that the designer competition was unduly rushed. Officials selected the construction management route because in their opinion it was the only way to meet the timescales that ministers desired. I believe that the risks that were associated with that approach were not communicated to ministers not from malice, but because the civil servants concerned thought that the risks were manageable. It is easy to be wise after the event, but neither the civil servants nor the ministers had ever been involved in a project of such a magnitude before. Albert Einstein said: "Anyone who has never made a mistake has never tried anything new."  Scientific progress is achieved through learning from unexpected results. If the Scottish Executive and Scottish Parliament can learn from unexpected results, some of the pain will have been worth it. Perhaps we must ask why ministers were so anxious to make the decision before the Parliament came into existence and why so much emphasis was placed on how quickly the building could be constructed. It is ironic and sad that decisions that were taken to ensure that the building was ready in 2000 resulted in four years of delays. As Secretary of State for Scotland, Donald Dewar "was insistent that progress should be made towards the delivery of a building for the new Parliament at the earliest possible opportunity." Sir Russell Hillhouse, who was at that time the permanent secretary, said in his evidence that in a private conversation in July 1997, the Scottish secretary expressed his fear that "unless we get ahead and do something now, the Parliament will find it extremely difficult to get round to it." We must remember that Donald Dewar also desired a building that would be worthy of the hopes and aspirations of the Scottish people. I believe that Donald Dewar took the decision so that we in the Scottish Parliament would not have to. He knew that a lot of pressure would be placed on the new parliamentarians and that in considering options, we would be accused of wanting fancy offices and of acting in self-interest rather than the nation's interest, so he decided to take the rap. I fear that we would have been afraid of media backlash and that we would have been too chicken to do anything more than consider the apparently cheapest option. We would probably have stayed where we were. We would have been like the National Assembly for Wales, with a big expensive hole in the ground. We would have remained the wee pretendy Parliament in the borrowed buildings that was ready to be abolished at the stroke of a Whitehall pen if the United Kingdom Government changed or its attitude to us changed. Donald Dewar wanted a Scottish Parliament to be permanent physically and politically, not for his sake or for our sake, but for the nation's sake, so that Scotland would have a permanent Parliament where Scottish choices could be made and Scottish solutions sought.

I am about to finish. If Donald Dewar was right—if this building remains fit for purpose over the decades and the  centuries; if it becomes an icon of Scottish architecture; if it promotes Scotland and our culture throughout the world; if we rebuild the Scottish people's trust in the Parliament; and if what we and our successors do here is worthy of the building and of our nation—history will remember him not as a villain, but as a hero.

I was one of the reporters on the committee's inquiry, which was an interesting experience. I thank the clerks—Susan Duffy, Emma Berry and, previously, Jane Sutherland—and also Ross Burnside from the Scottish Parliament information centre for all their hard work and invaluable support for the committee. I also thank the witnesses and the employees in the various agencies and departments who responded to our online survey. The responses were helpful to us in producing the report. I also thank the representatives of the Irish Government for their hospitable co-operation with our inquiry. They were on a week's holiday to celebrate St Patrick's day—they could not believe that we were going back to Scotland before St Patrick's day—but they were willing to come in during their holidays to try to give us the information that we wanted. I hope that the  Scottish Parliament will have a chance to reciprocate that at some time. Many members have spoken about the SNH relocation to Inverness, but it will probably not surprise members that I did not come to the inquiry with that focus. I was more concerned about why Dumfries and Galloway has not been successful in bidding for relocations; indeed, the area has lost jobs in the past five years. In the public sector, we have lost jobs from the Ministry of Defence and from what was West of Scotland Water and we are to lose jobs from a public company, British Nuclear Fuels, when Chapelcross closes down. My concern was why we were not being successful. To echo what Susan Deacon said, I wanted to know what was going wrong with the policy. I wanted the Finance Committee to assess how matters could be improved and how the policy could be made to work better. The problems seem to be to do with how the criteria are operated, which militates against Dumfries and Galloway, as it does against a number of other areas. From the analysis of the consultants' reports that we looked at, Dumfries and Galloway and many other places always seem to be discarded from consideration at the first sift by the consultants who are employed to compile shortlists of possible relocation sites. I do not think that ministers had some sort of prejudice against those areas; it was just that they never seemed to get on to the shortlist for consideration. How some of the Executive's criteria were applied by some consultants was very strange. One Edinburgh-based consultant assessed Dumfries as having no suitable buildings and as not being an area with any disadvantage. That is certainly not the Dumfries and Galloway that I live in, and I am not quite sure how that idea came about. We did not get the Executive's response in time, but I am grateful for it and for its tone. The Executive acknowledged that "any over-prescriptive methodology may exclude specific areas from consideration in reviews." The Executive agreed that transparency for all stakeholders, and especially for the staff concerned, was very important. Maureen Macmillan, Paul Martin and John Swinburne made the same point. Part of the problem might be that the relocation policy has evolved since 1999, and that there has not been much discussion about how the various criteria are applied. Colin Fox made a number of allegations about the Irish policy. He must have been referring to previous relocations, as the Irish policy is very new and has not started to apply yet. The Irish are considering how staff may transfer between  departments or between agencies and departments if they are unable to be relocated. It is worth examining that point. The lack of transparency under the current policy makes things difficult for ministers. It makes it difficult for them to rebuff the type of allegations that Ted Brocklebank and others are making: that Inverness was chosen for the relocation of SNH for political reasons. If it was chosen for political reasons, why was SNH not sent to Stirling or Dumfries, which are Labour marginal constituencies? Why make its new location an SNP marginal when there are some perfectly good Labour marginals around? The committee's suggestions for a strategy linking relocation to economic development have been mentioned by Des McNulty and others. I am not suggesting that we want the same system as in Ireland, but I am saying that we can learn things from Ireland. In particular, we were impressed with the idea of a strategic overview, with something like a relocation unit that could monitor or evaluate policy and could consider how large and small-scale relocations are working. Such a unit could also examine the balance between people and posts. A number of members have said that relocation can be about bringing jobs to areas of high unemployment. In areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, it is not so much jobs that are needed as people. We have a shortage of people in Dumfries and Galloway. In particular, we have a shortage of health workers, teachers and social workers. It is possibly by joining together packages with public service jobs that we might be able to bring more people into areas with demographic problems. Jeremy Purvis's constituency in the Borders has similar issues to mine. It is important that the policy is carried out strategically and, as Des McNulty said, within the context of economic regeneration. There has to be an analysis of those areas of Scotland that require such regeneration and input. We will return to relocation issues. I am grateful for the minister's offer to come back to the committee and discuss the matter further. If people would like me to go back to Ireland to find out how they are getting on there, I would be very happy to do so. We need to bear it in mind that there is no relocation without tears. Relocation will always be difficult but, the more we keep people involved and informed and the more transparent and rigorous the policy is, the more easily people will be able to accept the decisions that need to be made.

I, too, congratulate Duncan McNeil on securing the first members' business debate in the new Parliament building and on his choice of a very important and serious matter. It is unfortunate that technical problems meant that the debate has had to be conducted 24 hours after he made his introductory speech. As Janis Hughes and Mary Scanlon have said, suicide is a Scottish problem. I believe that it is a cultural problem for us, as it is strongly linked to low self-esteem, which we have both as a nation and as individuals. I recall, as a young girl growing up in Edinburgh, that showing off was probably the cardinal sin. We seem to believe that God will bring us down if we think too highly of ourselves. That attitude is often displayed in the way in which we consider our football team, our athletes and, I dare say, even our Parliament. We tend to assume that, because something is Scottish, it is going to be second rate and, unfortunately, I think that people believe that of themselves. That is part of the legacy of our Calvinist tradition that can be very damaging to us as a nation, as we tend to sell ourselves short. It can also be damaging for individuals. It contributes not just to our high suicide rate, but to many of our other health problems. As Mary Scanlon said, earlier this year there was a spate of suicides in the Highlands. There  was a similar terrible series of suicides in the Annan area of my constituency last year. It was almost like an epidemic, as if suicide was catching. Nobody understood why several people—mainly young—in a pretty Border town such as Annan and the surrounding area committed suicide within a short time. That included two people who killed themselves on the same weekend and, on two consecutive weekends, two people who hung themselves from the same tree by the river. That absolutely shocked the community. Later that year, I spoke with the mother of one of the young men who took their lives. It turned out that he had been the victim of bullying. She came home after a night out to find him hanging in the hall. She was a lone parent; he was her only child. She had gone out that night with no inkling of his mental state—he had seemed perfectly cheerful when she left. When she came home, he was dead. Naturally, she has found it extremely difficult to reconstruct her life, and her mental health and resources have been put under incredible strain. As others have said, the causes of suicide are complex and individual. However, recent statistics show that young people—especially young men—and the elderly, as Janis Hughes said, are the most vulnerable. At stages in people's lives, they may feel especially uncertain of their role and whether it has value. A young person who may have relationship problems, who cannot envisage what their future could be or who has financial problems or problems with drug or alcohol abuse may question the value of their existence. An older person whose family has grown up and moved away, who has perhaps lost their lifelong partner or close friends, or who suffers from chronic ill health that will only deteriorate may also have difficulty in seeing any point in struggling on. Such individuals may not show obvious signs of depression. They may feel unable to talk to anybody about their feelings of despair and may be ashamed of those feelings. That shame only adds to their lack of self-esteem. Sometimes, close friends or relatives can guess that something is going very wrong with their loved one but feel that they cannot get through to them or cannot obtain professional help. On other occasions, suicide seems to come out of the blue leaving those who are closest to the victim blaming themselves for not noticing the signs. That is why it is crucial to talk openly about mental and emotional health issues and about suicide prevention without prejudice or stigma. We must reject the old notion that people who attempt or commit suicide are cowards or selfish. Those people are in despair. They have lost all sense of self-worth.  That is why it is important that the issue is not seen just as a health problem. It is important that our education system in its broadest sense builds self-confidence and self-esteem in our children and young people. That is linked to developing a more flexible curriculum that enables young people to build confidence in themselves and in what they can do, and to moving away from an education system that is about failure to one that is about success. If we cannot do that, our people will continue to take their own lives, whether deliberately by pill, knife or rope, or inadvertently by drugs, drink, alcohol, bad diet or lack of exercise.

There is a joke about a Westminster colleague who dreamed that he was making a speech in the House of Commons and woke up to find that he actually was making a speech in the House of Commons. In a way, I feel a little bit like that MP because I cannot quite believe that we are here now. I have to ask myself a question similar to that which philosophy students used to have to answer: how do I know that I am not dreaming that I am in this wonderful building? The building is a terrific and magnificent edifice. Whether it represents value for money will be for future generations to judge, as will whether or not it has remained fit for purpose in 50, 100 or 200 years' time. However, the building is much more than just a physical presence at the bottom of the Royal Mile; it is a statement of the Scottish Parliament's permanency. The individuals who inhabit the building will change, but Scotland's Parliament is here to stay and those who hoped to destroy devolution by attacking the building will have to move on. I hope that they, too, will raise their game. The Executive once considered the merits of an Edinburgh biennale's being held in the not-too-distant future, not only to celebrate this architectural triumph, but to focus the eyes of the world on the flourishing of Scottish architecture and culture in recent years. Scottish architecture is a success story that does not receive sufficient attention. It may be difficult for the ministers who are present to answer, but I would be grateful if  ministers advised us whether that proposal remains under active consideration. There is much to welcome in the Executive's legislative programme and its wider policy framework, and the way in which those build on the Parliament's achievements of the past five years. One of the most common issues that my constituents bring to my attention is housing. That is not directly a health matter, but we know that poor housing is a major factor in ill health. Fortunately, actions that the Executive and the Parliament have taken in the past five years have begun to have an impact. In my constituency, I have seen excellent social housing developments in various communities, which not only provide much needed good-quality housing for rent; some that I have visited are of extremely high-quality design and finish. They, too, are examples of excellence in Scottish architecture. However, housing need remains a huge issue in terms of the number of houses that are required—many of my constituents have lived in inadequate accommodation for far too long—and in terms of the necessity to regenerate areas where the housing type is inappropriate and has encouraged social problems. I very much welcome the First Minister's commitment to increase investment further and to provide more homes for rent and for low-cost ownership, because as house prices rise in my area and other parts of the country, first-time buyers and people who are on lower incomes are beginning to experience difficulty in purchasing properties. Many private landlords are good landlords but, sadly, some are far from that. I am well aware of constituents who live in absolutely appalling conditions in private lets—that happens in urban and rural communities. The poor condition of some housing in rural areas can be less visible than it is in urban areas. It can also be difficult for tenants to move out of substandard accommodation, because few alternatives are available in their vicinity. I have spoken with constituents who are frightened to ask environmental health services into their private lets because they will have nowhere else to go, other than perhaps a car.

I am sorry; I am running out of time. Demographic change—other members have referred to it—is a significant issue in my constituency. Unlike many rural areas, we probably have an increasingly aging profile. I do not suggest that that in itself is a problem and I certainly understand why older people may wish to retire to beautiful areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, but we have a problem in recruiting a number of key workers such as carers, nurses,  radiographers, audiologists, podiatrists and dentists. I had a wee wry smile about free dental checks, because I fear that some of my constituents will have no teeth left to check by 2007. We also have shortages of some medical consultants. The answer to that is not to force young people to stay, study and work in the places they come from. New experiences through studying and working in other parts of the world and other parts of the country can be invaluable in developing people's experience and skills. However, we need to attract people back when they have gained those experiences and we need to attract new people to our country—especially to regions that have demographic problems. That will not happen if politicians or the media continually carp, moan and talk down our country or its regions. Nobody will want to come here if we keep on telling people how awful it is. Unfortunately, some of my local media run stories every week that tell people how dreadful Dumfries and Galloway is. If I were a young professional looking for a job in Dumfries and Galloway, I would be far too frightened to go there. All of us have a responsibility to develop policies and to change Scotland for the better. I say to the Opposition that they are entitled to put forward an alternative to the Executive's programme, but they should not simply moan about the state of the nation without offering practical alternatives. That will not be good enough in the future. I am pleased to welcome the Executive's programme for the coming year. I look forward to future developments and to all of us playing a constructive and focused part in them.

My colleague Scott Barrie indicated how well the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 has served social services in Scotland over the past 36 years, but it is a period during which society has changed a lot and during which the task of social services has changed a lot. For example, we see in the documents that have accompanied the review of the children's hearings system that the numbers of children referred to the children's hearings system on non-offence grounds—that is, children referred because they are seen as vulnerable or in need of protection—has increased by 600 per cent. The number of children living in residential care has decreased by 75 per cent, but the number of looked-after children has decreased by only 25 per cent, so a lot more children are being supported in their families and in their communities. That is what we would want, but it obviously adds stresses on the services. Last year, 19 per cent of the Scottish population was of pensionable age, and 7 per cent was over the age of 75. The fact that someone is of pensionable age does not mean that they require social work services; however, as Kenny MacAskill said, we are now in a society that is more mobile, and where families are more likely to have moved. Therefore, elderly people in need even of transient support are less likely to be able to call on the services of sons, daughters or grandchildren in the way that they might have been able to in the past. Social work services increasingly have to deal with the problems of drug and alcohol abuse. In 2001, 56,000 adults in Scotland were reckoned to have a drug problem. The Education Committee was quite shocked to learn during its child protection inquiry that one baby in 53 is born to a parent who has a drug abuse problem, which obviously creates issues for social workers and social work departments. We have an increased prison population, and this morning we heard about problems of drug use and violent behaviour in Dumfries prison. If those problems are not dealt with adequately in the prison service, those who have them will come back into society with them and will require a degree of support through social services or voluntary organisations. How social work services are provided, and the job that social workers do, has changed considerably over the past 36 years. My mother was what was known in her day as a medical social worker and she retired in the early 1980s. I  was interested to hear from the minister that the Executive is considering whether it is still appropriate to have generic social workers. My mother has terribly strong opinions about that and I am sure that, even at the age of 80, she would be happy to lobby him on that topic. When my mother was trained, she was actually called a lady almoner, not even a social worker, so the job has changed a lot in her lifetime. The department in which she worked was situated in a geriatric hospital, in which people lived in wards. Those who were not well enough to go home lived in the hospital for the rest of their lives, which could be many years. There were a limited number of outcomes: patients either went home and looked after themselves, went home and were looked after by their families or received residential care in a care home or the long-stay geriatric hospital. Now, with care in the community, people are rightly being supported to live in their own homes. We all believe that that should happen, but it requires the bringing together of packages of care of a type that did not exist in 1968, or even in the 1980s, but are a more recent development. There have also been changes in how social work services have been organised in councils. Many councils took the opportunity of local government reorganisation to group services differently. For example, South Ayrshire Council put social work services in with housing and Stirling Council was one of the first councils to have a children's services committee. Other councils have reorganised over the past 10 years and there is now a super example in Dumfries and Galloway, where social work services are in with education. There is a number of different sorts of groupings and I am not sure whether we have a handle on how successfully those groupings work. As we hear, councils are also facing severe shortages of key staff in a number of areas. In the campaign for the Scottish parliamentary elections last year, I went round to a gentleman's door with my leaflet that promised more nurses, more teachers and more police—I think that everybody was making that promise—and he accepted the leaflet with a resigned sigh and said, "What about more social workers?" That shows that social workers, who support society, have felt that they are the forgotten profession. I am, of course, aware of the steps that the Executive is taking in trying to tackle the shortage of social workers, such as the fast-track postgraduate qualification and the new honours degree qualification. Unison made a strong case in its evidence for the training of unqualified staff who are already in social services to give them some sort of on-the-job qualification that could enable them to go on to social work. That is what the  work-force development issue to which Donald Gorrie referred is about. Mary Scanlon made the good point that we must also consider how to retain experienced staff. We do not want a lot of churn in the system. Shortages of other care workers thwart the best intentions of social services. In my constituency, there is a shortage of care workers, so, although social workers identify the care needs of people in hospital and are identifying the funding for them, there is delayed discharge from hospital because the care workers to provide the support are not available. I welcome the review and note those who are involved in it. The review should include input from the whole social care sector and it is important that it should include input from the users of the services as well as the professionals.

It is important to remember the context in which the bill has been introduced, because quite a few red herrings have been swimming around this afternoon. As the minister and Ken Macintosh reminded us, the 2000 act set out a new framework for ensuring continuous improvement and the raising of standards in our schools. Indeed, as Rhona Brankin pointed out, it placed new duties and responsibilities on schools, education authorities and ministers. Moreover, it gave HMIE a new role in inspecting education authorities. The bill's three aims are to complete the national improvement and support framework, to ensure that authorities take the action that HMIE has identified and—most important—to secure a child's right to a good education by seeking to ensure that no child should suffer as a result of inaction or ineffectiveness by the Executive, the local authority or the school. All have a duty to ensure that children receive a good education. As members have pointed out, the power under section 70 of the 1980 act has been used only once. However, that provision allows ministers to take action if a local authority has breached its statutory duty, which does not include a failure to implement HMIE recommendations. The new powers will allow ministers to act if education authorities or grant-aided schools—we have not heard so much about them—do not take satisfactory action to secure improvements. We have also heard that the powers will be used by ministers only on HMIE's recommendation. As a  result, the bill is not about ministers sending hit squads into so-called failing schools; instead, it seeks to ensure that local authorities take appropriate action. Despite the hysterical language that has been used, agreeing to the bill at stage 1 does not endanger democracy. I agree totally with Kenneth Macintosh. COSLA is unhappy more about the vote that we took yesterday than about the vote that we will take today. It is none too cheerful with some members in relation to some of the committee's other activities. Because it is very upset with us at the moment, it will continue to take an oppositionist stance. Robert Brown has pointed out that, without this bill, if HMIE concludes that an authority has not sufficiently addressed its recommendations for improvements and children's education is suffering, there is nothing that the inspectorate or ministers can do to improve matters. What do the Tories and the SNP suggest that we do in such circumstances? They have no answers, other than to say that we should wait and see and monitor the situation. If something happens, they will simply say, "Oh dear me! What will we do?"

I have no idea what the member said in Latin, because I do not speak it. However, I do not see how an individual child whose education might be suffering or their parents can be reassured by the suggestion that the local electorate will somehow sort things out for them. The bill also proposes to change existing legislation that covers the registration and monitoring of independent schools. It will make the provisions for grant-aided schools equate to those for local authority schools. There was relatively little unhappiness about that and although someone made a reference to it, I cannot remember exactly what it was. The committee did not pick up much unhappiness about that from any representatives of the independent school sector. Any notice or direction will now be addressed to the manager of a school rather than to an authority, and the bill will also change the 1980 act's definition of an independent school by removing the words "five or more". I was a little bit concerned when East Ayrshire Council raised the issue of whether that change might affect home educators—when a group of parents get together to educate a group of children at home—but the Executive officials assured us that parents providing home education in partnership with other parents would not be covered by the bill.  We have also heard that the bill replaces the independent schools tribunal, which was last used in 1977, with a right of appeal to the sheriff principal. I was pleased to hear from the minister that the Executive is prepared to consider the Subordinate Legislation Committee's suggestion that we should be using the affirmative procedure. The bill has been opposed by COSLA and several other organisations, but it is important to bear in mind the fact that the bill has been supported by organisations representing the interests of young people, such as the Scottish Youth Parliament and Children in Scotland, and I will also be supporting the bill at stage 1.

Does the member accept that the powers in the bill would be used only if a local authority did not take the action that HMIE thought needed to be taken to address the problems? Ministers would not intervene in an individual case because a school had a problem, but would do so because the local authority had not worked with HMIE to try to solve the problem.

I apologise to Des McNulty and the Presiding Officer for being slightly late in coming to the debate. Like other members, I did not realise that the Procedures Committee debate would terminate as quickly as it did. Despite the fact that I am wearing high heels, I seem able to run faster than Fergus Ewing. I want to take this opportunity to expand on the committee's recommendations on targets. I say to the minister that I intend my remarks to be  constructive. There are times when committee members from Executive parties have to play the role of critical friend, and I see that as my role today. The committee recognised that there has to be some way of measuring progress towards Government objectives. We received evidence from organisations such as the Confederation of British Industry and the Federation of Small Businesses in Scotland that was generally supportive of the principle of setting targets. Although those organisations support targets, they know that targets alone are inadequate for assessing efficiency and effectiveness and that any individual target can be influenced by a number of policy levers. The subject committees noted problems with the targets that are set in several areas of the AER. One of the difficulties that we have is relating the Executive's targets to its priorities. The Executive says what its top-line portfolio objectives are, but it is not clear how each minister selected the 12 or 15 targets for their portfolio. There is neither a clear relationship between the targets and the objectives, nor between the budgetary inputs and the targets. That makes it difficult to assess how the Executive's priorities are being supported financially. For example, we do not necessarily have to spend a lot of money on trying to make people more physically active in order to have a good effect on the nation's health, but at the same time, we might have to spend an awful lot of money to reduce waiting lists, which may not hugely improve the nation's health. However, it is important to spend that money for the people who are on the waiting lists, who are ill or in pain. I am not arguing that there is a simplistic relationship, but we expect the Executive, wherever possible, to put its resources towards those programmes that contribute most to the key priorities. Peter Wood, who was mentioned earlier, said in written evidence: "The targets are not necessarily or clearly related to activities which represent the major elements of spending or even the elements of spending which are being increased." The committee's report concluded: "some of the performance targets do not best reflect departmental objectives (or those of the Executive) and appear to have been chosen because they are readily measurable or easily achievable rather than because they are the most appropriate measurement of how ... objectives are being met". That is an important criticism of how the targets are selected. As members have mentioned, the committee found that the targets are variable in type, both  within and between portfolios. As Des McNulty said, 63 of the targets are either statements of policy or of practice or both. We suggest that those targets should be removed from the annual evaluation report. We are not saying that we do not need targets on policy and practice—they have their place—but that they should be used for management rather than budgetary purposes. Removing those targets would assist the Executive in achieving its aim of reducing the number of targets from 162 to below 100. Some of the targets are difficult to measure. For example, the third target in justice is to reduce the fear of crime. How do we measure whether the fear of crime has reduced? The fifth target in education refers, among other things, to the presentation of school meals, but I do not know how the Executive will measure how school meals are presented. Some of the targets are not desperately realistic.

The committee argued that we need a better way of measuring economic growth, but because an awful lot of things contribute towards growth—such as infrastructure—it is not easy to have a single measure of growth. A number of measures are used, but I would like a better explanation of how the targets contribute to the top priorities. As members have said, some targets will primarily be met by other agencies. The Minister for Finance and Public Services said that there is no point in his setting targets for things over which he has no control. Many of the targets on health and education will be met by other agencies or by local authorities and health boards, which are funded by the Executive. The Executive decides the top-line budgets, but the decisions about how those budgets are spent are made by people in the agencies, not by the Executive. The progress towards achieving the targets is made by somebody else, but there is no way for that to be fed back. For example, there is no detail in the AER on how local authorities spend the £3.3 billion of funding for education, nor on the 80 per cent of the health budget that health boards spend. It may be that, in the words of many a written answer from the Executive, that information is not held centrally.  It is difficult to achieve transparency and to find out how targets are met and how that is financed. The committee would like further discussion between the Parliament and the Executive about how transparency can be increased in future annual evaluation reports.

I apologise to Jim Wallace for being five minutes late for his opening speech. Unfortunately, I was stuck in a city traffic jam. Members might wonder why I, who represent one of Scotland's southernmost constituencies, should speak in a debate on the economy of the Highlands and Islands. Indeed, although many of my forebears hailed from the Highlands and Islands, I have never lived there myself, so I was somewhat surprised to be asked to contribute. However, I may have an interesting perspective, because I think that we in the south of Scotland are quite envious of the success that has been enjoyed by the Highlands and Islands. After all, the Highlands and Islands has a very strong brand image, which has been successful in attracting tourists both from the UK and from abroad. The area is strongly associated with wildlife tourism, walking and climbing and, indeed, heritage tourism. It also has a strong cultural image. That was enhanced by Inverness's bid to become European city of culture last year. I thought that it was an excellent bid and I was extremely sorry that the judges were not sufficiently attracted by it.

I do not want to get into that in my four minutes. I am pleased that some of the ideas in the city of culture bid have been transferred to the proposals for the Highland year of culture in 2007, which I am sure will be a great success. Inverness has become a city recently and it is a successful one. When I go to Inverness, I am struck by how similar it is to my home city of Dumfries. As we regenerate Dumfries, there is much that we can learn from the way in which culture has built Inverness's success. Inverness has been successful in obtaining job relocations. I say that through gritted teeth as we have lost more United Kingdom and Scottish civil service jobs in certain parts of the South of Scotland than we have gained. We are envious of the degree of investment that there has been in UHI over the years compared with the investment in the Crichton university campus in Dumfries. The Highlands also benefit from having an airport, which is something that we would like to see in the South of Scotland, because it would help to build our economy. The Highlands have been successful in using structural funds to support infrastructure development. Indeed, in the south, we sometimes fear that policy makers equate "rural" with the Highlands to the detriment of the South of Scotland. As I am sure Mr Purvis would agree, we want some of that action down in the south. However, we cannot just be jealous; we must also look at the similarities between the two areas and look for common solutions. As has been mentioned, one of the problems is demographic change. According to the Scottish census for 2001, 18.6 per cent of the Scottish population was above pensionable age, whereas the figure was 22.4 per cent in Dumfries and Galloway, 22 per cent in the Borders and 19.4 per cent in the Highlands. As others have said, in those areas we have problems retaining and attracting young people, which has resulted in a shortage of skilled workers. The shortage of dentists is a common problem in many rural parts of Scotland, as is the shortage of occupational therapists, social workers, teachers, construction workers and plumbers. As Rob Gibson and Sylvia Jackson said, there is a shortage of affordable housing in many rural areas. Although housing is traditionally cheaper in such areas, we also have problems with people who have been able to sell their houses in high-value areas and then outbid local people and first- time buyers. That contributes to the problems that we have in retaining young people and attracting skilled people to rural areas. I do not want to overrun my time because I do not come from the Highlands, but I was pleased to hear this week's announcement about broadband. That will make a great deal of difference to rural areas up and down Scotland.

I, for one, congratulate the Tories on having the brass neck to select health as their topic for debate. It seems a curious choice for the Tories during the campaign for elections to the European Parliament, but it is probably a bold one. As a member who has previously said that Opposition parties have a duty to provide alternative policies rather than just moan on, I ought perhaps to give Mr McLetchie some credit for at least attempting to  justify his flagship proposal. The patient passport is probably one of the most unpopular policies that the Tories have dreamed up since Michael Howard introduced the poll tax. That is the view not only of members of this Parliament but of bodies such as the Royal College of Nurses, which overwhelmingly rejected the policy at its recent conference. As others have pointed out, the patient passport policy would involve the NHS subsidising private treatment to the tune of 60 per cent of what any treatment would cost under the NHS. However, if one compares the BUPA costs for common operations with the equivalent NHS costs—Mr McLetchie was right to say that there is a list of NHS costs—it becomes clear that, on average, the BUPA costs are twice those of the NHS. That means that patients would still need to be able to afford to pick up some 70 per cent of the cost of the private operation. I cannot understand how that would help people in deprived areas, who would be unlikely to be able to afford those costs.

It would not. That is an erroneous argument. Patient passports would simply remove funds from much-needed NHS operations in order to subsidise much more expensive private treatments for those who could afford to pay some of the costs. We must recognise that the operations would be performed by the same consultants. There is no mystery bank of consultants who could suddenly be parachuted in.

Not just now, thanks. The Tory policy would not be an effective use of public money. It would certainly not contribute to equality of access in the way that Mr McLetchie suggested. Among other polices, the Conservatives have also recently promoted local pay bargaining for health workers. Perhaps that should come as no surprise, given Mr McLetchie's derogatory comments about the poor productivity of such workers. In three very similar press releases this year, David Davidson has stated that, under the Tories, "hospitals would have responsibility for their own staffing decisions" and that hospitals would have "the ability to set pay and conditions to suit local circumstances." However, there are already discrepancies in the way that health boards grade equivalent jobs. I know that from the health board in my area, which  grades some health workers lower than their counterparts in other boards. Mr Davidson's policy would exacerbate that problem by allowing health boards to pay health workers the minimum that they could get away with. Presumably, the savings that would be made from doing that would help to provide NHS subsidies for private treatment. That would produce not just a two-tier system but a multi-tier health system. Another worrying aspect is the Tories' ill-disguised dislike of the NHS. In his press release of 15 March, Mr Davidson described the NHS as "a state controlled monopoly—a nationalised health service". Today, we have heard the NHS described as "Stalinist". Mr Davidson's colleague, Mr Monteith, has been similarly dismissive. In his press release of 25 February, he stated: "Good health begins in the home." Many of us would agree with that, but he went on: "the overwhelming majority of Scots would rather get on with it themselves." It does not sound to me as if the NHS is safe in the Tories' hands. Perhaps the Tories in this Parliament should at least be given credit for understanding that health is devolved to the Scottish Parliament. That is more than their sole Scottish colleague at Westminster seems to understand. Mr Peter Duncan MP raised a petition about the lack of NHS dental provision in his constituency of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale. Many members of this Parliament share his concerns about that issue, which we have discussed fairly frequently. However, rather than pass the petition to his Scottish Parliament colleague Alex Fergusson for presentation to Scottish ministers, Mr Duncan trundled off to Westminster to present the petition to some health committee there.

Perhaps Mr Mundell wants to swap places with Mr Duncan.

That convoluted argument does not take us any further forward. I cannot understand why the issue was raised at Westminster, which has no jurisdiction in the matters that were discussed in the petition.  I will finish with a statistic. Dumfries and Galloway NHS Board's allocation has increased by 63 per cent since 1997—those are the board's figures, not ours. Money is being invested. Like ministers, I recognise that reducing the long working hours of NHS staff is a significant challenge and that issues relating to the out-of-hours service must be addressed. However, they will be addressed by sensible policy. The alternative to what has been proposed was the haemorrhaging of GPs from rural areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, the consequence of which might have been a system in which there were not enough NHS doctors in those places, just as there are not enough NHS dentists. Lists would have closed and people would have been unable to access NHS services. We had to tackle the problem of long working hours in the NHS. I am sure that sensible policy decisions will help us to overcome some of the challenges that we face as a consequence of the actions that have had to be taken.

There is no doubt that Scotland was well ahead of the game in 1971 when the children's hearings system was introduced, in that the new system represented clear recognition that offending behaviour was linked inextricably to a need for protection. That acknowledgement is not an excuse for all offending behaviour, nor does it suggest that offending behaviour is inevitable if a child is vulnerable and in need of protection. There was also recognition that the child had to be central to, and fully involved in, the system if that system was to be effective, and that children had to be encouraged to be responsible by making them accountable for their actions. The Kilbrandon report, which preceded the introduction of the children's hearings system, recognised that the formal court system was highly intimidating, especially to young and vulnerable people. That ties in quite well with Scott Barrie's point about legal representation at hearings. He said that we might, if we over-legalise the system,  make it less easy for children to express themselves or to take a central part in proceedings.

I am sorry to say that, with some lawyers, nothing would surprise me. The system provides a range of dispositions as alternatives to custody, so it is beneficial financially—the alternatives are much cheaper than secure accommodation, provision of which can cost up to £3,000 a week—and, much more important, it is beneficial because the alternatives are much more successful than custody. We know that almost 80 per cent of young people who are given custodial sentences at the end of the track go on to reoffend. I have had a brief look at judicial systems in other parts of the world. It was interesting to find that youth systems in some other countries are beginning to adopt some aspects of our system. For example, Canada, which had one of the highest incarceration rates for young offenders in the western world, is reviewing its youth justice policies in recognition of the facts that sentencing is uneven and that use of the court system for minor offences is inefficient. The Youth Justice Board for England and Wales expressed concerns about similar disparities in sentencing. In New Zealand, the juvenile justice system originally made a judicial distinction between children who were in need of care and those who offended. However, the authorities in New Zealand have begun to review the situation and to move away from traditional views on the causes of children's offending behaviour towards a system that challenges such behaviour and uses the court system only as a last resort. Indeed, a new system of family-group conferencing has been introduced and is delivering outcomes that are similar to those of the children's hearings system. The system also enables the victim to become involved, which provides a forum in which the young person can understand the consequences of their behaviour on others. A similar system has been introduced in Ireland, which in 1998 had the highest rate in Europe of  incarceration of young people under 21. The Children Act 2001 contains provisions for family conferencing, which can take place if the offender admits his or her guilt, and in which the victim is invited to become involved. Moreover, the parents of the young person in question are also encouraged to become involved in developing a plan of restorative action. I know that Guernsey is a small island, but in its recent review of such services it considered introducing a system that was very similar to the Scottish children's hearings system. Indeed, it noted that the benefits of our system were involvement of the community, the chance of effecting real and long-lasting improvements in children's lives and more effective targeting of the causes of criminal behaviour. Our system has significant strengths, although that does not mean that it does not have weaknesses or points that need to be addressed. As other members have pointed out, there have been many changes in society over the past 30 years. For example, more parents and siblings have drug addiction problems and more children are being brought up in single-parent families. Furthermore, many more families do not have support from immediate or extended families. Because people are able to travel more, more parents are isolated and are not able to rely on advice from other family members as they try to tackle their problems. I ask the Executive to consider some of the measures that have been introduced in other countries. Although the systems might not be the same, we might be able to import certain aspects into our own system to influence the way it works. I am sure that the system could be improved in certain respects. For example, processes could be faster, integration between agencies could be better and we could improve the system for inspecting and monitoring those aspects. Moreover, training for panel members could be changed and we need more emphasis on the responsibility that parents, families and young people must bear. At the moment, we have too much of a culture in which parents simply dump their kids on professional people such as teachers or social workers and expect them to do all the work. There needs to be more focus on victims and restorative justice and we need better tracking of outcomes over longer periods to ensure that we know what works and what does not work. At the moment, we lack knowledge on that matter. I certainly believe that we need more trained personnel—no matter whether they be social workers or others—to work with young people. I agree with Tommy Sheridan and Rosemary Byrne that society needs to show more respect for  people such as social workers who work with young people. For example, social workers are often denigrated and blamed when things go wrong and dreadful statements such as "Those who can do, do; those who can't do, teach" are made about teachers. We need a culture in which the media and others do not simply blame or make disparaging remarks about those important professionals every time something happens. They need support, funding and training that are adequate to the jobs that they have to do now.

That is true. However, the negative image that those professions have been given has made it more difficult for them to recruit. We have evidence that people do not want to go into child protection because they are frightened of the pressures and stresses that will be placed on them. I realise that I am running out of time. However, I just want to say that, if we manage to improve the system through the review, we will have fewer persistent offenders and less antisocial behaviour. Such elements are all parts of a spectrum of activity and if we get the review right we will be able to address other problems. That does not mean that we will not need to have disposals at our fingertips when things go wrong—after all, things always will go wrong. However, as Johann Lamont pointed out, we need to address problems at the very beginning before they escalate and cause grief to our communities and to society. I welcome the review. We must recognise the strength of what we have in Scotland and we must be proud of our unique system, but we must recognise the need to reform it. Many people must feed into the process and into the review to ensure that we can effect the changes that will make the system more effective and which will result in better protection being provided for our young people and for our communities.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken to reduce GP waiting times. (S2O-2129)

I am pleased to hear that action is being taken to reduce waiting times and hope that the new general practice contract will help to attract more doctors to remain in and to join general practice. I have received many complaints from constituents about the length of time that they have to wait to see their doctor. I have also been advised by doctors in my constituency that they have problems in obtaining locums. What action is the Executive considering in order to secure locum cover for general practice members who are off sick?

I, too, congratulate Elaine Smith on securing the debate. I also acknowledge the tenacity with which she has pursued the cause of the nursery nurses. She might not have been as strident as some people in doing so, but she has been just as dogged in her support of the nursery nurses. I am pleased that that is being recognised tonight.  I was pleased to support Elaine Smith's motion, despite the fact that nursery nurses in Dumfries and Galloway went back to work two weeks ago. I do not criticise them for making that local arrangement, as it enabled them to return to work. However, I hope that that is not the end of the story; indeed, it must not be the end, because there is a lot of unfinished business that needs to be resolved. As other members have said, it is necessary that a national review of pre-five education takes place. The review must encompass training, professional development, progression and, indeed, the relationships between the public, private and voluntary sectors. During the dispute in my area, someone from the voluntary sector said to one of my colleagues, "I do not know what the nursery nurses are complaining about; we are even worse paid." It is a scandal that some workers are even more badly paid than local authority nursery nurses. That issue needs to be addressed. Importantly, the motion calls for "a Scotland-wide regrading of the role of nursery nurses" after the structural review. There is a very strong case for a national review and a national pay structure. Mr Campbell Martin spoke about nursery nurses "looking after" children, which was a typical man's remark. Nursery nurses do not look after children; they educate children. During the demonstration a few weeks ago, a lady called out to me and asked how my daughter was getting on. I realised that she was the nursery nurse who looked after my daughter when she was three and a half. I never thought of her as "looking after" my daughter, or as a "nursery nurse". I thought of her as a person who was educating my daughter. She is responsible at least in part for the transformation of a shy, quiet three-and-a-half-year-old into the bright, self-confident young woman of 16 that my daughter is today. It is important to recognise that we now consider education from three to 18. Later in the session, we will discuss a three-to-18 curriculum, which is a national curriculum that will require national standards. Nursery nurses—although perhaps we should not use the term "nursery nurses", as it does not in any way describe their role—will play a vital role in the initial stage of delivering that curriculum. Nursery nurses' salaries are inadequate, as is acknowledgement of the contribution that they make to the education of the young people on whom Scotland's future depends. We must make amends: we must recognise the tremendously important work that is done by this group of women workers and the huge contribution that they make to the future of our young people and of our nation.

I welcome the fact that we have reached the final stage of the bill. The bill has been a long time in gestation, not only in the committee but in the consultation periods before that, so I hope that it will succeed in  being passed without the qualification of the amendment. I completely dissociate myself from Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's statement that ministers' concessions were few and far between; that is patently incorrect. Let us reflect on the fact that the bill will, for the first time, place a duty on local authorities to provide for all children who require additional support to reach their full potential. Thus, no child should fall through any net. The bill does not provide a two-tier system, but one that will provide additional support for all children who have additional support needs. I am amazed that the Scottish Socialist Party will vote against the bill and therefore in favour of the record of needs system, which has been so discredited. These days, that system results in postcode provision for the most vulnerable children. The bill recognises that the system of support is most likely to break down where services are provided by more than one agency. For that reason, it will place on education authorities a duty to ensure that co-ordinated services are provided for vulnerable children. The bill is about protection and recognising where things go wrong. It is not about labelling and stigmatisation. The bill will also provide additional reassurances to parents of children who have records of needs but will not be eligible for CSPs. Those children will receive a service that is at least as good as the service that they received previously. There will be no diminution of service. The guidance on the code of practice will be essential. I welcome the fact that there will be consultation with a large number of stakeholders. That consultation will involve not just Parliament, but the people who really matter: the parents of the youngsters. I am pleased to support the bill and to reject the amendment.

I support Executive amendment 47, which removes a provision that was inserted at stage 2. Initially, when I had discussions with Children in Scotland and others, I had sympathy with the intentions behind lines 20 to 24 on page 14 of the bill, although I did not vote for their insertion at stage 2. I was sympathetic to the  provision because I thought that it could provide reassurance to parents of children who have records of needs but who will be ineligible for co-ordinated support plans in future. On further reflection, I believe that section 13(3)(ba) would restore to the legislation much of the uncertainty that surrounded eligibility for records of needs, which has led to postcode record-of-needs provision. It would remove the clarity of definition surrounding co-ordinated support plans that is one of the strengths of the bill. Ministers have made it quite clear that local authorities have a duty to provide additional support for all children who need it to achieve their full educational potential. If they fail to do so, they are breaking the law and there are a number of ways in which people can get recompense, not just through HMIE. The minister has introduced further reassurance for parents of children with records of needs who will not be eligible for CSPs by introducing at stage 2 section 24A, which is much more specific and less open-ended in its definitions and intentions and is, therefore, a more robust provision. I support amendment 47, to remove section 13(3)(ba) from the bill. If the provision is removed, the additional qualification in amendment 80 will not be required, so I urge Robert Brown to withdraw amendment 80 in favour of amendment 47.

Thank you Presiding Officer—that is third time lucky. I am not convinced that the effect of Executive amendment 38 would be identical to the effect of amendment 68. However, the minister's comments this morning and during the stage 2 debate make his intention clear; that planning for transition should be undertaken at least 12 months before a young person leaves school. I wonder whether that message might be reinforced in the guidance. Considering that the minor tense change caused so much confusion and disconcertedness among the draftspersons of the bill, and given that legal documents have their own house style from which it is difficult to deviate, I accept the minister's additional assurances on the Executive's intentions and will not press amendment 68.  Amendment 68, by agreement, withdrawn.  Amendments 36 and 37 moved—[Euan Robson]—and agreed to.  Amendment 76 moved—[Ms Rosemary Byrne].

Amendment 68 may seem a rather strange little amendment because it would simply change wording from the present tense to the present perfect tense. However, I believe that it has caused a fair stir among the draftspersons because it is unusual for wording to be in that tense. I lodged amendment 68 because concerns have been continually expressed about the way in which arrangements will be made for transition from school. The amendment would make it clear that the process is to be completed 12 months before the child leaves rather than commence at that point. As written, the duty could imply that consideration of the information may take place during the 12 months before the child leaves rather than before that period. I believe that the Executive's intention is that that should not happen, but changing the tense might make the intention a bit clearer. I introduced a similar amendment at stage 2, but I did not press it because the Executive wanted to consider alternatives. Amendment 76, in the name of Rosemary Byrne, probably has the same intention, but it might require education authorities to ensure that children receive adequate support after leaving school. That is not really within the competence of education authorities; it will be an obligation on the organisations to which young people go after leaving school. The Executive's amendment 38 is intended to have the same effect as my amendment would have, but I am not convinced that it will do so. I wait to hear from the minister  how amendment 38 will achieve the same effect as amendment 68. Amendment 77 would require education authorities to provide information to the relevant agencies 12 months before a child transfers from school. However, that could be simultaneous with the completion of the examination of the arrangements that are needed, which might be somewhat impractical. I move amendment 68.

I, too, am pleased that the Executive has accepted amendment 20. Rhona Brankin is to be congratulated on the doggedness with which she has pursued her concern. Section 7(1A), which was introduced at stage 2, was stimulated by confusion, originally from COSLA, about who might be eligible for a co-ordinated support plan. That confusion has been erased and there is now considerably more clarity about who is eligible. I am grateful to the Executive for agreeing that subsection (1A) should be removed.  Amendments 33A to 33D are unnecessary, because amendment 20 will supersede amendment 33.

I welcome amendment 8 and acknowledge the work that Scott Barrie, in particular, has done to bring this matter to the attention of the Education Committee. I am grateful that the Executive has taken his arguments on board and has dealt with the issue in this way.  I, too, am not convinced by the minister's arguments against amendment 8A. Neither am I convinced by Mr Brown's arguments. I admit that "developmental disorder" is a wide term and can cover all manner of things. However, "mental illness" is also a wide term—someone does not necessarily lack capacity because they have a mental illness or, indeed, because they have a learning disability. If someone has a developmental disorder, they will not necessarily fall into either of those categories. If a young person has an extreme form of autism that makes them unable to communicate their wishes, they may fall into category 1. However, if they have a condition such as Asperger's syndrome they will not fall into that category, any more than a child with a mild form of mental illness would. I do not follow the logic of the minister's argument and would like to hear a little more.

Will the member take an intervention?

Here we are again. This debate seems to have a higher frequency than debates on amnesic shellfish poisoning. I suspect that the motive behind it was the fact that the vote was very close last week. We seem to have what is a preliminary legal opinion, which seems to be based on what is arguable and on the possibility of challenges to the Scottish ministers had they made a different decision.

I want to get on. I have been speaking for only 20 seconds. From that legal opinion seems to have come the interpretation that the Executive wants a Trojan horse to bring in lots of GM crops. I cannot understand the basis of that argument, given that it is absolutely clear that decisions on crops will be made on a case-by-case basis. Nevertheless, I was initially disappointed when I heard the announcement by the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs that the UK Government had agreed in principle to the commercial cultivation of Chardon LL T25. In principle, I am not opposed to GM. Like Alex Johnstone, I believe that GM can be used to our benefit and that it can be used to our detriment. I was disappointed by the announcement because it seemed to be in opposition to public opinion and I believe that politicians have a responsibility to give due consideration to the views of those who elect them. However, the clarification from the secretary of state and from the Deputy Minister for  Environment and Rural Development has reassured us. The deputy minister has not consented to adding Chardon LL maize to the national seed list. There are two important conditions to the agreement. First, the restrictions on the European Union marketing consent mean that the crop can be grown and managed only in the trials or under conditions that will not adversely affect the environment. Secondly, when atrazine is phased out in 18 months' time, further scientific analysis will be required to monitor changes in herbicide use on conventional and Chardon LL maize. Professor Joe Perry of Rothamsted Research has conducted research into alternatives to atrazine. He has found alternatives that are beneficial to the environment and has concluded that the environmental benefits of Chardon LL could therefore decrease. However, he does not believe that those benefits will be negated. If they are negated, the crop will be thrown out. As we have heard, Chardon LL is unlikely to be grown in Scotland. Forage maize forms less than 1 per cent of Scottish arable production and, as we know, T25 is a late-maturing variety that is poorly suited to the UK climate, although it had clearance to be grown in France in 1998.

I am sorry, but I am not taking that intervention. My constituency is not likely to be a recipient of Chardon LL. Even the climate of Dumfries and Galloway, mild and pleasant as it is, is not likely to be suitable for that brand.

I know that someone in Alex Johnstone's constituency maintained that he might grow the crop if it was commercially advantageous, but it is highly unlikely that a late-maturing variety will be advantageous. Even though the precautionary principle says that the polluter pays—

There is a serious misunderstanding about the nature of the precautionary principle as  it is applied by the European Commission. The precautionary principle is not a politicisation of science, but a risk-management scheme. When action is necessary, measures taken under the precautionary principle in the EU should be proportional to the chosen level of protection, non-discriminatory—which is one of the reasons why ministers had to make the choices that they made—consistent, based on examination of potential benefits and costs of action or lack of action and subject to review in the light of new evidence. Moreover, there must be a capability of assigning responsibility for producing the scientific evidence that is necessary for a more comprehensive risk analysis. That is how the precautionary principle is applied in the EU and it is the basis on which ministers made their decisions. I believe that the ministers made the decisions that they had to make.

Fergus Ewing and I often disagree but, in this case, I ask the minister to consider the merits of the system in Ireland, which uses a regional regeneration strategy to determine where the jobs ought to go. Will the minister consider seriously such a system of relocation, given that, sadly, the application of the Executive's present criteria results in areas such as Dumfries and Galloway never being shortlisted for serious consideration for civil service job relocation?

I was about to train to become a physics teacher when I began a political career 10 years ago through being elected to Strathclyde Regional Council. I had a place on the postgraduate certificate in education course at Craigie College. Sometimes I reflect on the relative usefulness and security that each career path offers. I therefore congratulate Lord James Douglas-Hamilton on securing a debate on a topic that is close to my heart. Science is extremely important to Scotland's future and science matters are not debated nearly often enough in the Parliament. At the Labour Party conference last weekend, the First Minister stated that Scotland needed to develop "a dynamic economy" that would mean "opportunities for Scots and resources for schools and hospitals." However, we cannot have such a dynamic and world-class knowledge-driven economy if we do not have a supply of "young scientists and engineers and a population that better understands and appreciates science." That is a direct quote from the Scottish Science Advisory Committee's report, "Why Science Education Matters: Supporting and Improving Science Education in Scottish Schools". Robert Brown referred to the belief that science is boring and difficult. There is a genuine problem with science's image. It is also thought that it does not have much reward in the long term. Such an image is not helped by stories such as the recent story about the scientist retraining as a gas fitter because he could earn more money and have more job security if he took that career path. Sylvia Jackson alluded to the fact that science is seen as a masculine subject, which often puts girls off it. The physical sciences and engineering in particular are seen as masculine subjects. I  trained in physical chemistry and have to say that the fact that there were many blokes around made the subject rather more attractive to me. [ Laughter. ] This is not about a bang in the lab. We must try to get away from the image of science as involving geeks in laboratories. I was terribly sorry about poor Beagle 2 getting lost. The gentleman who seemed to front up that project was very charming, but he looked a bit strange. Scientists need to look a bit more ordinary and try to engage more with ordinary people rather than put young people off science. We must face the fact that a third of all science teachers are now over 50—unfortunately, I would not have helped a great deal in that respect if I had gone into physics teaching. There is a great need to attract young teachers into science. Significantly more science teachers and science technicians are needed in the next few years. Many scientists are aging and science is a rapidly advancing subject. There is a greater need for professional development to allow science teachers to keep up with recent developments in schools. In my final few seconds, I want to advertise an event tomorrow on microbiology awareness. Hugh Pennington will be at the Hub to discuss the importance of microbiology and the biotechnology sector. I hope that members who are interested in science will participate in that event.

Like Brian Monteith, I was struck by the coincidence that the bill is being debated on the same day as local councils set their rates of council tax. As has been observed in previous debates, tonight's and tomorrow's newspapers will be full of headlines about councils and council tax, but probably none of them will run a story about the Budget Bill. I do not think that anybody will remark on the £21.6 billion cash authorisation for the Scottish Administration or that the much-maligned Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body's budget for next year will be £87.7 million. The budget's headline figures are provided in the broad-brush breakdown in schedule 1 to the bill.  Although I recognise that only ministers can amend the bill, it is important that parties that condemn the bill and the Executive produce alternatives, at least for the people. The Opposition has not only a duty to oppose but a duty to provide alternatives. I am waiting to see what the major Opposition parties' alternatives are. Perhaps members of those parties would like to enlighten us at some point, not necessarily in this debate, how they would do things differently. As I said, the legislation that we will pass today contains headline figures. The minister referred to a new-look annual expenditure report and suggested that he is keen to work with the Finance Committee on the desire that we have for timeline data, which would allow us to reconcile spending with the Executive's priorities. I recognise that expenditure is not the whole story. Ministers have rightly said that it is outcomes not inputs that matter. However, we need that information to allow us to judge whether money is being spent effectively. I recognise that smaller sums targeted in particular areas may well do more to achieve the Executive's main priorities than large amounts of money that are not as well spent will. I do not for one minute accuse the Executive of not spending its money well. I was surprised to see in the draft budget that the contingency fund is a modest £58.37 million for the forthcoming year. Of course, that is a prudent measure, as things with which the Executive has to deal might be around the corner. Unforeseen payments would otherwise have to be funded by dipping into departmental budgets. However, I was surprised by how modest the sum was compared with Dumfries and Galloway Council's reserves, which stand at £14.5 million, even though the council still finds it necessary to have a council tax increase that is above the rate of inflation. I noted that the same contingency fund was £120 million the year before and is expected to go up to £180 million the year after. I wondered what the relevant payments are and where the judgment that that figure should stand at £180 million in the future came from. Schedule 5 indicates that Scottish Water has been allocated a borrowing consent of £241.9 million. Ministers are well aware, following discussions with the Finance Committee, that Scottish Water borrowed only £51 million in its first year of operation. There is concern about the fact that Scottish Water is not using its full borrowing levels. To refer to something that was mentioned in the Finance Committee on Tuesday, I am a bit concerned about the fact that £85 million of borrowing consent appeared to be returned to the Executive in the spring revision and then reallocated to health for a reduction in waiting lists. Therefore, a capital consent somehow became revenue spend.  Overall, I welcome the Budget Bill, and it is important that we pass it today, because it enables all those agencies, councils and health boards that are dependent on the Scottish Executive to continue to function and to fund the services that they provide.

I am sure that the minister recognises the growing frustration in the sector about the length of time that it is taking to make the announcement. Will he advise members how many times the ad hoc ministerial group has met so far? The group intended to report to the Cabinet in autumn 2003. Does the minister have a new estimate of the date on which the report might go to the Cabinet?

To ask the Scottish Executive what restrictions are placed on private landlords whose tenants have had central heating installed as part of its central heating programme. (S2O-1282)

I am sure that the minister will share my concerns about one of my constituents—a single pensioner in private rented accommodation—who was encouraged by her landlord to have free central heating installed under the Scottish Executive's programme but who then received a demand for considerably increased rent. When she questioned that, she was threatened with eviction and the sale of the property concerned. What safeguards exist to prevent private landlords from abusing the free central heating programme by inflating the rents that are paid by pensioner tenants or even evicting those tenants and selling the property or re-letting it to other tenants at an increased rent?

In some ways, I am disappointed that this topic has come up for debate again. A number of genuine concerns were expressed when visitscotland.com was set up. Particular concerns related to consultation of the tourism industry and to some of the information that was provided for businesses. I had hoped that some of those concerns would have been ironed out, so it is a bit disappointing to hear that the problems of some time ago persist in some parts of the country. Personally, I have not heard many complaints recently; it may be that, in the south of Scotland, things are a bit better than they were before. However, problems clearly persist throughout the rest of the country. I was around with Mike Watson when visitscotland.com was brought into being. It was always intended that it would be a tool for business. It was not to drive business and it was not to be compulsory; it was to be a tool that would, we hoped, be so attractive to business that most people would want to sign up to it and use it. Members have spoken about misleading information. Area tourist boards are responsible for some of the local information on the site, and businesses are responsible for some of the information about themselves. It may be that some of the area tourist boards should examine the information that they make available to ensure that it is correct and that the site is as good as it should be. Like many others, I looked up my own locality on the site this afternoon. Obviously, I did not try to book anything, and I did not go in through AOL, so I cannot comment on those issues. I looked at hotels, bed and breakfasts and inns, and I got 293 results, most of which seemed to be in Dumfries and Galloway. Of those 293, 153 were in the lowest price range—between £10 and £22 a night. That rather suggests that the site is attractive to some of the smaller businesses. Most of the businesses seem to be bookable either online or via the national phone line. However, by clicking on the link for further details, it is possible to get addresses and, in some cases, postcodes so that maps can be accessed. In many cases, phone numbers are given, so people do not have to book through the national phone line but can book directly with the business concerned. It was always the intention that people should not be forced to go through the national phone line. I also had a look at some of the activities that are mentioned on the website. If I do have a criticism, it would be to say that the range of activities is possibly a little limited at the moment. For example, I found no mention of equestrian tourism, which is a growing opportunity in our  area. In the wildlife section, I asked where we could see red squirrels and red kites in Dumfries and Galloway. I was told where I could see them in Nairn, but I did not think that that was terribly helpful. However, the website is improving. I say to visitscotland.com that, if there are genuine concerns, they should be looked into. However, I regret that visitscotland.com so often gets negative publicity, because it is a very useful tool for marketing tourism in Scotland. I believe that it is a national portal that could be particularly useful for areas such as mine, which are not so well known for the cycling, climbing and walking that can be done there.

One of Scotland's oldest nuclear power stations is in my constituency. It was opened in 1959 and at its peak was able to produce 200MW of power. Since the power station opened, it has been a major employer in Annandale and Eskdale. Currently, more than 400 people are employed there, and it also supports a substantial number of local contractors. Although decommissioning will take a number of years, the cessation of production and the gradual dismantling of the site will result in the loss of a significant number of well-paid jobs in the area. Well-paid jobs are not especially easy to find in Annandale and Eskdale. We have a strong interest in attracting some of the functions of the nuclear decommissioning authority when it is established next year—especially as its establishment will coincide with the cessation of power generation at Chapelcross. Because of the expected job losses and because of the existing expertise of the local work force in nuclear issues, we feel that we are well-placed to create a centre of excellence in decommissioning in Annan. I was pleased that the Scottish National Party scheduled nuclear waste for debate. It is an important issue. I was, however, a little disappointed when I read the text of the motion, because it appeared to relate to constitutional issues. However, Roseanna Cunningham raised a number of legitimate concerns. I do not agree with all of them but it is important that we should discuss them. The power companies that generate 25 per cent of the UK's electricity through nuclear power are UK companies, and the NDA will operate UK-wide—partly because energy policy is reserved to Westminster. I therefore do not have a particular problem with these issues being discussed on a UK basis.

I was just about to come on to that point. Fortunately, there have been no serious incidents at Chapelcross in 45 years. If there had been, Cumbria would probably have been more affected than many parts of Scotland. Similarly, Sellafield—where much of the waste from Scotland goes—is in England but, if there had been a problem there, it might have affected my constituency more than many parts of England. I do not think that the nationalistic argument applies.

I am sorry but I have only four minutes. I am now going to annoy a large number of my coalition colleagues: I am one of those people who believes that nuclear power generation has a future. I believe that the global environment is more seriously threatened by greenhouse gas emissions than it is by the new generation of nuclear reactors that is currently being developed and researched. Of course, I believe that renewables are part of the solution, but I do not believe that they are the whole solution. A 1,000MW advanced passive reactor—1,000MW is five times the power of Chapelcross—would, over a 60-year lifespan, produce something like 2,000m 3 of low-level radioactive waste and about 700m 3 of intermediate-level waste. I therefore believe that we must not close the door on nuclear power. I have some sympathy for the Tory amendment—although issues arise over who will develop the power capacity that it refers to. There is currently a lack of appetite for investment in power because the power market is poor. I will not deceive the work force at Chapelcross by saying that next year we can somehow have a brand spanking new nuclear power reactor and that everybody will get a job. However, I think that research can continue and that licensed sites such as Chapelcross would be ideal for such research. People in such areas are sympathetic towards nuclear power. My plea is this: do not close the door on nuclear power, because it will prove to be an essential part of the global energy supply.

I am sure that David Mundell, as a member for the South of Scotland and as a Westminster aspirant, is well aware of the need for investment in infrastructure. If the Tories intend to cut business and water rates, are they advocating an increase in income tax to pay for that investment?

Does the minister share my concern that the way in which consultants who are examining possible relocations apply the Executive's criteria militates against many parts of Scotland, including Dumfries and Galloway? Will he undertake to review the criteria and the operation of the Executive's relocation policy in order to ensure that all parts of Scotland benefit?

Will the member take an intervention?

Like others, I am disappointed that the discussion of this important bill was interrupted by a somewhat infantile display of gesture politics. I am glad that we have managed to recover and get back to matters that are important to many young people  and their parents. Like Robert Brown, I thank the clerks for their work and the witnesses, institutions and organisations that have invited members of the committee to visit them. We have all learned a lot from the visits and from speaking to the witnesses in the committee. The provisions of the bill have generally been welcomed by witnesses, but there are many questions about how the system will work in practice. I disagree with something that Mary Scanlon said. The system proposed in the bill is not the same as the current system. The bill is not about replacing records of needs with co-ordinated support plans; it establishes a new system to abolish the record of needs and introduces the co-ordinated support plan as a statutory document to safeguard the interests of those young people who need support from an external agency. More generally, it places on local authorities a new duty in their role as education authorities to take account of the additional support that a much wider category of children or young people might require—possibly temporarily—to achieve their educational potential. Furthermore, it requires local authorities to make adequate and efficient provision for that additional support. The bill is about giving new rights to many children and young people who did not have such rights before. I recall a conversation that I had with a constituent whose child has a record of needs. Although the child has severe dyslexia, he has that record of needs because he has mild Asperger's; he would not have been entitled to a record of needs on the basis of his dyslexia. The bill follows on from the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000, which established the right of every child to be provided with a school education by a local authority. In relation to Robin Harper's point, I point out that the act also placed a duty on education authorities to ensure that education is directed to the development of each child's "personality, talents and mental and physical abilities ... to their fullest potential." The bill recognises that attempts to meet the requirements of a child with multiple or complex needs are most likely to fail when some of the additional support that is needed is provided by external agencies or by the education authority when it is exercising any of its functions other than education. There are always concerns when systems change. Brian Monteith referred to concerns among Tory members about the changes, but I say to him that there are concerns among members from all parties. We have all heard the concerns of parents. The minister has recognised  that reassurance is required for parents of children who currently have records of needs but who will not qualify for CSPs. What can those children do if their local authority ceases to provide the additional support that they currently receive? I acknowledge what the minister said about the letter that he has written to chief executives of local authorities, but I think that parents need to be told explicitly how they can raise concerns if they feel that their child's needs are not being met. Indeed, that also applies to the young person who did not have a record of needs but who has additional support needs. How do they make progress? I know that that is provided for in the bill, but I suggest that it needs to be made more explicit in order to reassure people. I am absolutely clear that the Executive's intention is that all children who require additional support are entitled to have their needs met and I welcome the announcement of additional funding to meet unmet need. The letter to which Fiona Hyslop referred was written by COSLA before it was aware of that funding and I hope that COSLA finds that some of its concerns have been addressed, too. The bill does not propose a universal system. Some witnesses from whom we took evidence felt that the bill represented a lost opportunity to introduce a single system of personal learning plans for all children. The ministers have indicated a desire to develop a system that identifies learning and development pathways for each child. Eventually, we will move towards a system in which each child is entitled to have a PLP and in which children with additional support needs will also have an individualised educational programme in order to identify those needs. Some people say that that is enough, but I recognise that Robin Harper is not saying that. There are those who say that a CSP will stigmatise people, but they are not taking account of the fact that a new universal system would require a level of resources and training that would be difficult to put in place in one tranche. That has to happen over a period of time, with resources being fed in; it cannot be delivered at the moment. Those people also fail to recognise that the most vulnerable children and young people require the protection of a CSP because, sadly, we do not live in an ideal world in which all agencies collaborate willingly and holistically. Members who think that the CSP will stigmatise children and young people are, in my view, opposed to the bill's general principles and should vote against the motion. The bill's long title makes it clear that the bill is about making "provision for additional support in connection with the school education of children and young persons".  The bill is about meeting the needs of those children who would not achieve their full potential without additional support. It is not about introducing a universal system of documentation—it is important for us to keep that in mind. I conclude by saying that considering the bill has been an extremely interesting experience. I have become more reassured as we have taken evidence and I hope that ministers can provide the further reassurance that parents need to be sure that the bill is the right measure.

Will the member give way?

I congratulate the Conservative party on having some policies. I hope that in the future, SNP members will tell us not only what they do not like about the Executive, but what they would do differently. I disagree with the Tories' proposals, but at least they are making proposals.

Mr Monteith may be right—I could not possibly comment. Sometimes, it seems that the only news about the Scottish Parliament is bad news, so what most of us heard of the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000, from the second year of the Parliament's first session, was about problems with its financial memorandum, rather than the educational tenets in the act. The act contained two important educational tenets, one of which was the presumption of mainstreaming, which led to the problems. The other was the definition of the purpose of education, which concerned the duty of authorities to direct education to develop each child or young person's abilities to the fullest potential. Those are firm foundations for the development of a comprehensive education system that is suitable for the 21 st century. I support unashamedly a comprehensive system that is administered by directly elected local authorities. The principles of the 2000 act inform the Executive's current policy of developing the five national priorities in education. It is important to recognise that achievement is not just about academic assessment or examination results, important though they are; it is about fulfilment, self-esteem, creativity and ambition. Self-confidence is important to each individual and it also relates to many of the Parliament's issues and concerns. Young people who like themselves are less likely to be involved in crime, antisocial behaviour, taking drugs and under-age sex in a disrespectful relationship. Self-respect is important to society, because if we respect ourselves we probably respect others. Therefore, we need to engender a sense of citizenship. Successful individuals make successful communities and create a successful nation. That is why the fourth national priority in education, which relates to values and citizenship  and the concept of working with parents to develop what is called emotional intelligence, is very important in the central role of personal and social education in encouraging the development of positive attitudes and involvement in extra-curricular activities. Such activities encourage a sense of responsibility in young people and inspire them, for example, to get involved in youth councils and forums, to take part in work placements and to learn the habits that will help them in their working lives later on. The development of personal attributes and a sense of self-worth can come about through things such as sporting and cultural activities. Outdoor education, which Robin Harper is keen on, plays an important part in that. I believe that the accreditation of personal and social development as a standard grade and the fact that awards are given to people in schools for PSE has helped to improve pupils' perception of an important part of the curriculum. As the minister said, the Executive no longer reports only academic success. The focus has moved away from league tables of exam results. At the end of last year, local authorities produced the first of their annual reports on their progress towards the outcomes within the national priorities. The reports are produced at local authority level and at national level, and both make interesting reading. I do not want to give the impression that under-achievement should be disregarded. As we know, there is still progress to be made, particularly from P7 to S2, and we need to bring the achievements of the lowest-achieving 20 per cent of pupils closer to those of their peers. There are particular issues around the performances of boys and looked-after children in the care system, who do not do as well as others. Improving achievement is also important in areas in which poverty and deprivation are prevalent. However, I say to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton that the answer is to improve achievement in the schools in such areas rather than to remove pupils from the schools and create what would be sink schools. I echo Robert Brown's concerns about science education and the uptake of science in schools and further and higher education. We know that science is tremendously popular on television. People will watch endlessly programmes about black holes, string theory and so on. However, people are frightened about doing science as a subject. There is a job to done, and we must consider why science is no longer attractive to people. The subject cannot be that difficult—I did it. It is important for Scotland's future and for the knowledge economy in this country that we encourage more people to study science at school and in further and higher education.

To ask the Scottish Executive how, and to what extent, it monitors the actions of registered social landlords, in particular those who have received former council housing under stock transfer. (S2O-1140)

I know that the minister is aware of problems that have been faced by Dumfries and Galloway Housing Partnership in the first months of its existence. Will she advise members what recourse tenants of RSLs have if they are unhappy with the actions of the board of a housing association? Do ministers have any powers of direction regarding the activities of RSLs?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is considering reviewing the system of appeal against High Court judgments. (S2O-1051)

I thank the minister for her reply and, in particular, for her emphasis on victims. I do not expect the Executive to comment on particular circumstances or cases, but does she share my concerns that an individual who was convicted of rape in May 2001 did not submit his grounds for  appeal until August 2002 and that the appeal procedural hearing has not yet been taken, almost three years from his conviction date? Does she agree that, like the High Court sentencing process, the appeals system requires modernisation?

I do not have a direct constituency interest in horse racing—although there are many horses in my constituency, including some extremely successful racehorses, we do not have any courses for horses. Euan Robson mentioned his first bet and I can recall my first bet on a horse—his name was Red Rum. My boyfriend at the time laughed at me for putting money on Red Rum, but he went on to win the grand national in question, as well as several subsequent grand nationals. I have felt some affection for horse racing ever since. Like other members, I have general concerns about the OFT's rule 14 proposals, because I think that they run against the Scottish Executive's aspirations. Last year, the Executive created a new non-departmental public body, EventScotland, the intention of which was to bring major sporting and cultural events to Scotland. EventScotland was set up because we recognised the importance of major cultural and sporting events to the country's economy. The OFT's proposals threaten a sporting and cultural industry—as Alex Neil said, sport is culture in Scotland—that benefits greatly local economies and, in the case of major events, Scotland's national economy. Fifteen years ago, I lived almost next door to Ayr racecourse. From outside the course, one got a very strange view of the track—one would see the horses thunder round, then disappear and then come thundering back round. During the decade or so for which I lived in Ayrshire, I observed directly the great benefit that accrued to the retail industry and to the hospitality businesses when the races—particularly races such as the Ayr gold cup and the Scottish grand national—were on. Eighteen months ago, I attended a presentation at Hamilton park racecourse and was struck by the evidence that was cited of its success in attracting families and young people to events at the course. That belies racing's image as being only for toffs or for men in macs who are dedicated gamblers. Horse racing is predominantly a spectator sport and those people, such as Colin Fox and Susan  Deacon, who have had a great interest in it over the years have not grown up to become jockeys. However, I think that there is a case for spectators to be able to watch a wide diversity of sporting activity, to stimulate their interest in sport and physical activity. Although the successes of a Scottish horse, a Scottish jockey or a Scottish trainer or owner are perhaps not as much the cause for national pride and celebration as the successes of an athlete or a football team, it is important that young people are exposed to different forms of physical activity for enjoyment as spectators, because that might encourage them to try out different sports and find the one that suits them.

I think that that depends on the two legs. At present, equestrian sports and physical activities face some significant barriers. Although this evening's debate might not be the appropriate occasion on which to discuss them, I would appreciate a future opportunity to discuss with ministers the grave concerns that I have about the future of equestrian activity and some of the problems that are faced in the teaching of such activity. Some of those matters are not within the capacity of government to address, such as the problems that are associated with insurance. However, it is within the capacity of government to rectify the OFT rule 14 recommendations. Therefore I, like others, urge the Executive to work with the industry to explore ways of further developing it and to ensure that actions that arise from the OFT report do not damage the potential of the industry to contribute even more significantly than it already does. We have already heard how significant the industry's contribution is to tourism and the economy in Scotland.

To ask the First Minister whether public-private partnerships continue to be an effective way of improving education and health provision. (S2F-484)

The First Minister will be aware that Dumfries and Galloway Council is about to submit revised proposals for upgrading its school estate using a public-private partnership agreement, for which the Scottish Executive had previously offered £103 million. In light of the problems that have recently been encountered by other local authorities and the concerns of some members of the work force, can he advise us whether the £103 million will remain available, if the council's proposals are acceptable? Could a similar level of investment be made available to the council by the Scottish Executive through any other mechanism?

rose—

I recognise John Swinburne's point, but that is precisely why the Liberal-Labour Government intends to introduce a national free travel scheme, which will mean that pensioners do not have to stand outside in the rain waiting to pay.

I see that Rab McNeil is still in the press gallery. He might be bored by Des McNulty, but he thinks that I am a dog.

I might be a bit of a mongrel, actually. Anyway, I welcome the opportunity to speak in today's debate, which is about the presentation and the process of reporting on the budget rather than about the budget's content, which will be a matter for debate at a later stage when we have the budget bill in front of us. There has been general agreement that the process and presentation have improved. In 1999, we inherited the Westminster model of presenting budgets, which uses shock-and-awe tactics whereby the House of Commons is bombarded with information that has to be picked over during subsequent days as the media, back benchers and Opposition parties try to interpret the proposals to decide whether they will support or criticise them. There is a role for that sort of theatrical event in politics—the UK budget is one of the few political events that actually interests the public—and it is absolutely appropriate that budgetary decisions are presented to the Parliament through ministerial statements. However, the operation of the Scottish Parliament is rooted in its committee system; it is necessary that the information that we receive is presented in a manner that enables us to fulfil our function as scrutineers of the Executive. The Executive is to be commended on the continuing improvement in the provision of financial information that Des McNulty referred to. I am particularly pleased to see the absence of cumulative accounting. However, our report requests further clarity in how objectives and targets are funded to reflect the Executive's key priorities. That would allow us to interrogate whether and how funding decisions achieve or do not achieve those policy priorities. That is why I agree strongly with Wendy Alexander—sadly, she is off ill, or she would be standing here now—on the need for that broad financial backdrop against which funding decisions are made. As Jim Mather pointed out, it would be of great assistance to know what the trends have been over a period of years, so that we could assess how those are related to policy priorities and what the outcomes were. I recognise, of course, that outcomes are what matter and I know both that economics is not an exact science—in fact, I suspect that it is not a science at all—and that local and national economies are not isolated systems, but I would like to understand better what the reaction pathway is. We would like to know how putting £X million into one budget line or £Y million into another budget line actually achieves the outcomes that the Executive desires. Not only would that enable Parliament to scrutinise Executive decisions better, it would also  encourage Opposition parties to propose, as oppositions in councils have done for many years, alternative budgets on which they could be judged. Opposition members in the Parliament often say that the job of the Opposition is to oppose, but—

I will just finish the sentence before giving way. Opposition members often say that it is their job to oppose, but their job is not just to oppose but to provide alternative policies. Good Oppositions should be able to suggest how those policies would be funded.

I will refer to some of that later, but part of the point that I was making was about the difficulties for Opposition parties. It is clear that some form of scrutiny of the links between financial inputs and outcomes is done outwith the budget process. The Finance Committee considers the financial memorandums that are attached to the policy statements that accompany bills. For example, we can assess the Executive's key priority of tackling crime not only by looking at things such as the number of police on the beat, but by considering the bills that reform the court system, that introduce other disposals to provide deterrents and that enhance community safety. The Executive is expected to use the financial memorandums to indicate what funding might be required to support the legislation. However, that memorandum cannot and does not provide the whole story. The problem is making the link at strategic level between the funding allocation decisions and how those produce the desired objectives and outcomes. It is not just about how many millions are put into a portfolio; it is about the information that we need to allow us to judge whether that funding is being allocated in the best possible way to get the desired outcomes. That is where the budget continues to disappoint, because we could not trace how the Executive is funding sustainable development or the closing of the opportunity gap. We are not yet in a position to judge whether a bit more in one budget line or in one portfolio might better achieve the stated objectives. That then makes it difficult to analyse the decisions that are made in the biennial spending review process to identify new areas for funding, to decide what areas should receive  increased funding or might need to be sunset for various reasons; it is also difficult to analyse what quantitative criteria are used to make those decisions. That knowledge would enable the Parliament to judge better the action taken within the Executive's parameters and it would allow the committees to make meaningful alternative budget suggestions. That is the point that Mr Monteith made. There is a common desire to understand better the mechanism that affects outcomes. Throwing money at an issue is likely to effect some improvement, but the effectiveness depends on what is put in and where it is put. To achieve best value, we need to understand how particular inputs and investments in areas of activity influence outcomes and the extent to which that happens. After that, we can have an informed debate about those outcomes and much of that will be a political debate between the different parties. However, we also need to know about how investment is used to achieve outcomes and whether that represents value for money. I close by thanking the Finance Committee clerks, members and of course, Professor Midwinter, and not just because he bought me a drink last night.

rose—

rose—

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton may be aware that Dumfries and Galloway Council recently conducted a two-year consultation exercise on the issue in rural and urban areas. Parents and communities overwhelmingly wanted to retain the local comprehensive schools in their communities; they did not want to send their children to new schools, however well equipped they are. How does that equate with the Tories' suggestions?

Is it not the case that the Tory document "Localisation of the Police Service", which promises a fair deal for everyone on crime, proposes directly elected police authorities? How will another set of elections help to bring down crime?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has assessed the effectiveness of its policy of seizing the assets of suspected drug dealers. (S2O-893)

The seizure of more than £1.5 million in assets and the freezing of a further £3.2 million in Scotland since the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 became law is encouraging, but will the minister tell members about the mechanism under which the share that is to go to the communities that are affected will be allocated? Will he assure me that small communities such as those in Dumfries and Galloway, which also suffer from the scourge of drugs, will benefit from the redistribution of those funds?

I welcome members to another groundhog day debate. This topic competes with the Scottish adjacent waters boundary and amnesic shellfish poisoning for the honour of the highest number of times that a subject has returned to the chamber. Yet again, the SNP has chosen to debate an issue for which the Parliament cannot legislate. Previous debates in the second session have been the same: on 12 June, we debated Europe—presumably, it was independence in, but common fisheries policy out,  although I apologise to Tavish Scott for that reference; on 11 September, we had a debate on asylum seekers; and today we are debating fiscal autonomy and the number of Scottish seats in the European Parliament. Those might well be important matters, but they are all ones over which we have no legislative competence.

As I have just been reminded, that was four years ago. Members' business debates are somewhat different from party-political debates; there have been all manner of debates at members' business. Moreover, we do not actually—[ Interruption. ] Shut up! We do not yet use the powers that we have. We already have tax-varying powers, and we have not yet used them. The tax that the UK Government raises from Scottish residents is redistributed and decisions on spending it in devolved areas are made by the Scottish Parliament. It is perhaps instructive to consider the patterns of income and expenditure over the past four years. The figures I have used are from "Government Expenditure and Revenue in Scotland"—GERS. The last available figures, which are for 2000-01, show that total expenditure in Scotland was £36.3 billion, with total receipts of £30.9 billion. North sea oil revenue, which Wendy Alexander mentioned, came to £4.3 billion and the deficit was £1.1 billion. In the previous year, £33.8 billion was expended; £28.9 billion came in; £2.5 billion was added from North sea oil revenues; and the deficit was £2.4 billion. I could go on, but the point is that the deficit over those four years ranged from £4 billion to £1 billion. The new GERS figures will be out within the next few weeks, but official figures show a continual deficit in the Scottish economy over the past four years.

I do not think that anybody is offering to take over the UK at the moment. The Scottish economy has been in deficit over the past four years and we must confront the consequences of that. We must also bear in mind the fact that, like shares, oil prices can go down as well as up. Oil revenues were as high as £12 billion in 1984-85 but, only seven years later, they stood at only £1 billion. That is a very volatile basis on which to plan our services. Oil revenues accounted for 7.9 per cent of total revenues in 1999-2000 and 12.2 per cent a year later. Scotland's percentage of total expenditure is  higher than our percentage of the population, of total receipts excluding oil revenues and of gross domestic product. Fiscal autonomy would mean cuts in Scottish services of between £1 billion and £4 billion each year, judging by the most recent figures, which I quoted. Given the fuss the SNP made earlier this year about the £394 million of end-year flexibility funding, I am surprised that its members are so relaxed about a sum that could be 10 times that. In committee, Fergus Ewing often likes to refer to such sums as the Holyrood factor. The Scottish Executive's total managed expenditure this year is £22.8 billion. We should bear in mind the fact that between 97 per cent and 98 per cent of that is fully committed, which leaves about £0.7 billion available for reallocation. Furthermore, 60 per cent of the budget goes directly to local councils and health boards. Would the SNP please advise us what it would cut? The Tories often like to flirt with the idea of fiscal autonomy. I see that there is only one of them here, who will perhaps advise us on this, because their position is interesting. We know that Mr McLetchie is keen to expound the policies of his former leader, Iain Duncan Smith, so I presume that he, too, wishes to cut overall UK public expenditure by 20 per cent, which would necessitate a further £7 billion cut in the Scottish budget. With the Tories in power and with fiscal autonomy, Scottish expenditure would stand to be reduced by between £8 billion and £11 billion per annum.

Sorry—I am in my last minute. Rather than dancing on pinheads, we need to assure the Scottish people of our competence in the areas that are currently devolved. The public do not consider that we are using our finances particularly well at the moment. They see us as the numpties who are spending 10 times what we were supposed to spend on a building, and I suspect that they would not take terribly kindly to being asked for more. My view is that devolution is evolutionary, and that, in 100 years' time, the Scottish Parliament might be a very different beast from what it is now. I suspect that it might have further powers and that the English regions might have more powers. I also suspect that the European Union will be more integrated. However, I do not wish to gainsay the decisions of future generations. The Parliament should be concentrating on getting on with doing its current job as well as possible.

I am pleased to take part in a debate that  acknowledges the issues that our nation faces, given that physical inactivity is a barrier to health improvement and causes problems for the country's economy. In particular, I will deal with the lack of physical activity among women and girls, which is particularly worrying for their current and future health and well-being. The document "let's make scotland more active" contains some worrying figures. It says that 72 per cent of women and 59 per cent of men "are not active enough for health" and that 40 per cent of girls and 27 per cent of boys are not active enough to meet the guidelines that recommend one hour's moderate activity on most days of the week. The amount of physical activity among girls drops off sharply at puberty. Moreover, girls are less active than boys at the age of only four. The 1998 Scottish health survey showed a strong correlation between lack of physical activity and socioeconomic grouping. Some 25 per cent of professional women participate only in a low level of physical activity—that is, once a week—compared with 51 per cent of women in unskilled occupations. That trend is also observed among men, although the overall levels of physical activity for men are higher. I have a 16-year-old daughter and I often think about what the world is like for her and her friends compared with what it was like when I was 16, which was not exactly yesterday. Significant advances have been made for women. For example, physical, sexual and mental abuse of women, which we discussed this morning, is generally considered to be unacceptable nowadays. Very few careers today are perceived as being unavailable to women or as being male preserves, although I do not deny that there are still glass ceilings. Nowadays, nobody would tell a young woman who was interested in studying science that girls are not as good as physics as boys are. Girls are probably more confident and assertive than they have ever been. That makes me wonder why they do not look after themselves. Why are we failing to get the message across to them that a moderate change in lifestyle would bring benefits that would improve the quality of the rest of their lives? Why, for example, are women more likely to try to control their weight by smoking than by taking more physical exercise? Let us not underestimate what a moderate change in lifestyle can do. Nearly 2,500 Scots die prematurely each year due to physical inactivity. That accounts for 42 per cent of deaths as a result of coronary heart disease, 25 per cent of deaths as a result of a stroke and 25 per cent of deaths as a result of colon cancer. We are talking about premature  death as well as about our quality of life and our well-being, especially in later life. The physical activity task force looked at barriers to being more physically active. The greatest barrier cited by all age groups, except for people aged between 65 and 74, was lack of time due to other commitments. For the oldest age group, the principal barriers were ill health, disability and being put off by the weather. The task force also reported that 71 per cent of people aged 25 to 44 and 51 per cent of those aged 45 to 54 are not physically active because they feel that they do not have time to be. What can we do to improve the situation? Obviously, we need to raise public awareness about how much physical activity is needed to improve health. People tend to think that one has to run a half marathon or give up an awful lot of time in order to be healthier. Only 34 per cent of the population knows that an accumulation of 30 minutes of moderate exercise most days will improve our health. Many people think that they need to do a lot more than that and are put off even from trying to exercise. One of the encouraging statistics in the report is that walking up two flights of stairs every day for a year uses up energy equivalent to 4lb of fat. I thought that that was rather nice, which is why I run up and down the stairs. People also need to make small changes to their normal way of life, such as walking more, cycling, gardening, doing housework and using the stairs instead of the lifts. I am not going to disagree an awful lot with what Tom McCabe said on the subject, although at the moment it may sound as though I am doing so. The debate is also about offering sport and physical exercise that people enjoy and about encouraging participation in physical activity early on in children's lives. Jamie McGrigor referred to the national sports strategy, "Sport 21", which notes that participation in the most popular sports—walking, swimming and cycling—has grown fast over the past decade. It also notes that those sports are the sorts of individual activities that people can do in their own time and perhaps in their own homes or that they can fit in with their lifestyles and family lives. I will not go through all the targets, as Jamie McGrigor recited them for us. It is worth noting, however, that the document takes a broad definition of sport.

Of course I am. I would hardly have chaired the group if I had not been interested in doing so. In 2001, the Council of Europe defined sport as  "all forms of physical activity which, through casual or organised participation aim at expressing or improving physical fitness or mental well-being, forming social relationships or obtaining results in competitions at all levels." That definition could involve chasing buses. If chasing a bus in high-heeled shoes had been an Olympic sport, I would have been a contender when I was younger. As Tom McCabe said, sport also involves activities such as dance and horse riding, although I have to say that my participation in the latter sport has not always helped my physical well-being. Women enjoy those sorts of activity—dance, in particular, is enjoyed by pensioners at tea dances and by young women in nightclubs. Bill Shankley once famously said: "Football isn't a matter of life and death; it's much more important than that." I am sure that the same thing could be said about sport and physical activity. I believe that money that is invested in sport, and in culture, is an investment in the health and well-being of our nation. The investment of relatively small amounts in health budget terms in initiatives such as the active primary schools programme and the school sports co-ordinator programme would make a great contribution to our nation's future health. Having tried to persuade Tom McCabe to give some of his funding to Frank McAveety, I will sit down.

Sport 21 is the national strategy for sport. It is not the strategy  of the Executive but the strategy of the sports community in Scotland.

Is the minister aware that no NHS or private dentists in my constituency have open lists? Will he assure us that the welcome measures will be monitored closely and regularly to ensure that they work in areas such as mine? Will the Executive consider making it possible for NHS boards to give people who are on low incomes financial assistance to enable them to travel to other NHS board areas to access dental health treatment?

I am normally cautious of gobbling up the titbits that are offered to me by the Conservative party, not least because they are likely to contain an emetic and would, from some quarters, probably be heavily laced with strychnine. I am sorry that Annabel Goldie is not in the chamber at the moment, because I cannot let her away with her comment that a quarter of Scots are not safe outside their front doors. A quarter of Scots may feel unsafe, but that does not mean that they are unsafe, and part of the reason why they feel unsafe is that people such as Annabel Goldie tell them that they are about to be attacked every 1.2 minutes. The culture of fear that is engendered by such scaremongering adds to the problems that we are trying to tackle through the bill. That culture means that people who see something happen are scared to go to the police or to court in case the perpetrators of the crime or their friends get back at them.

That is what the Tories tell us, but I have no evidence of that, other than that the Conservatives like to say it. Part of what we must tackle is the perception of and fear of crime. We should encourage people to stand up for themselves and their communities, to report crime and to support one another when they do so. The Tories' way of tackling the situation is not terribly helpful. To get to the topic on which I am supposed to speak I, like all members, welcome the bill, which will widen the categories of people who may be considered to be vulnerable witnesses, and will provide such witnesses with measures that will support them and improve the quality of their  evidence. We are all aware of high-profile cases that have collapsed because of the stress that has been placed on vulnerable witnesses, which made the evidence unsafe. That is highly undesirable, from the standpoint of both the complainant and the defendant. Although a guilty accused person may escape justice in such cases, equally, an innocent accused person may be prevented from clearing their name. I am sure that all MSPs are aware of the problems that the police and procurators fiscal have in progressing cases because witnesses are too frightened to go to court. In the past four and a bit years, I have had many conversations with constituents who have come to my surgeries to tell me about drug dealers or antisocial behaviour in their areas. I often have fairly robust conversations with such people about the need to tell the police and to be prepared, if necessary, to go to court. One of the problems in enforcing justice is people's fear that they will not be able to cope with the court experience. One important feature of the bill is that it will allow external circumstances to be taken into account when determining whether a witness is eligible for special measures. That is helpful, especially as the circumstances include those in which fear or distress may diminish the witness's ability to give evidence in the normal manner. I want briefly to draw attention to a matter that has been raised with me. It is not directly within the scope of the bill, but is more to do with reform or upgrading of the courts estate. Witnesses are often intimidated when they attend court if they have to wait in a waiting room with the friends, relatives and supporters of the accused. That needs to be addressed in order to make it easier for witnesses to come forward. The minister has also stated that she will enable other witnesses to act as supporters to vulnerable witnesses. I am pleased to hear that. My involvement with the bill has been principally as a member of the Finance Committee. I will, therefore, raise some of the points that were made in our evidence taking. One was the difficulty in estimating the potential number of vulnerable witnesses. That was referred to by Annabel Goldie and Alasdair Morgan, to some extent. The Scottish Legal Aid Board was concerned that if, in summary criminal cases, there were more procedural steps than there are at present, there could be greater attendant costs and, therefore, pressure to submit those cases to the board as being exceptional. The legal aid budget is demand led and is therefore difficult to control. The board fears that, if additional hearings are required because a witness is vulnerable, solicitors might be inclined to submit their expenses as being exceptional.  The Executive officials responded to that concern by pointing out that legal aid fixed fees are reviewed regularly and that such issues may be taken into account during review, although they did not feel that that was necessary at this stage. Both the Legal Aid Board and the Executive felt that the extent of the pressures could not really be identified until we see what happens in practice. Therefore, I hope that the Legal Aid Board will work with the Executive on those issues during implementation of the bill. I am sorry that John Swinburne is not in the chamber. In a characteristically trenchant way, he has made the point that certain aspects of the legal system seem to be a gravy train. It is important to recognise that, although there may be genuine pressures, the requirement to change and modernise does not, in itself, require additional long-term resources. It may be possible to finance that change within existing resources by using moneys differently. The Finance Committee was also concerned that only nine of the 52 courts in Scotland have closed-circuit television, although the financial memorandum budgets for a further 10 courts to be upgraded. We were advised, in evidence taking, that those 19 courts handle 80 per cent of all court business and that, if CCTV facilities were required at more remote court locations from which business cannot be transferred to a larger centre, mobile facilities would be made available. We were told that there are no specific plans to allocate funding to introduce CCTV into all courts, although that might eventually happen as the courts estate is upgraded. I feel that it is particularly important that vulnerable witnesses in remote and rural areas be provided with the same level of assistance in giving evidence as are vulnerable witnesses in more populated locations. It is important to recognise the fact that the bill is part of a series of measures—as the minister said, a "jigsaw" of measures—that will modernise and improve practice. Some of the new procedures may involve additional work, but others are about going about things differently. I do not think that I am being unduly unfair in observing that the public are sometimes cynical about lawyers and their fees in general, and about the legal aid remuneration system in particular. I dare say that they are even more cynical about politicians and their expenses. However, it is important that our justice system is seen to be efficient and effective and that the public trusts that it will be so. As the minister and other members have said, the bill promotes a cultural change. The minister has illustrated the fact that that change is happening in the Executive, but it has to happen throughout the justice system to enable better participation by witnesses. With regard to its  financial implications which, as Alasdair Morgan said, have been well documented in the financial memorandum, I believe that it will be money well spent.

In the early hours of 17 May 2000, Kennedy McFarlane, then aged three years and one month, was admitted to Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary in a state of collapse. She died a few hours later in intensive care. Staff at Kennedy's playschool had registered their concerns about her well-being in the February. A range of injuries, including injuries to her eyes, her face and her urinary tract and signs of drug ingestion, was subsequently reported to health visitors, to GPs, to social workers and to the local hospital. The agencies involved agreed to hold a child protection case conference in May 2000. However, before the conference was held, Kennedy's mother's partner, Thomas Duncan, violently murdered her, a crime for which he is now serving a life sentence. Astonishingly, prior to Kennedy's death, no one had asked about Mr Duncan, despite the fact that the abuse coincided with his move into the family home. Dumfries and Galloway's child protection committee commissioned an inquiry into the circumstances surrounding Kennedy McFarlane's death. That inquiry was conducted by Dr Helen Hammond, whose report, which was published in September 2000, found that although Kennedy's violent death could not have been predicted, it could have been prevented. Three years ago, Dr Hammond identified a lack of effective communication between health and social services officials, which resulted in failure to trigger a formal child protection investigation. One  of the many sad facts of the case is that prior to Kennedy's murder, Dumfries and Galloway Council's social services department and health board were considered to work well together. In 1999, when he was Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, I accompanied Iain Gray to a meeting with senior officials from social services and the health board and we were told that being co-located was helping joint working. The meeting was held in the context of Dumfries and Galloway being a good example of joint working between health and social services. Sadly, it was later proved that locating senior managers in the same building did not mean that vital and effective communication was taking place. Dr Hammond's report concentrated on the local issues surrounding this particular tragedy. In February 2001, the various agencies published their responses, which included specific departmental and interdepartmental action plans to address her concerns. Dr Hammond's report also noted some matters of national concern and made suggestions for consideration by the Scottish Executive. Among the matters of concern was isolation from a major teaching centre and the effect that that could have on agencies in a rural area. Dr Hammond also noted the effect of unrealistic work loads on key professionals and suggested the establishment of a national centre for child protection. I am pleased that we have heard from the minister that the Executive has followed through the national review and audit and that progress is being made; that is much to be welcomed. I say to Mr Martin, however, that we are in the second year of the reform of children's services and not the first. We need to recognise that there are significant challenges in achieving the improvements that we desire. The children's social work statistics for the year ending March 2003 show a 13 per cent increase in the number of children on local child protection registers compared with the previous year, and a 12 per cent increase in referrals for child protection inquiries. Those increases might represent an increase in awareness, which is all to the good as long as the cases are followed up. However, staff vacancies over the same period increased by one third and that adds considerable stress to the system. In Dumfries and Galloway, we have a lower than average number of social workers per head of population and, oddly enough, a lower percentage of vacancies—a contradiction that I have flagged up to the responsible director on the council. From my case load, I am acutely aware of the local shortage of social workers and the pressures that that puts on those who are in post. Mike Rumbles described how competition between local authority areas when bidding for  staff makes matters worse. The British Association of Social Workers has expressed its concerns that the welcome measures that are being taken by the Executive to try to increase the numbers of social workers might not fully bear fruit for four years. Had Kennedy McFarlane's murder been prevented, she would now be six years and eight months old and in her second year of primary school. The investigations that were caused by her tragedy have continued now for a longer period than her short life. Some 18 months after her death, 11-week-old Caleb Ness was murdered by his father. That was a year after Dr Hammond's report. Five-year-old Danielle Reid's body was found this year in the Caledonian canal. I am pleased that ministers have accelerated the development of their responses to the review and audit in response to those further tragedies. I welcome the increased pace of reform. On 11 October this year, The Scotsman newspaper noted that, according to the national criminal intelligence service, babies under one year old are at a greater risk of being murdered than any other group. Children are most often at risk from the very people who would be expected to afford the maximum protection—the people who brought them into the world and their partners. Those children look to the child protection agencies and to us, the legislators, to defend them. We owe it to the memory of Kennedy McFarlane, Caleb Ness, Danielle Reid and the others who have died in similar dreadful circumstances to prevent their fates from befalling other children.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to ensure that nutritional standards are maintained and met in the provision of school meals, particularly in primary schools. (S2O-676)

I am sure that, like me, the minister will be gratified to learn that the Soil Association praised the Executive's nutritional targets, comparing them with the "muck off a truck" that is served in England and Wales—those were the association's words, not mine. Has the Executive given any consideration to the suggestions of the association's director, Patrick Holden, and set additional targets for the use of local and organic foods? In particular, Mr Holden has suggested that more farms could be directly connected to their local schools. That would be of particular relevance in constituencies such as mine in Dumfries.

Until yesterday, I though that the debate was going to be about sustainable agriculture and the future of agriculture in Scotland. I was going to welcome that debate, as it is important to many of my constituents. Unfortunately, the title seems to have been something of a Trojan horse to sneak in a GM debate. For the life of me, I cannot see why, if the Greens wanted to talk about GM, they did not lodge a motion on GM and not raise expectations. The motion is ill-informed. As the minister demonstrated, the Scottish Executive believes in applying the precautionary principle. Back in March 2000, the then Minister for Health and Community Care, Susan Deacon, led a debate in which public concerns about the development of genetically modified foods and crops were acknowledged and the precautionary approach was commended. I am tempted to replicate the speech that I made on that occasion three-and-a-half years ago. I will not do so, other than to repeat my view that we cannot assess the threats or benefits of GM without informed scientific and medical opinion. That opinion has to be informed by rigorous, controlled and independent research and not by prejudice, ill-informed fears or anxieties. I have to pick up Eleanor Scott on the idea that nuclear irradiation is akin to something that happens in nature. Intense nuclear radiation causes fundamental genetic mutation. If there were to be a nuclear war, that is one of the reasons that I would sit on the roof with a bottle of wine—I would not want to survive it. Research is necessary, not only to evaluate whether GM commercialisation is desirable, but because—

No, I am sorry. I cannot take any interventions, as I do not have time to do so. The fact is that GM commercialisation exists in other places. As George Lyon said, the horse has well bolted and by now it is not just out of the stable but galloping halfway round the field.  I remind members that foot-and-mouth, which devastated agriculture in my constituency, might have been introduced into this country by illegally imported meat in a sandwich. We have to know how to react and behave if we discover that material has been introduced into this country from overseas sources. That is another reason why we have to get on with the research in this country. The actual title of the debate is "Future of Scottish Agriculture", and I really wanted to talk about some of the things that are happening in that respect. Indeed, I would have thought that the Green party would welcome certain measures. For example, the rural stewardship scheme was launched with the publication of "Rural Scotland: A New Approach" back in 2000. In August 2002, conservation awards worth £14.6 million were made to 196 farms that covered a total of 75,000 hectares; about 20 per cent of those farms were in southern Scotland. A year later, awards worth £23.6 million were made to 1,078 conservation projects covering 360,000 hectares of Scottish countryside. Surely that should be welcomed if we are talking about the future of Scottish agriculture.

I am sorry, but I am in my last minute. The Executive's "A Forward Strategy for Scottish Agriculture", which was published in June 2002, stated: "farmers are better able to care for the environment if they are economically successful and if they continue to farm in our remote areas." The document said that land management contracts would be explored. I am pleased by the progress in that respect with the establishment of a working group and a modelling exercise in which model land management contracts were drawn up for 21 farms, three crofts and a common grazing. Indeed, the model contract that was drawn up for a farm in Dumfries and Galloway identified 15 agriculturally and economically sustainable projects that would bring in more than £11,000 per annum. I would have welcomed the opportunity to examine what was being done to bring together Scotland's agriculture and environment and to consider a way forward for both.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether there would be any changes in the repayment of student loans and the graduate endowment if proposals by Her Majesty's Government on the reform of student loans and tuition fees are implemented. (S2O-568)

The minister is aware of the concerns of the universities of Glasgow and Paisley about the funding of their places at the Crichton campus in Dumfries. Will he assure Parliament that any financial consequences of the reduction in graduates' annual payments—which would be welcome—will not affect the funding of or the number of places at Scottish universities?

The last time that I was involved in a debate on theatre in Scotland was on 12 February. That was a much less happy occasion and I was here in a different capacity. At that time, the Executive had to make hard choices regarding the future of theatre. Before we were able to make this welcome progress on the national theatre, urgent steps had to be taken to support the infrastructure of regional theatre. As a result, £3.5 million was allocated in 2002 and another £1 million earlier this year to strengthen regional theatre. Unfortunately, that included £3 million of the £5 million that was originally earmarked for the national theatre. However, as we reflect on that, it is worth recalling what Hamish Glen said in February 2002: "it is only right that we sort out the historic problems within the existing theatre network first, since the plans for the new organisation will build on this." The announcement that the Minister for Finance and Public Services made in September about the allocation of £3.5 million in 2004-05 and a further £4 million in the following year was welcome. That allocation is larger than the amount that was sought by the steering group that Dr Donald Smith chaired and, indeed, it is larger than the Scottish Executive's initial allocation. That is extremely welcome. Members have noted that the allocation covers only two years. However, there will of course be another spending review in 2004 and I have every confidence in the minister's ability to fight for enduring funds to support the national theatre in the years to follow. However welcome the money is, £7.5 million is not a large amount compared with many of the sums in the budget lines that we discussed in our debate on the draft budget earlier this month. As with much of the creative sector, investments of very—or relatively—small amounts of money in the theatre can make a significant difference and generate substantial results. It is significant that the money that has been allocated can both meet the aspirations that the theatre sector has had for 60 years and fulfil a commitment that was made in the national cultural strategy. I was a little surprised by Jamie McGrigor's speech, in which he seemed to criticise the Executive for taking too long to do something. In fact, it was the Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive  in the first session of the Scottish Parliament that produced the first-ever cultural strategy for Scotland. For years, the cultural sector had been asking for that but, in their 18 years in Government, the Conservatives did not deliver it. It is through that commitment that initiatives such as the national theatre are coming to pass. The national theatre will be a body that will commission our best writers, actors and directors and will tour their works of excellence throughout Scotland and beyond. I hope that theatres such as the Theatre Royal in Dumfries—an ancient theatre, which Robert Burns attended, although it is no longer in the form that it was when he did so—will be able to attract funding so that they can be rebuilt and transformed into venues that are capable of putting on the sort of performances that the national theatre will produce. People in Dumfries and Galloway need to be able to see those performances locally. Of course, it is great to go to Ayr, Edinburgh and Glasgow, but I feel strongly that people should be able to see works of excellence in their communities. As Colin Fox said, the inspiration that seeing such works can give to young people and communities is important. I know that there are no philistines in the chamber at the moment and I hope that there are outwith the Scottish Parliament no philistines who begrudge even the small amount of money that we are talking about going into the arts. Culture, in its broader sense, means not only drama, art and music but includes sport, language and popular music. In that regard, other members of the Education Committee and I visited a school yesterday in Edinburgh and saw a music lesson that involved youngsters in secondary 3 writing raps and creating music to rap to. That is also part of Scottish culture and our voice today. Culture and creative activity contribute a great deal to the quality of our lives, on individual and national levels, and to the sense that we have of ourselves and our society. Scotland's cultural identity is strong internationally and the excellent work that will be commissioned by the national theatre will enhance our image outside Scotland. It will add to our reputation for excellence and quality and will attract visitors to our nation. Indeed, I hope that our having a strong and vibrant cultural sector might assist in the First Minister's goal of attracting people to work in Scotland and retaining people in the country after they have been trained here. The conditions and the aspirations of Scotland—snapshots in time—will be understood by future generations through performance of the new works that will be commissioned by the national theatre, long after we politicians have been forgotten. Charles James Fox—who I do not think  is a relative of our Colin Fox—said of our profession that we go up like a rocket and down like a stick. I am sure that we all hope that we are not in the stick phase at the moment, but the point is that we will not be remembered. The arts are not like that; good art exists for generations and informs other generations about the experiences and influences of the past.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will extend the central heating installation programme to people over 80 who have partial or poorly functioning central heating systems. (S2O-419)

The minister may be aware of circumstances such as those of my constituent Mrs Thompson, who is 80 years of age and whose application for central heating was turned down by the Eaga Partnership because she had two storage heaters, one of which was in the stairwell. I do not have a supplementary question, but I congratulate the Executive on making funding available to help older pensioners whose so-called central heating is not up to the job.

I welcome the minister's statement on the funding of the partnership agreement and the use of end-year flexibility. I appreciate that more detailed announcements will be made in the coming weeks by the portfolio ministers and the First Minister. I congratulate the Executive on bringing the sum down to £400 million this year. That figure is down £225 million from the previous year, which is a 39 per cent fall from that year and a 45 per cent fall from the 2000-01 figure of £718 million. I believe that the Executive is doing well in managing the Scottish budget. However, in contrast to what Fergus Ewing seems to believe, I do not think that end-year flexibility is necessarily a bad thing. As the minister said, EYF for 2002-03 represents only 1.9 per cent of the Scottish budget. I further note that the consequentials from Westminster bring the total up to £600 million. In a Scottish budget where 98 per cent of the budget is fully committed and 60 per cent is spent by health boards and local authorities, that 2 per cent can make a significant difference.

Obviously, the matter depends on how one does the calculations. I am merely saying that that 2 per cent is important. It is also of great importance that it be carried over into following years and I welcome the fact that Andy Kerr, like his counterpart in Westminster, is being prudent and recognising that the situation might not always be rosy in years to come. Over the summer recess, I, like many other members, met a large number of constituents who brought to my attention a variety of concerns. I had one representation on civil partnerships and two representations on Dungavel. I am not saying that those issues are not important, but I received a total of only three representations on issues that some parts of the media think that MSPs should be beating themselves up over. In contrast, I had scores of representations on issues such as antisocial behaviour, neighbour disputes and litter and vandalism. I welcome the £65 million to tackle that and I particularly welcome the fact that in the social justice budget, there is a budget line for initiatives tackling antisocial behaviour. Those will not be about punishment; they are initiatives to divert people from antisocial behaviour. The funding will rise to £12 million in the following year and £17 million in the year after that. People talk to me about the need for more police on the streets, the need for people to feel safer and the need for more closed-circuit television cameras on the streets, which is a pledge in the partnership agreement. There was a fight outside my constituency office over the summer—and no, it was not between David Mundell and me—but the police did not arrive for 45 minutes, because the CCTV cameras had not picked it up. There is also a need to reduce waiting times and a need for more nurses, such as specialist endoscopy nurses and auxiliaries in hospitals to give nurses more time with patients. I therefore welcome the NHS spend increase from more than £7 billion to nearly £8 billion over the next two years. I welcome the increase in national theatre funding. I believe that it was leaked to the papers slightly wrongly, because on page 63 of the draft budget the figure looks more like £7.5 million to me. I welcome that as part of the ministerial team that in previous years wished to progress that but was unable to do so because of the problems with the theatre infrastructure. It gives the lie to all those who said that the Scottish Executive and the First Minister in particular did not care about the arts. I do not always agree with The Herald , but I agree very much with the statement in today's  editorial, which was that the national theatre "will need to work with schools and communities to ensure that the place of theatre is firmly rooted in modern Scotland."

rose—

I start by making some contribution to the issue of relative poverty and absolute poverty because there seems to be a bit of a misunderstanding as to why they both have to be measured. The experience of the person who is living in poverty does not depend on whether their poverty is absolute or relative. We must be able to identify whether policies are helping to lift people out of poverty in both senses. Someone who lives in a poor-quality rented flat somewhere in Britain and has a poor standard of income might not be poor compared to someone in the developing world who lives in a shanty town. However, in comparison to the rest of society, they might be poor. It is important that we measure whether or not we are lifting people out of absolute poverty and whether the poor are keeping up with everyone else. There have been several versions of the single transferable speech in today's debate and Campbell Martin's was one of my favourites. However, he is not correct to say that the poor are getting poorer. The poor are not catching up with everyone else and average incomes are increasing. I am concerned about that and it is important to monitor and address the problem although I do not believe that that will be as easy as we are trying to make out.

That would depend upon circumstances. I would not try to put an exact figure on poverty because a lot would depend on how high someone's rent or mortgage was and the rest of their outgoings. We must also recognise that poverty is not just a financial measurement. It is also about opportunity and the lack of opportunity for people to develop. It is therefore particularly appropriate that the Executive has had to monitor how it is addressing closing the opportunity gap throughout its portfolios and over the entire span of its activities. That has been an important development during the past couple of years and I welcome the document that sets targets. I know that the Executive is often criticised for producing glossy documents and target-setting, but if we do not have targets and outcomes, we cannot judge whether policies have been successful.

We have a target for child poverty. In fact, we have a number of targets that relate to child poverty and a number of other issues. For example, in the sport and culture brief, there are targets for the participation of people in more deprived areas. I was quite enticed by Donald Gorrie's image of a ned who had taken up ballet and given up crime, but we must not underestimate the contribution that sport, culture and the arts can make to the closing of the opportunity gap, to the improvement of people's self esteem, to people indulging in lifelong learning, and to enabling people to get themselves out of poverty. I also take exception to the idea that no one is doing anything about it. If we consider the record of the Labour Government in Westminster and the coalition here in Scotland, many actions have been taken. No one is saying that everything has been solved and that there is not a long way to go. Of course there is a long way to go, but people have been trying. I am talking about such things as the minimum income guarantee and the minimum wage. John Swinburne talked about fuel poverty and pensioners, but what about the action taken on free central heating for all pensioners who did not have any form of central heating, and the expansion of that scheme that is planned for this session of Parliament? We are taking action to tackle poverty. It is difficult, but action is being taken.

I am sorry but I have taken rather a lot of interventions and I am not making the progress that I should. We must also recognise that poverty manifests itself differently in different geographical areas. Johann Lamont and Patrick Harvie talked about the concentration of poverty in some of the cities, particularly Glasgow where there are huge areas where people live in poverty. It is essential that anyone who describes themselves as a socialist sees that we have to tackle that as a priority. We also have to recognise—and Jeremy Purvis mentioned this—that poverty is manifest differently in rural areas. In a rural community, the poor can live next door to the rich. We cannot use the postcode definition of poverty that we could use in the cities. Sometimes poverty in rural areas is hidden. In rural areas, we cannot use car ownership as a realistic measure of poverty. Someone who lives in Eskdalemuir in my constituency will probably spend their last pound on their old banger because that is the only way  that they can access the doctor's surgery in Lockerbie or Langholm. The only way they can get to the shops is by car because public transport is not very good in rural areas. We have to acknowledge that the way we try to close the opportunity gap is different in different parts of Scotland. The Executive realises that, but as someone who represents a semi-urban and semi-rural constituency, I know that the problems are different in different areas and that we need different solutions to tackle those problems.

Will Mr Mundell tell us what he has achieved in the south of Scotland in the past four years?

I congratulate Jeremy Purvis on securing the debate and I apologise to him for failing to sign his motion. Unfortunately, I missed it because the business bulletin is not my most required reading during the recess. However, I am pleased to support the member in the debate. It is important that we take the opportunity to showcase achievement and investment in the south of Scotland. All that we in the south of Scotland do is moan about the hard lot that we have. If we continually talk down our region, jobs will continue to be relocated in Inverness rather than in the south of Scotland and we will continue to have problems recruiting dentists, teachers, health professionals and other key workers in our area. Let us take this opportunity to debate something positive about the south of Scotland and, indeed, something positive about Europe. Jeremy Purvis has described several successful projects in his constituency that have used European funding. I want to add a small snapshot of key achievements in Dumfries constituency and the way in which those have contributed to the economic and social fabric of the area. European regional development funding totalling £488,000 in 2001 helped the Crichton Development Company to refurbish Galloway House on the Crichton campus in Dumfries and to develop the Crichton Business Park, which has provided 400m 2 of business space and now has a state-of-the-art call centre that is used by Telegate, Or 118866, as the company would like us to say at the moment. It is hoped that the centre will eventually provide 400 local jobs. It is also offering training that is developed and provided locally. In the same year, the Crichton campus benefited from a grant of almost £500,000 from objective 2  funding towards the refurbishment of Browne House, which has provided a centre for management, personal and professional development. The building acts as an interface with the higher education development on the site, which is a unique partnership between several higher and further education institutions. That partnership now includes the business sector, because the centre aims to meet the demands for training and product development of small and medium-sized enterprises, which are very important in rural economies such as the south of Scotland. It will enable local businesses throughout Dumfries and Galloway to compete more effectively. Nearly £1 million has been allocated to those two projects centred on the Crichton campus in Dumfries. The projects have attracted inward investment, have provided job opportunities and have provided a facility that will allow indigenous local businesses to develop. The European regional development fund also contributed nearly £700,000 to a £1.4 million project, led by Dumfries and Galloway Council, to develop a community resource centre in north-west Dumfries, which is one of the more disadvantaged areas in my constituency. That funding helped to upgrade and convert a former old people's home in Lincluden, to create an integrated facility that provides child care, further education, training, volunteering and business start-up advice. Forty-six partner organisations from across the spectrum were involved in converting a derelict eyesore into a focus for local pride and a centre for the entire community, from the very young to senior citizens. The centre has provided 120 child-care places and training facilities that have created 27 jobs—mainly for women. It also has an extremely good café-restaurant that I have had the pleasure of visiting on one occasion. We have also received £270,000 for the arts and crafts sector, which is developing marketing of arts and crafts in Dumfries and Galloway. Nearly £200,000 was allocated to Dumfries and Galloway College for a flexible access centre. The money helped to purchase 50 computers that are linked to the internet and intranet and which are available not only to students of the college, but to the public. The area tourist board has lost funding because of the decision of the Executive and Scotland not to pass on the third tranche of foot and mouth disease recovery money. I am profoundly disappointed by, and disagree with, that decision. However, it should not detract from the fact that Dumfries and Galloway tourist board has already received approval to spend £1.3 million of objective 2 money that has come into the region  and has done a great deal to promote tourism and information and communications technology.

I am sorry. I did not hear because I was too busy clapping. I, too, am familiar with the problems of small businesses. A fairly small number of small businesses have come to me about their water charges, but I have been a bit disappointed in the actions of Scottish Water in looking into their problems: responses have been standard responses rather than individual responses. However, we must not forget Fergus Ewing's point that Scottish Water inherited significant problems from the three quangos that were set up by the Tories when they took water out of local authority control. We must also not forget the 18 years during which the Conservatives starved local authorities of cash. As Des McNulty said, the current situation is the result of a long period—

No, I want to get on. I am not even one minute into my speech. It was considered locally that the council in Dumfries and Galloway provided a good service, although it might be debatable whether the council could have dealt with some problems that have arisen since to do with compliance with European legislation. However, that is more than could be said of West of Scotland Water, which was unpopular throughout Dumfries and Galloway. My experience of Scottish Water is that it is more responsive than was West of Scotland Water—David Mundell could confirm that following discussions that we have had about the sewage treatment works in Langholm. Scottish Water seems to be more willing to discuss those problems and more willing to discuss matters with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency than  was West of Scotland Water, which described SEPA as the Taliban and did not want anything to do with its recommendations. I am therefore prepared to give Scottish Water a bit of time to demonstrate its capabilities. We must not forget that the Conservatives voted for Scottish Water less than 18 months ago. If they were so opposed to the idea of Scottish Water, why did they not vote against it? Why did they not come out and propose privatisation at that time? Is it not actually the case that they were aware, and continue to be aware, that privatisation of water is extremely unpopular with the Scottish electorate? The Conservatives knew that a Scottish parliamentary election was coming over the horizon, so they did not dare to talk about their plans for privatisation.

We have given them two such opportunities—in May 1999 and on 1 May 2003.

We did not lose as many seats as the Conservatives did. The Tories are simply dressing up their desire for privatisation in the clothes of mutualisation. That represents an extraordinary conversion from Conservatism to the Co-operative Party, which I simply do not believe has happened. Mutualisation was discussed extensively before the passing of the Water Industry (Scotland) Act 2002, which brought Scottish Water into being. Mutualisation was not at that time considered to be suitable because we felt that it would not be able to address some of the industry's significant problems. The Tories' real agenda continues to be privatisation of the water supply in Scotland, so let us examine what the results of privatisation might be.

I am not splitting hairs, because a mutual company would still have major infrastructure difficulties and would have to borrow money on the private market. Privatised water companies might well be  interested in the densely populated areas of the central belt, where a lot of money could be made, but I do not believe that they would have any interest in sparsely populated rural areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, where we have many problems. In my area, we need investment to address infrastructure issues and we have planning blight because our sewerage system is insufficient to cope with new development. No private company would have the slightest interest in resolving those issues. If Scottish Water were to be broken up into smaller private companies, we would have no guarantee that the jobs that we have tried to keep in Dumfries and Galloway through cross-party co-operation—unfortunately, those efforts have been unsuccessful—would even remain in Scotland and not go elsewhere, as has been the case with some of the companies that the Conservatives privatised, such as BT, whose jobs we see going to India. The Tories' plans would offer no such guarantee to my constituents in Dumfries and Galloway.

Does the minister agree that there are some excellent examples of alternatives to excluding disruptive pupils, such as the Schoolhouse at Dumfries High School, to which I referred during the debate on young people last week? Will he consider ways in which such excellent projects can continue once funding for fixed-term alternatives to exclusion ceases?

I will focus on a particular part of the motion, which is about young people requiring support. There has been some discussion in the press about the desirability of excluding pupils from mainstream education. I will highlight an example from my constituency where good support is given to young people with behavioural difficulties. Last Friday I was fortunate to visit Dumfries High School, which has obtained funding through the alternatives to exclusion programme to establish the Schoolhouse. The school has taken over the vacant janitor's house and converted it into a learning base, which is staffed by two teachers. Pupils who are excluded from school because of behavioural problems are required to attend the Schoolhouse during the period of their exclusion. Instead of those young people missing out on their education and being left at home or hanging about on the streets where they can get into more trouble, they are kept on the school premises. They can continue to learn in a safe, secure environment without interacting with other pupils or causing problems in the mainstream school. I was impressed to find that the Schoolhouse was neither a sin bin nor an easy option for the young people whose behaviour had caused them to be excluded from being educated with their peers, even for a short period. The Schoolhouse pupils continue with their studies and attend other sessions, including group and one-to-one sessions during which they address some of their behavioural problems and consider how their behaviour affects teachers and fellow pupils. The Schoolhouse pupils will shortly be given access to computer-based learning support, which is in operation throughout the rest of the school. That support will help the pupils develop their literacy and numeracy skills. It uses a series of programmes that are tailored to individual need and to levels of attainment. The pupils not only engage in academic activity, but work in the garden and undertake vocational activities. I was very impressed when I visited. It was very quiet; a group of pupils were working together on their individual educational activities in one room and in another room two young boys who had been excluded from school for fighting each other were working together and helping each other with their homework. The general atmosphere was supportive, quiet and disciplined. I felt that the young people were continuing to learn and to understand their difficulties.  I was informed that two of the excluded pupils were helping another pupil, who is school phobic. One of the boys had been in trouble on many occasions during his school life, but he was anxious to help a young lad who was finding it difficult to come into school. He was going home to try to help the other boy to come in the following day. I thought what a contrast it was to pupils being sent home to hang around on street corners; they were engaged in doing something positive and in addressing their own behaviour. I was impressed by another aspect of the project. I often meet teachers and head teachers and they are sometimes stressed—being a teacher is a stressful occupation. One would think that teachers who deal with the most behaviourally challenged children would be the most stressed, but they were not; they were incredibly enthusiastic. They often do not take a coffee break. If other teachers are too busy to give them relief, they are quite happy to work with the young people through their coffee breaks because they are so enthused by and passionate about their work. The only concern is how the project will continue to be funded once the alternatives to exclusion project ceases, as it is a three-year pot of money. Can ministers consider how these excellent projects can continue? They are on short-term funding. How can we ensure that those excellent projects continue once the three years is up? I extend an invitation from the head teacher, Colin Mitchell, who said that he would be delighted to see the Minister for Education and Young People or the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People, if they are ever down in that neck of the woods, to demonstrate to them the value of the work that is being done. Let us see how projects that are examples of excellence can continue, because they are important and contribute greatly to the support of young people who otherwise would have behavioural difficulties.

I will describe experiences of my constituents that show why I welcome the partnership proposals to make our communities safer. Last summer, I was contacted by a group of residents in my constituency. They were neighbours who were frustrated beyond endurance by a gang of young people in their early teens. The group complained of abusive behaviour and language, harassment and vandalism to the local school and their properties. Everybody knew who was doing the deeds—they were local kids whose parents did not seem to bother—but it seemed that nothing could be done about them.  I met the community police officer, who was frustrated, too. He had a record of reported incidents and had pressed charges against those involved, but the system was slow and it seemed that he could not do much to improve the situation. He had spoken to the parents of the young people, but one father had said that the kids were out of control and that he could do nothing about it. I met the reporters to the children's panel, who knew the family well and were anxious to make progress. They told me about a list of problems that prevented them from making progress, such as a lack of sufficient places in secure accommodation, especially in our locality, which meant that the panel often had to rely on foster carers. There is a lack of alternative disposals for people who are under 16 and there is a serious problem with the number of social workers who are trained and available to implement the disposals. Eventually, the ringleader returned to secure accommodation, the dark nights came in and the situation seemed to quieten down. However, last week, two upset and angry ladies called at my constituency office. They were the mother and grandmother of a very young girl who had been seriously assaulted, possibly by someone with a sexual intent. It was fortunate that a passer-by pulled the teenage boy off the girl and called the police, which allowed charges to be brought. Of course, the girl was terrified. Her terror increased as the boy and his friend took to harassing her family, to hanging around outside her school as she left and outside her house and her grandmother's house, and following her to the shops. The police and lawyers said that nothing could be done to prevent the teenage boy and his friend from doing that. That was when the women approached me in frustration. During our discussion, it soon became clear that the boy was one of the gang that had harassed the neighbourhood a year before. Unfortunately, he had graduated from petty street crime to violent crime that could place him on the sex offenders register. Those women wanted to know why the law could not protect that little girl from harassment by her attacker. They felt that the assailant was given greater consideration than the victim. I promised them that we would try to change the law and redress the balance in favour of the victim. Sadly, such incidents are replicated in every constituency. That is why I welcome the commitments in "A Partnership for a Better Scotland" to legislate to tackle antisocial behaviour. Perpetrators who are under 16 should no longer believe that they are exempt from the law because of their age. I welcome the  commitment to make parents accept their responsibility for controlling their children's behaviour. During my time as a councillor in Ayrshire and as an MSP, several police officers have reported to me that, late at night, they have quite often picked up children as young as 12 or 13 who were drunk and getting up to mischief. The police officers have taken them home to their parents, but their parents' attitude has been, "What do you expect me to do about it?" That is not good enough. Such parents are letting their children and their communities down. However, it would be wrong to give the impression that all young people are involved in crime. The vast majority of young people have responsible parents and behave compassionately and respectfully towards one another, despite the many pressures on young people nowadays. Alongside taking tough action to deal with antisocial behaviour and the lack of parental responsibility, we must help to support young people and enable them to make positive choices not to get involved in crime or drugs. At the beginning of this week, I was fortunate to witness such a scheme when I attended a performance that was given by young people from S1 to S4 at the Moffat Youth Theatre. With the assistance of drama instructors, they had put together a moving series of plays about bullying, social inclusion and lack of self-esteem and they explored ways in which they could reject becoming involved in criminal and antisocial activity. I am delighted that Moffat Youth Theatre has just been successful in obtaining a grant of £185,000 from the Community Fund to expand such excellent work. I am also pleased that the partnership agreement directs an extra £10 million to provide additional support for localised action and initiatives to divert young people away from crime. Making Scotland a better place to live means taking tough action where individuals act against the collective interest and giving people the opportunity to make positive choices. The proposals in the new partnership agreement do both. I congratulate colleagues in the Labour party and the Liberal Democrat party for their hard work in putting together a programme that will make a real difference to the real problems that are faced by people in our constituencies.

I congratulate Richard Baker on his maiden speech and I congratulate Trish Godman on her first debate as a Deputy Presiding Officer. Richard  Baker must have wondered why somebody from Dumfries signed his motion and whether it was a slip of the pen or the mouse that added my name to it. I do not know much about dental services in Grampian, but I can empathise with people there, because the situation is replicated throughout Scotland outwith the central belt, as members have said. I will say a few words about the equivalent situation in Dumfries and Galloway, which has one dentist for every 4,000 people. I had extensive and helpful communications with Mary Mulligan about my constituents' problems, which resulted in five salaried posts being made available last summer. Although those posts were advertised throughout Europe, we have had not one single applicant for them. We have had one new dentist in the past couple of years. He came from Scandinavia and he did not last long. When he saw the state of my constituents' teeth, he returned home. Only two dentists have lists open in Dumfriesshire—one is in Lockerbie and one is in Sanquhar, which takes people north of Auldgirth. My family and I have no dentist and my children have not had a dental check-up for two and a half years. Even if I overcame my fundamental dislike of private health care, that would not make the situation much better. An emergency service has operated between 10 am and 12 pm on Sundays for the past few months. It has received 1,150 emergency calls and it received 43 calls on the first three Sundays of May. That service is pressured, because it relies on dentists to give up their free time on Sundays to operate it. As Jamie Stone said, although we might welcome the idea of free dental checks, we do not have a dentist to go to for those checks at the moment. Last night, I watched with interest "Frontline Scotland", which discussed the case of the engineer and doctor asylum seekers who want to work in this country. I note that the Scottish Executive is pressing the Home Secretary to allow asylum seekers who have rare skills to work during the time that they are waiting for their claims to be processed. If dentists who seek asylum in this country came to Dumfries and Galloway, I am sure that we would welcome them with open arms and, indeed, with open mouths.

I congratulate the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care on his appointment and on his first speech in his new role. Over the past 18 months, I have not kept up with the issue with which the orders deal, but before that I had two and a half happy years as a member of the Rural Affairs Committee and then the Rural Development Committee. I certainly never heard it referred to as a sin bin and I had no idea that I was in the sin bin—but I know now, as they say. Fergus Ewing paid tribute to Rhoda Grant for her tremendous work. She is a former MSP who is sadly missed by Labour members. I was well aware of the work that she and John Farquhar Munro did on the issue.  The minister will be aware from other members' speeches of the concerns about the testing regime. It is necessary and correct that public safety must be paramount and I will support the orders for that reason. However, we know that the toxin tends to be concentrated in parts of the scallop that are not generally consumed. I certainly would not fancy eating the gonads of scallops. I would be grateful if the minister advised the chamber whether the testing regime has had further consideration in the European Union, what role the Scottish Executive has had in any such discussions and what conclusions have been reached. As we have heard, the concern is that the results do not reflect accurately the toxicity of the edible portion of a scallop. Confidence in the research is necessary. I echo Eleanor Scott's concern that the primary causes of the toxin and the toxic algae might be environmental factors, such as the by-products of fish farming or fertilisers that are washed in.

That is a reassurance, but some environmental factor must be the cause. Until we identify the cause of the problem, the scallop fishing industry will continue to be threatened by its recurrence. It is important to undertake research to ensure that we understand better the root cause.

I congratulate Dennis Canavan on having his motion selected for the penultimate members' business debate of the Parliament's four-year session. I am replying on behalf of the Scottish Executive, not on behalf of the Scottish Premier League. I can well understand the frustration and uncertainty that Dennis Canavan and his fellow Falkirk supporters feel about the situation that they would face if their team won the first division. It is clear that the club has made great progress over the past five years. I have considerable sympathy for Falkirk's position, as I am hopeful that Queen of the South might be in a similar position in a year or two. We are lying fifth in the first division, but we were promoted only at the end of last season. The Queens are definitely on their way. As members are probably aware, the Minister for Finance and Public Services announced that an additional £2 million of capital consent money would be available to Falkirk Council to go towards the building of the new community stadium at Westfield. I am aware that Falkirk remains in discussion with the SPL as to whether its plans to release the Excelsior stadium from Airdrie United would enable it to operate within the Scottish Premier League's criteria. I am also aware that Inverness Caledonian Thistle, which is currently in third place in the first division, has asked me to meet the SPL. Last month, the local MP, David Stewart, announced that he had asked the Office of Fair Trading to examine whether the criteria for entry into the SPL are consistent with UK competition law. However, as Brian Monteith indicated, there are a number of clubs on the other side of the argument. Those include St Johnstone, which is currently in second place in the first division, and Partick Thistle, St Mirren and Airdrie. Those clubs invested significantly in their stadia in the hope of promotion to the SPL, so they might well feel aggrieved if the criteria were now changed in retrospect.

The member is right in saying that assistance was made available to some clubs. I know that clubs have a difficult choice when deciding whether to invest in players or in stadia. Some years ago, Queen of the South was criticised for selling players in order to invest in the football ground. That is a difficult argument for football clubs to win. However, the rules that we are debating were agreed upon by the membership of the Scottish Football League when the SPL was established. As other members have mentioned, the rules arose from the report of Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry into the Hillsborough stadium disaster in which 96 people were killed. That report recommended that all grounds of premier league clubs should be all-seated and the recommendation was enforced voluntarily by the football authorities in Scotland. As Fergus Ewing said, the recommendation was incorporated into national planning policy guideline 11 by the Scottish Office in 1996, although that guideline is simply a statement of policy and does not have a statutory basis. Under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, every designated sports ground with a spectator capacity of more than 10,000 must obtain a safety certificate from the relevant local authority. That requirement applies to all stadia, not just those of the SPL clubs. The 10,000 capacity to which I referred can be seated or standing or a combination of both. Like Scott Barrie, I have some affection for standing on the terraces, as I always feel that the atmosphere is better on the terraces than in the seated area. Personally, I would find it a matter for regret if Queen of the South had to give up its terraces. In 1994, the football authorities determined that the stadia of premier league clubs should be all-seated and should have a minimum capacity of 10,000. Clubs that were promoted during the 1993-94 season were allowed a period of five years in which to become all-seated. That condition was confirmed when the SPL was established. As Dennis Canavan mentioned, UEFA is looking to introduce a requirement that the stadia of all clubs in an affiliated association's top division must have a minimum capacity of 10,000. I am aware that legal action has been proposed and, although I do not advocate such a course of action, that may be the only way to determine whether the rules governing membership of the SPL are legal. The SPL has stated that it is confident that its rules will stand up to legal challenge.  One thing of which I am certain is that there needs to be constructive discussion among all parties. The Executive would be happy to participate in any such dialogue and we would be prepared to consult on the reduction of the 10,000 limit for the issuing of a safety certificate. However, of itself, such a move would not affect the SPL's criteria. We would also need to be careful to ensure that there were no repercussions for the smaller clubs in the lower divisions. That would need to be taken into account if we entered into those debates. In conclusion, it is clear that the first division has some exciting football. I hope that a resolution can be found that allows the best clubs to gain the promotion that they deserve.

None at present. Castle Tioram is a scheduled monument that is in private ownership and the maintenance of the castle is the responsibility of the owners. The owners were refused scheduled monument consent for the restoration of the castle and ministers accepted the reporter's recommendation, which was also against the granting of scheduled monument consent following a public local inquiry. The owners have lodged an appeal against that decision with the Court of Session. We have received legal advice that it would not be appropriate to comment further on the matter at this time.

The member will be aware that there are many strong differences of opinion on the future of Castle Tioram, although everyone agrees that the monument is extremely important and that the current situation is extremely difficult. I have discussed the issue with Historic Scotland and tried to get a date for the hearing of the appeal that has been lodged, but we have not been able to ascertain that date. The situation is certainly unsatisfactory, but, after the hearing, we will be able to make progress one way or another.

It is indeed sub judice at the moment. I know that the member has strong views on the matter, as many others do. I say in response to him only that an independent reporter also came out against granting scheduled monument consent—Historic Scotland did not make that decision; the reporter did. Ministers acted on the reporter's advice.

The possible bid by London for the 2012 Olympic games was raised at the UK sports cabinet meeting on 8 January. However, the discussions were general and did not focus on whether elements of the games could be dispersed around the country, although I believe that that could be a possibility.

I am hesitant to make commitments for future members of the Scottish Executive, but should the bid be made and be successful, Scotland certainly could bid for elements of the competition. As Ian Jenkins suggests, football would certainly be one such event as it could be dispersed around the country to utilise our many excellent stadia. We could also consider the provision of training facilities. There are certainly possibilities for Scotland to be involved, although in the unlikely event of Scotland being an independent country by 2012, we might have less success in making such a bid.

At the moment, the bid is predominantly the responsibility of Westminster, the Department for Culture, Media and Sport and the Greater London Authority, as London would be the main beneficiary of the Olympic games. However, as members know, we have some excellent facilities in Scotland, and I believe that Scotland should be looking to maximise the benefits to the Scottish economy of the dispersal of a number of the events throughout the UK.

I, too, congratulate Tom McCabe on securing tonight's debate. It was only yesterday afternoon that I learned that the debate was to take place, so I was only slightly in advance of Brian Monteith on that. I congratulate all the members who have managed to contribute so well to the debate at such short notice. My only regret is that, in order to get my notes together last night, I had to forgo the first night of "Rigoletto".

I am glad that someone is sorry for me.

I know that I did. I was most disappointed, but it was perhaps worth it to hear about and celebrate the good work of Hamilton International Sports Trust. It is also important to have the opportunity to talk about the importance of youth sports. I believe that seven competitors from the  Hamilton area competed at the Commonwealth games in Manchester, including the judo bronze medal winner, Fiona Robertson, who I had the pleasure of meeting when I was in Manchester. That demonstrates the success that the trust has had in bringing on young athletes. The trust is an excellent example of a number of agencies working together. I find it refreshing to hear about an organisation that received £1,000 16 years ago and has not come back for more since then. That bears testament to the organisation's tremendous fundraising record. I am also pleased that the Hamilton International Sports Trust is promoting minority sports. Promotion of excellence and community involvement are important and we cannot have one without the other. As other members have said, we need grass-roots involvement and youth involvement to produce the elite athletes of the future. At the same time, elite athletes should be able to inspire the young people who are coming on. As many members have said, sport is central to the promotion of social justice. It is also essential to the delivery of national priorities in education and health improvement. The Executive's physical activities strategy will be published tomorrow. There is a desperate need to address the low level of physical activity in our population. We must foster habits of physical activity in young people. That will enable them not only to live longer—medical intervention can enable people to live longer—but to live healthier. As we have heard, sport has the potential to regenerate communities. It empowers citizens and contributes to crime prevention by providing alternatives to anti-social behaviour. I agree with Tom McCabe that, unfortunately, the local and national media tend to prefer to concentrate on the bad things that young people do rather than the great successes that many young people achieve. It is a pity that we do not see better reporting of young people's successes in the field of sport. Donald Gorrie is quite correct to say that the clubs are the cornerstone of sport in Scotland. We acknowledge that and are in discussions with sportscotland. One of sport 21's original aims was to foster more coaches and to provide better training for them. Unfortunately, we have not been able to deliver on that as well as we wanted to and we will return to that issue in the review of sport 21. Johann Lamont made an important point about girls and young women. Unfortunately, girls' level of physical activity declines much faster than that of boys. By the age of 14, the majority of young girls are not taking sufficient physical exercise and  we must address that in a number of ways. The same is true of older women, and I say that as someone who does not take enough exercise. We have a number of programmes aimed at young people. I will not use up all my time by going through them, but examples include the new opportunities fund, the quality of life funding and end-year flexibility money. School sports development officers have been around for almost four years but that programme will be extended and we hope that it will be taken up in all schools, so that we can introduce young people to as many different sports as possible and give them choices, so that they can find a sport that they like and which they will continue to do in later life. A scheme that is being worked up at the moment is the sports ambassador scheme. In that, we are aiming to use top sportspeople, such as the Commonwealth games medal winners, to work with young people and to provide good role models for them, and to promote healthy lifestyles and activities. I hope that we will be making an announcement on that soon. A number of members mentioned sports facilities. The 2002 spending review includes a commitment to a national indoor facility. Certainly, part of the Euro 2008 bid legacy will focus on community and youth sports. Unfortunately, I cannot yet give Johann Lamont details, but I am sure that someone will be making an announcement in the future. We have been engaged in recent discussions with sportscotland and others about future requirements for indoor training facilities. We have also had discussions with the Scottish Football Association about its review of youth football and about the sort of training facilities that are required to improve our football chances. Jamie Stone mentioned the problems of rural and remote areas. I recognise those problems because I come from a rural area. I know that access can be more difficult in more geographically remote areas. Access will be part of the review strategy. While I am on that subject, members might be aware of the sportscotland consultation document "Time to Speak Up". The final review document will be launched at the end of March, and I hope that members of all parties will come to the launch. The document is not party political; it is about Scotland's sports strategy, and I hope that we will all be able to sign up to it. On support for young athletes and their kit, which Tom McCabe has raised with me, the governing bodies are responsible for sending out representative teams that are properly prepared. The talented athletes programme includes some contributions towards kit. The junior groups  funding can also provide some funding towards kit, but that would go through the governing bodies. On start-up grants for trusts, I am happy to discuss that with sportscotland. Off the top of my head, I wonder whether some of them might qualify for awards from the Community Fund. I am taking a stab in saying that, but I am happy to look into the matter. Irene McGugan made the point that people do not know about diets and supplements. The Scottish Institute of Sport at elite level provides a sports medicine department and advice on diet and appropriate exercise. That advice is also available through the six area institutes, so mechanisms and structures are in place to provide that sort of advice to young people. There is not much more for me to say, because my seven minutes are up. I think that we are all agreed, irrespective of political difference, on the importance of physical activity and sport to the health of our nation and to the health and well-being of our upcoming generations. I am pleased that Tom McCabe secured the debate, and that we have had an opportunity to hear contributions from different sides of the chamber on how the issue can be furthered in future years.  Meeting closed at 16:26.

I congratulate Robin Harper on securing the debate and on giving us an opportunity to respond to members' concerns on a number of issues and not only the text of the motion. In view of his rather snide comment about prepared speeches, I reassure Robin Harper that I prepare my own notes from various bits of advice that I get from officials, so he can blame me if he does not like my speech. It is unfortunate that there seems to be a tendency to concentrate only on the negative at the moment. Contrary to the impression given by some sections of Scotland's media, Scotland's theatre is very strong. That is not to say that it is without its problems, but Scotland's theatre is successful. We should spend more time thinking about those successes and being proud of them and not just talk about the problems of funding. Rhona Brankin was correct to draw attention to some of the fine playwrights we have at the moment. There were eight nominations of Scottish companies at the Barclay Awards and three of the successful four were theatre companies. As Brian Monteith mentioned, there have been sell-out runs of "The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie" at the Royal Lyceum Theatre. There is also the Traverse Theatre's 40 th anniversary programme. The fact that companies south of the border are looking to recruit some of our top directors is a demonstration of how successful some of those people have been rather than a cause for complaint and dissent. Much has been made of comparisons between theatre funding in Scotland and in England. Rhona Brankin is correct—the levels of funding per head of population are similar.

No, I would like to continue. There has been a 33 per cent increase in theatre funding from 2002 to 2004—16 per cent last year and 17 per cent this year. Twenty-three core funded organisations received almost £7 million from the Scottish Arts Council. The Arts Council of England is bringing up its support to £70 million a year. Given that England has 10 times the population of Scotland, similar amounts of money are being invested in theatre.

No, I am not giving way. I have only seven minutes and I want to get on. The Arts Council of England supports 209 core funded organisations, which is a similar number, per head of population, to the number supported  by the Scottish Arts Council. If we consider the figures—as I have—we find a much wider divergence in the amount of funding. Some theatres in England receive very small amounts—perhaps £10,000 or £20,000—whereas— [Interruption] . Will Mr Quinan please not shout from a seated position: it is quite unnecessary.

Let us be honest: some theatres are also getting large sums of money. In Scotland, the smallest awards are around £50,000 or £60,000. We have a narrower range of funding. Robin Harper rightly said that there has been a problem concerning local authority supported funding—particularly to building-based core funded organisations, which has fallen since 1994-95. There is now a shortfall of some £405,000. We discovered last year that additional funding provided through the Executive and the Scottish Arts Council to some of our core funded organisations resulted in a reduction in support from local authorities. The unfortunate result was that those CFOs did not get the benefit we hoped they would get from the reallocation. I do not have time to go through the settlements for individual theatres, but they go up by as much as 30 per cent for Borderline Theatre Company. Admittedly the increase has been made through the reallocation of £1 million, but there have been significant increases for a number of CFOs. Much has been made of the total funding of the Scottish Arts Council. Brian Monteith is wrong: I do not know where he got his figures. The figures I have show that in real terms the Scottish Arts Council is faring slightly better than the Scottish Executive, because the Scottish Executive budget will fall in real terms from £18.428 billion in 2000-01 to £18.286 billion in 2003-04, or by 0.77 per cent. Over the same period, the Scottish Arts Council budget will increase from £35 million to £37.2 million, or by 6.6 per cent. For those who want Mike Watson and me to vire other parts of the tourism, culture and sport budget over to the Scottish Arts Council—

I do not have time. I ask those people to explain what parts of our budget they would cut. Would they cut—

Mr Quinan should sit down. I have told him that I will not take an intervention from him.

Do they want to take money from VisitScotland, from sports programmes in schools, from support for our historic environment or from support for Gaelic? They have to answer some of those questions before they make such allegations. There has been significant debate about the national theatre. I want to take the opportunity to restate the Executive's position. The national theatre remains an Executive commitment. However, we consider that without a secure package of funding for the full project, it would be inadvisable to proceed with detailed implementation at this stage. We believe that the theatre infrastructure needs to be secured in advance—Donald Gorrie made some good points about that. We recognise that the Equity and Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union settlement places additional burdens on theatres. As a trade unionist, I would not agree to the funding of the national theatre on the back of not paying union rates to theatre workers.

No, I will not. There have been many calls for a review of arts funding. We would be happy to consider that. We have not yet heard any formal proposals from the Scottish Arts Council but, as Mike Watson said in his recent interview with The Scotsman , it would have to be a root-and-branch review and it would have to include the role and structure of the Scottish Arts Council. I remind people who call for a McCrone of the arts that the McCrone settlement was based on modernisation to release funds. All I want to say in summing up is that—as Mike Watson and I do personally—the Scottish Executive does and will continue to value and support, and wishes to fund more fully, the Scottish theatre.

I promise that I will neither quote my own poetry nor sing. Those are both things that I prefer to do in private. If I was going to adopt a word, which I have not done yet, it might be "scunnered", because I am a bit scunnered by some of the girning that has gone on, and also by some of the misunderstandings that exist. The matter for debate is how the cultural strategy has been progressed, not whether it is a daft policy or, indeed, whether we should have a policy at all. I was a little confused by some of the misunderstandings about the report. The report does not exist to tick a load of boxes and say what we have done; it is slightly different, and when I saw it I congratulated my colleague Mike Watson, who was behind the way in which it is put together, because it is a refreshing, new and interesting way of producing the data. It is not just a boring table of facts; it has information that people could find useful, examples of good practice, and examples of some things that the Executive is behind. There was no intention in producing the report of trying to claim that the Executive is doing anything—

No, I have only just started and I have not got long, so sit down for the moment. The national cultural strategy was an aspiration before devolution. I was the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities' cultural spokesperson prior to devolution, and I am well aware of the pressure from the cultural sector at the time for Scotland to develop a national cultural strategy when it got its own Parliament. A national cultural strategy is not about the Government telling people how culture is done; a national cultural strategy has to be a partnership among people at all levels of government, the voluntary sector and the business sector, to which Mary Scanlon referred. The strategy is not about imposing a policy on people; it develops and enables partnerships and facilitates various art forms. It should also allow the development of our creative industries, which are often an unrecognised sector in the Scottish economy. They generate something like £5 billion in the Scottish economy every year and 70,000 jobs. The Executive sees the importance of developing a framework that will allow the creative industries to flourish and be recognised for their contribution to Scotland. Mike Russell had some funny things to say and was quite amusing about the annual report. I remind Mike Russell that the Executive supports culture and the arts through other bodies, through non-departmental public bodies such as the Scottish Arts Council and Scottish Screen, and through the national institutions. Mike Russell seems to object to page 24, which refers to investment in Scottish story telling and the £800,000 that the Scottish Arts Council awarded to the Netherbow Arts Centre, but anything such as that is in accordance with the national cultural strategy.

I am not saying that that is instruction. My reply to the Conservatives is that what is involved is not instruction from the Government, but partnership, such as our partnership with the Scottish Arts Council. The strategy is for the Scottish nation, not the Scottish Executive. Page 25 of the annual report describes activities that the Scottish Arts Council undertakes through the National Library of Scotland, which is funded by the Scottish Executive. Those actions are  important to our culture's development. I will not apologise for the inclusion of examples of good practice from all sectors in our annual report. Murdo Fraser did not like the fact that we had a strategy. The Tories think that culture will somehow exist out there and will either thrive or go to the wall. The idea that the Government has no role in helping to nurture culture is ridiculous.

I am pleased to tell Murdo Fraser that the document and its web conversion cost £18,000. Unfortunately, that amount would not go far towards funding free musical instrument tuition in schools, which might cost several hundred thousand pounds. Many members referred to music tuition, which the Executive considers important. As we have said, we intend to make an announcement about music tuition in school in the near future. I hope that that will be of interest. Murdo Fraser said that the annual report contains no picture of the Edinburgh tattoo. The national cultural strategy contains a picture of the tattoo. I do not criticise him for not knowing that, because he was not an MSP when the document was published, but we have referred to the tattoo. All parts of our cultural heritage are important. Members made many good points. Some expressed concern about arts funding—we all acknowledge that concern. I will give a few statistics. The culture and sport portfolio receives £170 million a year at present. After the Scottish budget 2002, that figure will rise to £217 million in 2005-06. The Executive will give the cultural sector funding of £156 million this year. That figure will rise by 18 per cent to £184 million in 2005-06. Members referred to spending in other countries. The projected spend in England in 2005-06 is £9 a head. I admit that, under the previous budget, spending in Scotland would have been £7.90 a head, but if we include the £10.8 million from the Scottish budget 2002, that figure rises to £11 a head. If we include funding for Gaelic, which we all agree is an extremely important part of Scottish culture, whatever our view on the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill, the sum rises to £13.90 per capita. It cannot be said that we do not appreciate the arts or that we do not fund the arts.

Mike Russell is aware of the different pressures in the Scottish budget, which relate to geography and other matters. We are ahead of England on expenditure per person on the arts. I make no apology for that. I do not have time to deal with all the points that were made. I appreciate what Mr Russell said about the level of noise in the chamber, which is always a problem at this time of day.

Unfortunately, I am not possessed with as loud a voice as certain other members in the chamber, so it is more difficult for me to make myself heard. I turn to the traditional arts. I look forward to Cathy Peattie's report, to which Karen Gillon referred. As a result of my intervention on Linda Fabiani, members will be aware that we have been funding the traditional arts. We will continue to examine how we can promote the traditional sector. Donald Gorrie rightly said that the arts sector has important linkages with tourism. That is one of the reasons why tourism, culture and sport have been brought together. I commend the document to members and I urge them to reject both the amendments. As my colleague Mike Watson said, the Tory one is silly and the SNP motion is unnecessary. I commend the motion to the chamber.

I appreciate Linda Fabiani's interest in the traditional arts. Funding of traditional excellence is one of our priorities. Does not the member recognise that, for example, the Scottish Arts Council is providing funding in a three-year programme to promote the traditional arts? Does not she recognise the £700,000 from the excellence fund that went to Plockton High School? I am confused about why the member thinks that nothing has happened since the strategy was first published.

It is a pity that the motion focuses on the constitution because there is much in the motion on which we could get a fair consensus of agreement across the chamber.  As Ian Jenkins said, it is true that the devolution settlement had difficulty with aspects of broadcasting and the media. It is no surprise that some aspects of the devolution settlement were clearer than others. In terms of broadcasting in particular, there were competition issues with competition policy being reserved. There were also the issues of devolved responsibility for the contribution to economic development and social justice. Those issues have made the devolution settlement more difficult. I am one of those who believe that devolution is an evolutionary process. I might not be proved right in future, but I do not imagine that everything is set in stone. However, we have a devolution settlement in the Scotland Act 1998 and there is little point in continually returning to discuss that settlement. I share the concerns about the SMG situation. I believe that a newspaper owner or editor has every right to a particular political position. They have every right to be against the Scottish Parliament if they wish to be so. I do not agree with Andrew Neil's politics, but I do like "Despatch Box" and will be sorry if that programme ceases to exist. However, I would be worried if the SMG broadsheet coverage was the only position available to the vast majority of people in Scotland. A merger would restrict opportunities for quality journalists who want to remain and work in Scotland. I know that the National Union of Journalists has recently expressed its concern about the possible merger. However, if we refer back to Tavish Scott's question to the First Minister on 3 October, members will recall that the First Minister has pledged to make representations to the ministers responsible for competition policy at the appropriate time. I am certain that he will do so. I am afraid that, unlike the Conservatives' motion, I do not think that broadcasting is identical to banking. I do not believe that a free market would safeguard regional broadcasting. We need the public sector obligation and the commitment to independent regional, educational and quality programmes. Those are part of the so-called second tier of regulation that will be applied flexibly and after consultation with the broadcaster. However, it is necessary to have such regulation in order to ensure the quality of the service. Whether there is a Scottish Six is a decision for the BBC and not politicians to make. I do not necessarily believe the stories that are circulating in the newspapers that Gordon Brown or Tony Blair or whoever is somehow stymieing the BBC and preventing it from making that decision. David Mundell made an important point about  Border Television. The issue is not that the SNP would be blocking the airwaves to prevent Border Television coming into Scotland. The question is why Border Television should continue to operate a Scottish opt-out when it has been taken over by Granada and will form part of the ITV channel. What is the point of that? There is a potential that if the regulations covering the operation in Scotland are different from those in England, those companies that have cross-border operations will not want to continue with the Scottish side. As someone who represents the south of Scotland, that is my concern and I suspect that it is shared by others who represent the south of Scotland. I reassure all members that the Executive will continue to take a strong interest in the issue. I say to Karen Gillon that we will continue to have on-going discussions about the communications bill and representation within Ofcom. It is on record that the First Minister requested a seat on the central board. The DCMS feels strongly that it should not be a representative board, but that it should be a board of individuals and that there will not be representation for any particular part of the UK. However, the DCMS has conceded—as Mike Watson described—on issues to do with a Scottish committee and Scottish representation on the content board and consumer panel. That demonstrates that the interventions of the First Minister and the proposals of the Executive have been taken on board by the DCMS in the draft communications bill. Those discussions will continue. We are continuing, as Mike Watson said, to try to secure a better place for Gaelic broadcasting in Scotland. We recognise the importance of digital broadcasting and in particular whether any progress can be made on digital broadcasting and regional interests. That issue will form the subject of an important series of discussions. I reassure the chamber that the Executive is concerned about the effects on the media and broadcasting in Scotland. Those are reserved, but we fully recognise that they have important interactions with many of our devolved responsibilities. We will continue to have discussions with representatives in the UK, as will Scottish MPs. We return 72 members of Parliament to the UK Parliament, and they have a responsibility to represent Scotland's interests there also.

I congratulate Rhoda Grant on securing the debate and I congratulate all the members who spoke, because the debate has been good. Members highlighted the many and varied aspects of the bid, which make it strong. Like other speakers, I congratulate the bid  team on producing such a strong bid and a well-developed set of proposals. The bid is imaginative and audacious and it shows the team's pride in the region. The views of the members from Inverness and the Highland areas reflect that pride. When the bid was made, some people did not seem to appreciate the importance of the region's relationship with the city and how the city reflects the rural areas. Inverness was the county town originally, but it eventually became the regional capital and is now a city in its own right. Those who, to some extent, scorned the fact that the region was being included in the bid did not appreciate that such relationships are important in rural areas. As Jamie Stone said, that is what Bryan Beattie referred to as a spokes-of-the-wheel approach, which came from the bid team's breadth of vision. Members referred to the large number of spokes in the bid wheel, such as the work that is being done with young people, the pledges to young people and the contribution to the bid by young people, including Annie Marrs from Highland youth voice. I did not realise that she was a former pupil of Maureen Macmillan's. She went to London to make a presentation to the Department for Culture, Media and Sport on 24 September. That bid was produced partly by young people and was presented by young people. The cultural pledge has reflected what many of us in the Executive feel that we want to do with school co-ordinators. We may be thinking along the same lines as the bid team. A science centre has been proposed, and as a former scientist, I welcome science coming into culture. Science and the arts have much in common. Jamie Stone referred to the development of a cultural quarter. Last night, I was at a production of "The Duchess of Malfi" at Dundee Rep Theatre, which is part of a cultural quarter in Dundee and relates to the educational experience of the University of Dundee. That is important to Dundee and I am certain that such a development in Inverness will strengthen its cultural base and be educationally important for the relationship with the university of the Highlands and Islands. As my portfolio covers tourism, culture and sport, I am pleased that sports events are part of the bid. Rhoda Grant referred to the tour de France and I congratulate Fergus Ewing on completing the marathon. I admire people who manage to remain fit in a job such as ours, because that is difficult. As many people—including Winnie Ewing, John Farquhar Munro and Maureen Macmillan—have said, the Gaelic language and the Scots language are important. They are important to the cultural  heritage of the area. The bid team emphasised access. I will take up Mary Scanlon's issue about Caithness United, because access is an important part of the bid. Groups that are under-represented in cultural activity are being considered. The bid team is considering people with special educational needs, and community transport, and will hold a meeting about access issues. As Jamie McGrigor said, the area is strong on the environment, which will play an important part in the bid. Maureen Macmillan and Jamie Stone referred to tourism, for which European capital of culture status would be valuable. Jamie Stone is right that the gastronomic delights of the Highlands should never be forgotten. The bid reflects the breadth of the definition of culture, which I am pleased to see. I am depressed when people say, "Culture has nothing to do with me." Culture has everything to do with everybody. It is huge and broad and includes a number of activities. Fergus Ewing was right to mention the strength and importance of the international image of the Highlands. All of us agree that success is extremely important. Winnie Ewing hit the nail on the head when she spoke of the Glasgow debate and the importance of Glasgow's successful bid. Success would make a real difference to Inverness. It does not have a cultural backdrop over the centuries, but a successful bid would make a huge difference to the city and the region. That is incredibly important and we should get that message across to those who make the decisions. The Executive has been pleased to support the bid. It has done so financially, with many partners, and the First Minister and Mike Watson attended the launch on 25 March. I have had the good fortune to meet Bryan Beattie a couple of times. He has enthusiasm in buckets. I have known him for many years, during which he has been associated with the high arts, and I am sure that he will take his huge enthusiasm to Cork. I have not yet met Bill Sylvester, but he seems to be of the same mould and he is enthusiastic, which is important. I have also discussed the matter with Tessa Blackstone from the DCMS. She listened politely and encouragingly, but was diplomatic enough not to give me any hints as to how the DCMS was thinking. We look forward to the announcement of the shortlist at the end of the month. I hope that Inverness will at least be one of the centres of excellence and that there will be funding for some strands of its bid. However, we want the gold medal—that would be the first prize for Inverness. I enjoyed reading the book. I have seen the video and listened to the compact disc. If there  were a T-shirt, I would be more than happy to wear it if that would help the bid to be successful.

I am pleased to hear that. We have all expressed enthusiasm for the bid. Let us hope that there is a good result at the end of the month. If our bids for both major events are successful, 2008 could be a wonderful year for Scotland. Let us hope that there is progress. Robin Harper reminded us that today is national poetry day. I appreciated Mary Scanlon's contribution. We must reflect on the tremendously strong literary and poetic heritage of the whole region. I am pleased that national poetry day has been celebrated by a new competition sponsored by The Herald . However, I say to the organisers that I did not notice Gaelic mentioned as one of the languages in which to write poetry. I hope that they will reflect on that and on the importance of encouraging poetry and literature in Gaelic, as well as in Scots and English. I am pleased to have taken part in the debate and look forward with great enthusiasm to the future. I am sure that, if the bid is successful, it will bring a tremendous amount to the Highlands. I am sure that many other areas of Scotland would look to how Inverness managed to achieve its aims. I congratulate all members who have spoken.  Meeting closed at 17:53.

All of us in Scotland should be proud of our nation's rich and diverse historical and cultural heritage. That heritage is a key focus of the national cultural strategy, which was launched in 2000. Since then we have worked with many agencies to support and promote our heritage. The first annual report on the implementation of the cultural strategy was published in October last year. The second annual report is due to be published in November. I commend those reports to the member, as they indicate the kinds of projects and achievements that we wish to promote.

We spend considerable sums on the museums sector. This year, the national  institutions received about £44 million and the Scottish Museums Council received £1.9 million. Local authorities contribute about £32 million to the upkeep of museums. I am happy to concede that there is a problem with the museums sector. Scotland has 400 independent museums and nine industrial museums, many of which are pressured financially. That is one motivation behind the current consultation and is the reason why we wish to produce an action plan on museums, to promote sustainable futures for museums.

I am happy to agree with the member that the demise of Cawdor is a concern. The promotion of Scottish literature is one priority in the Executive's cultural strategy. Recently, my colleague Mike Watson met the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to discuss local cultural strategies. I hope that local authorities bear in mind the importance of promoting Scottish culture in the library and education systems.

I am aware of the report, having spent a pleasant couple of hours at the Scottish Mining Museum with the member on Monday. I saw at first hand some of the problems there. I understand that the museum's board met Historic Scotland yesterday and I intend to discuss with Historic Scotland the findings of that meeting. Industrial heritage is an important part of the museums sector and I hope that we will find a way of stabilising the situation.

rose—

Michael Russell's speech is romantic. He surely must agree that unless we have a way of measuring performance we do not know whether we are doing any better. One of the Executive's aims is to improve the educating of creativity and the creativity of pupils. Unless we can measure how successful we are being, how will we know whether we are getting to where we want to be?

Before I answer the question, I would like to welcome, in my ministerial capacity, Scotland's junior chess champions, who are in the gallery this afternoon. Scottish Executive policy on the demolition of listed buildings is that no worthwhile building should be lost to our historic environment unless it can be demonstrated beyond reasonable doubt that every effort has been made by all concerned to find practical ways of keeping it. When reviewing proposals to demolish in the light of this policy, consideration is always given to matters of public safety and, where this is an issue, arrangements can be made for interim protective measures to be put in place if a decision on the application may be delayed. Where public safety is a matter of extreme concern, there are powers under the Building (Scotland) Act 1959 for building control authorities to take immediate action to make safe or demolish the building in question.

I will not make the obvious response to that. The member has raised the matter in writing  with me and he will be aware that the reporter on the inquiry when the application was called in found that there had been no attempt to sell the property at a marketable value. One of the reports taken for the purposes of the inquiry did not agree that there was a real risk to the building. If the constituent feels that that is not correct, it is open to him to go to Perth and Kinross Council for a second opinion. If he finds that the second opinion indicates that the building is dangerous, he can return the matter to the Executive.

I am well aware of the member's interest in Castle Tioram and the controversy surrounding that issue. Rhoda Grant will be aware that the applicants have lodged an appeal on a point of law. That went to the Court of Session on 22 March and a date has not yet been set for the appeal. I am not able to comment on that particular case as it is within the legal process.

I, too, congratulate Irene McGugan on securing today's debate. No one is trying to deny the local importance of either RRS Discovery or Verdant Works, or the national and international significance of the Discovery. Verdant Works is widely recognised as an important tourist attraction—VisitScotland would not have given it a five-star award were it not. However, that award is not a guarantor of direct central Government financial support. I will turn to the rather sanctimonious points made by Mr Russell. I have been lobbied by Kate Maclean for some time. She has not chosen to highlight the issue through a members' business debate, but she has worked extremely hard behind the scenes on behalf of Dundee Heritage Trust. She persuaded me to meet Dundee Heritage Trust and she has had meetings with Mike Watson, Andy Kerr and Allan Wilson. I make no apology for offering to talk to her about what she wanted out of the debate, because I know how hard she has worked on the issue in the past. It may well be that Irene McGugan has written to me about the matter—I do not recall having received a letter from Irene McGugan but I may be wrong and she may have written. I do recollect the fairly insistent lobbying by Kate Maclean on the matter.

I do not recall having seen that letter. I will chase that up.

Mr Russell is extremely amusing—he should not give up the day job. I do not in any way dispute the importance of the Discovery or Verdant Works. I would not be pleased to see either of the attractions close—that is not on anyone's agenda.

No, I want to get on. Scotland's industrial heritage sector is extremely important. Many independent museums—many of which are themselves significant—have items of  significance in their collections. Industrial museums make up nine of the 400 independent museums in Scotland. The national audit, about which many members seem to be rather cynical, identified how many national treasures we have dispersed throughout Scotland. That is why we are continuing to consider an action plan. Perhaps people do not want to hear about an action plan for Scotland's museums—perhaps they would prefer to have soundbites and bits and pieces of political argument. However, I want to develop a serious and sustainable museums strategy for Scotland, so that we do not lurch from funding crisis to funding crisis.

No. I do not want to continue to be interrupted. I want to make some progress. The independent sector is supported to a degree by local government. Dundee Heritage Trust receives £26,000 per annum from Dundee City Council. That contribution is important, although it is clear that it does not fill the gap that the industrial heritage museum faces. Other councils support other heritage museums: North Ayrshire Council gives £86,000 to the Scottish Maritime Museum and Dumfries and Galloway Council gives £35,000 to Wanlockhead. There is significant support from local authorities and their contribution is important. I will say more about that later. There is a balance to be struck between what central Government does and what local government does in terms of how funding should be directed. The only statutory responsibility that the Executive has is to fund the national institutions. The National Museums of Scotland will receive approximately £17.5 million in grant aid in this financial year. On top of that, the Scottish Museums Council, which is an independent membership organisation that advises Scottish ministers on museums policy, will receive approximately £1.2 million. That organisation has a membership of approximately 200 and it also provides financial support to local museums. In 2000, the original commitment in the national cultural strategy was an allocation of £3 million to fund strategic change. That was in recognition of the fact that the funding structures for the museums sector are not stable and there must be strategic change in the way in which we manage our museums so that they can continue without such crises. The Scottish Museums Council received £250,000, so that it could conduct a national audit. That was not for the sake of having an audit; it was for the sake of finding out what we have in Scotland, where the important artefacts are and how we can support those.  As has been mentioned, in December 2000, £1.26 million was allocated to support three of the industrial museums. I appreciate that that decision might have caused problems for other members of the sector, because it looked like three museums received special treatment. Members will appreciate that that happened before my time as a minister. The point was to try to stabilise those museums—they appeared to be in a period of crisis—until the national audit had been completed and a better policy could be developed. That leaves £1.5 million in the strategic change fund for the next two years. This year, £0.5 million is available. That £0.5 million was launched in May and provides grants of up to £100,000 to help to finance projects aimed at strategic change.

No. I want to elaborate on that point because it is important.

I have taken quite a number of interventions from the SNP. If members would stop chipping my ear, I would like to explore the possibility that the strategic change fund might be able to provide something for Verdant Works. To be eligible for a grant, museums must hold collections of national significance, and must be able to demonstrate best practice in building audiences, in building capacity—including partnerships, enterprise, tourism and education—and in increasing access to exhibits. That might include the help with marketing that Alex Johnstone talked about. I am not aware whether Dundee Heritage Trust has applied for funding from the strategic change fund, which is being managed by the Scottish Museums Council. Kate Maclean can take back to Dundee Heritage Trust the suggestion that it consider discussing with the Scottish Museums Council whether or not there is a possibility of grant.

I am pleased to hear that. That was something my officials did not make me aware of. I am grateful to Mike Russell for giving me that information. I am encouraged by that because Verdant Works, having done work on restructuring and increasing access, would hopefully be in a position to be considered favourably. I appreciate that the funding is not revenue funding that continues for a long period of time. It would only be available in two tranches over two years. However, it might give Dundee Heritage Trust a package of funding that would enable it to  continue until we can find another way.

David Davidson raises an important point. We have had the national audit and the current consultation was launched by Mike Watson in July. The consultation process is intended to develop the action plan for Scotland's museums. We have to be clear about who does what in the museums sector. I do not have a back pocket full of cheques so that every time—

Mike Russell referred to Tain during his contribution in the debate on the spending review. In response to that, I would say that we have to set up a structure and decide who does what. We must establish what is of national significance and what role the National Museums of Scotland should play, not only in supporting galleries and museums here in Edinburgh but also in supporting collections and items of national significance elsewhere. I would like a better plan to emerge from the audit, to determine how the statutory responsibility of the Scottish Executive can better support nationally significant collections throughout Scotland, rather than just those in museums in the capital. I assure David Davidson that I will examine the matter that he has raised. I agree that we should look more carefully at the situation, and that there might well be other issues about support for organisations that have not been supported in that way in the past. The issue is still under consideration, the consultation is still under way and the conference will happen. The consultation will cease on 6 December and I hope that the action plan will be ready in the spring. We should not spend too much more time talking about that, but I will say that we need to get the plan right. I cannot make promises about recurrent revenue funding. Mike Russell was right to spot the fact that there was no additional money in the spending review for the museums sector. There was a lot of money for many other things, but he was certainly correct in spotting that almost straight away. There is no additional money at the  moment, and I cannot give a guarantee at present. If Dundee Heritage Trust has gone to the strategic change fund, there may be some hope in that. I also hope that the trust will get involved in the consultation process. I would encourage anybody who is genuinely interested in the museums sector to get involved in the consultation process and in building an action plan to make museums in Scotland sustainable so that we do not continue in crisis. Umpteen museums say that they have deficits of £10,000, £30,000 or £100,000. We must get ourselves out of that mentality and into a situation in which Scotland's heritage infrastructure is on a sound financial footing. If a lot more money came my way for museums, I would not necessarily want the Executive to give it out directly. I would rather channel it through local authorities or other local agencies so that they could make decisions about what is valuable to local residents and what is important to the local economy. I do not want to be involved in a Big Brother style of government, in which we subsidise everything. I want to work with other people by channelling money through other partnerships and bodies.  I cannot give a commitment on recurrent revenue funding, as I do not have that money in the budget line. However, I do not want valuable and important heritage museums to be lost, and I hope that we will be able to find a way forward, through the discussions that will take place during the next two or three months.  Meeting closed at 17:58.

The SNP ranks seem to be making great play of the e-mail, which was not leaked to the SNP but sent to somebody with a similar surname to the member for whom it was intended.

No, just be quiet and listen. I sent the e-mail to two constituency members for Dundee, because Kate Maclean in particular had been very active in lobbying on the matter. The fact that they were two Labour members had nothing to do with it.

I have not had any direct discussions with sportscotland on skateboarding, although I discuss the matter with my youngest son quite frequently. I am pleased to note that skateboarding is regarded as a sport by the home sports councils, including sportscotland.

Skateboarding does not have a governing body and therefore sportscotland does not support a governing body for skateboarding. However, it recognises skateboarding as a sport. A number of facilities have been funded under a number of programmes in the past few years. Money is currently available, including through the New Opportunities Fund, for physical education in schools and in the £95 million that the Minister for Finance and Public Services announced in June. There have been a number of successful applications for skateboarding facilities and £100,000 will have gone to Dumfries and Galloway, I am pleased to say. I note that the money is included as an unidentified bid and hope that something will be forthcoming through the local authority to provide facilities for young people.

An individual planning application is referred to the relevant local authority and it is up to the authority to decide whether a location is appropriate. However, if the member wants to put further details in writing about his particular concern, I will happily take up the matter with my social justice colleagues and find out whether particular planning issues are involved.

I would like to start by associating myself with the remarks of David Mundell in respect of our colleague Adam Ingram who, I am sorry to learn, has been taken ill today. I hope that Mr Morgan will transmit to him all our good wishes for a speedy recovery. I am grateful to Mr Mundell for securing this debate. It enables me to talk a bit about discussions that have been taking place on the matter. Obviously, as a local member in Dumfries and Galloway who was heavily involved, like other members from the region, in the foot-and-mouth crisis, it is sometimes difficult to look back and think how recently all that happened and how devastating it was to so many people in so many industries. It is a mark of the extraordinary fortitude of the people of Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders that they were able to pick themselves up, recover and work with a vision of a future, when it would have been so easy to slide down into the depths of despair. I have met with several of the local stakeholder partners during the past few weeks and my colleague Mike Watson met with Dumfries and Galloway Tourist Board on 20 May. As members will know, the First Minister visited the region on Monday and took the opportunity to meet with Norma Hart, the chief executive of Dumfries and Galloway Tourist Board, and Norma Findlay. He received a copy of a detailed analysis of how they spent last year's allocation, which totalled—when all partners were taken into consideration—something like £1.6 million. I am grateful to Mike Watson and the First Minister for the attention that they have given to the representations that they received on the matter and for bearing with my many complaints on the issue. I would not like members to go away with the idea that I do not support what VisitScotland is doing in terms of product-based marketing, because I think that there are many values to places such as Dumfries and Galloway in an approach that looks at a particular strength of Scotland, whether that be hill walking, wildlife tourism or arts and heritage tourism. There is a particular strength in that type of marketing because it flags up what Scotland is good at and, by advertising the product, benefits those regions that might be less well known. For example, Dumfries and Galloway might be less well known for hill walking than the Highlands. We in the south of Scotland know of and appreciate the strengths of our region, but other people may not know about them. Product-based marketing gives the  opportunity for those strengths to be flagged up. The First Minister made an announcement in Dumfries on Monday about the eco-tourism co-ordinator. As David Mundell rightly said, the funding comes from rural development department money from last year. The eco-tourism project is aimed particularly at helping farmers to diversify into tourism. Therefore, the money will be available for grants to promote an eco-tourism product. We want to enable people to diversify and enable farmers to become involved in environmental discussions. The initiative is not the same as niche market tourism; it is a different project. I am grateful to the rural development department for making available that money, which was disbursed through VisitScotland. I am sure that that project will bear great fruit and I was grateful that the First Minister took the time to launch it. There is an increasing interest in eco-tourism. Although another area tourist board will take the lead on the niche marketing of eco-tourism, it is important that we develop it in Dumfries and Galloway for reasons that include the fact that we have the biggest wetland area in Scotland and therefore have a particular product that we can advertise. Tourism is one of Scotland's most important industries, accounting for £4 billion of expenditure and 200,000 tourism related jobs, which make up around 8 per cent of the work force. Of course, it is much more important in rural areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, where it accounts for more than 11 per cent of employment. One of the ironies of the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak was that Dumfries and Galloway's two most important industries, agriculture and tourism, were both badly affected. From the conversations that I have had with colleagues, I know that Scottish ministers recognise that Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders were particularly badly affected by the outbreak. That is one of the reasons why a lot of money was put into the area last year, including £1.65 million from the Scottish Tourist Board, which I believe has been put to good use. I was impressed with the detailed analysis that Dumfries and Galloway area tourist board has made of the money that has been allocated.

I am coming to a point that might be of interest to the member.  Mike Watson and I have listened to the views that have been expressed to us and have considered them carefully. As I said, Mike Watson and the First Minister have met the ATB and have listened to what Norma Hart said. All of us, including VisitScotland, are agreed that the Dumfries and Galloway foot-and-mouth disease recovery plan should be funded from additional resources that we will endeavour to make available through VisitScotland. We want to do that and we will make sure that it happens. That will enable the area tourist board to proceed with additional marketing to follow through the work that was undertaken last year and earlier this year.

Mike Watson and I have been able to examine the detailed report that was provided by the Dumfries and Galloway area tourist board. If the Borders area tourist board could provide us with similar written evidence, we will give it the same sort of consideration. It is important to build on what has already been achieved and I hope to see the benefit of the continued recovery of tourism in Dumfries and Galloway. That recovery has already been good, but I strongly believe that additional support is required to enable the recovery to continue and allow the region to get to the point that it would have been at if the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak had never happened.  I am convinced that VisitScotland's approach of product-based marketing will bring dividends for this country and for the less well known remote and rural areas. That will provide an opportunity to showcase and benefit the south of Scotland, which I still firmly believe does not get the credit and recognition that it should in tourism. I hope that members will be reassured that we have taken the subject very seriously. I am very grateful for the support that has been offered to me on this matter by my colleague Mike Watson and by the First Minister. We will be doing our utmost to enable the recovery in Dumfries and Galloway to continue.  Meeting closed at 17:50.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will try to speak a bit slower than usual. This is a very appropriate time to discuss sport.  What with the world cup at the moment, Wimbledon coming up and the Commonwealth games at the end of next month, the subject is very much in people's minds, even though there are different degrees of Scottish interest in those competitions. At this point, I should perhaps congratulate those teams from the British isles that have progressed to the next round of the world cup. My only plea is that, if the team supported by Kenny Macintosh wins, we do not have to see the winning goal for the next 40 years. That said, it might knock replays of the other goal off the box. The Tories made much play of excellence. It is important to celebrate that quality and indeed the competitions that I have mentioned provide role models in that respect. Success is not just about bringing together communities and nations; it is also inspirational. For example, when Wimbledon is on, we see children out with tennis racquets; when marathons are on, we see people running in the streets. The other day, I was even pleasantly surprised to discover my eldest son, who has not been physically active, playing football. As several members have pointed out, we have to capitalise on people's interest in watching sport and convert it into a desire to participate in sport and physical recreation. Margo MacDonald did not like the way in which we had framed the motion and asked whether we were serious. Actually, we are deadly serious. Unless we use these methods to improve Scotland's health, we will continue to be the sick man of Europe and to build up a huge health bill through trying to make people well again. Some of our efforts must be directed at preventing people from getting ill in the first place and at enabling people to live to a healthy old age. If people are to live longer, they should do so in good health. That is to everyone's benefit.

The issue of PE teachers will be addressed in the review that my colleagues in the education department are undertaking. We will argue for increased resources in sport, because that is part of our job as sports ministers. We hope to be able to make a convincing case to our colleagues when the time comes. Many other partners invest in sport. Reference has been made to local authorities. Perhaps there is work to be done with local authorities to increase the profile of  sport in their community plans. We have talked a little about sport 21, which is not being reviewed just because somebody feels like having another review. Sport 21 is a strategy that was designed to expire in 2003. Now we want to find out how we can build on it and refine it to create a policy that will take us forward in the five to 10 years beyond 2003. I strongly encourage the MSPs who have contributed forcibly to this debate to get involved in that debate. Dennis Canavan was disappointed by what he saw last week. If that is the case, he should get in there and say what he thinks should be done, because the opportunity is available. I do not want a glossy Executive document on the Executive's policy for sport. That is not the intention—it is Scotland's policy for sport. The review affords the opportunity for all the partners to get together and create Scotland's policy for sport.

I am happy to do so. That is why I am taking part in the Moffat mountain rescue challenge next Sunday. I have much sympathy for and give much support to mountain rescue teams. In discussing the review of sport 21, we also have to make links. Mention was made, for example, of the national debate on education. That affords a crucial opportunity for people to make points about the importance of physical recreation and the contribution that sport can make to pupils' learning. I encourage all partners to get involved in that consultation process, and in the consultation on the draft strategy of the physical activity task force. The review of sport 21 can be a success only if all our partners are involved. That means involving local authorities and encouraging them to find ways to include physical activity in their community plans. Sportscotland recently commissioned a household opinion survey on people's attitude to sport. The sample was approximately 1,000 people over the age of 16. That may not be a huge sample, but even so, the results were interesting, because 90 per cent of the sample agreed that sport adds to the quality of life in Scotland for the population in general. Only 4 per cent of people disagreed. It was encouraging that so many people, who perhaps do not participate in sport,  recognise the contribution that sport makes to the population's quality of life—although we aim to get those people interested in taking part in sport themselves. Two thirds of people considered that sport added to the quality of life for them personally. Of course, some of that may have referred to the contribution from observing sport, rather than participating in it. On age profiles, the great majority of young people regarded fun and enjoyment as the benefits of participation in sport, but across all age groups there was an appreciation that there were also personal benefits in terms of health and fitness. People identified those benefits as more important than even the community benefits, such as regeneration and crime reduction. It is important that the benefits of building active communities are recognised. Demographic and other factors were evident in the survey. I am not sure whether the sample was large enough to be representative, but it appears that rural communities value sport more than do urban communities. That is interesting, in the light of what Jamie Stone said. I will digress, and say that of the new funding for physical activity from the New Opportunities Fund, more than £53 million is for facilities. I urge local authorities to examine how they use that funding, so that they can make sport accessible to people in different communities.

I intend to mention later the differences in participation rates between young men and young women. We must consider the aging population. The survey found that, as people get older, around 40 per cent identify themselves as having a disability that limits their physical activity or the work that they can do. The demographic change must be taken into account when we examine sport as time progresses. We can either increase participation among a smaller population sector—which I do not favour—or reintroduce sport to the sectors that are typified by non-participation. There are issues of accessibility. For example, mention has been made of physical recreation for people with disabilities or health problems. I am interested in the developments in the prescription  of physical activity by GPs, to which Ken Macintosh and Margo MacDonald, in her intervention, referred. That development is welcome and its progress will be interesting. We must encourage people to switch sports as they get on in life and help them to realise that alternative sports exist when they are not fit enough for some others. We must be aware of constraints on people's time. People tend to work longer hours, to travel for longer and to want more time with their families, which means that they have less time for organised physical activity.

No, I had better press on. There is a growth in sports activities that fit into short time spans. Those sports sometimes require changing facilities that are more accessible to people for shorter periods. We need more home-based activities and opportunities for sports in which families can participate together. Higher education is a major influence on participation in sport, because students have increased access to a range of affordable sports activities. That could be good news for the levels of participation in physical activity by women, because there has been an increase in the number of women who attend higher education. We must consider the points of transition, because we know that physical activity tends to fall away during transition from school to jobs or into the community.

I cannot. I am beginning to run out of time. The key in the longer term is to encourage children and young people who are at school to participate in sport and to develop a lifelong habit of physical exercise. That is essential to our nation. At present, the physical activity of the average person peaks at the age of nine and then deteriorates. As many members have said, that deterioration is particularly fast in young girls. That is sometimes because young girls do not like competitive team sports and might prefer activities such as dance, as Brian Monteith pointed out. Some women want to take part in team sports—women's football is, I think, the fastest-growing sport in the world—but we must consider activities that are more attractive to young women, such as aerobics and equestrian activities. The school sport co-ordinators programme and the active primary schools programme give children access to different sports and physical activities. Young people can be the link that brings their parents into sport. Young people often see  examples of physical activity not at home, but instead in schools or communities. That can involve their parents in physical activity. The sport 21 review gives us the opportunity to examine the issues that must be addressed and the challenges that must be faced. We have a common belief that sport matters. The way in which we develop future strategies for sport and physical recreation is vital to the quality of life in Scotland. I chair one of the review groups that brings together stakeholders and I intend to meet the deputy ministers of other portfolios to discuss the way in which sport and recreation impact on their portfolios. There are opportunities for joined-up government. I am happy to accept the SNP amendment. However, that does not mean that we do not put real resources into sport. Real resources are going in. We will look for all the opportunities that we can find to maximise the contribution that those resources can make. I will not support the Conservatives' amendment. Whatever the meaning of the Conservative amendment, its wording suggests that a physical education teacher will be put into every school—including a one-teacher rural primary school.

I am afraid that that is what the amendment says, and that is why I cannot support it.

Will Alex Johnstone ignore the contribution of people such as Rhona Martin and Jackie Lockhart, who are role models who have won Olympic and world championship gold medals? He must surely agree that it is good to see excellent female role models in sport.

I am aware of the member's concerns, which arise from a case in Aberdeen that resulted in a fatal accident and considerable destruction to the city centre. However, transactions between an insurer and the party insured are not the responsibility of Government.

Elaine Thomson and Lewis Macdonald brought the matter to my attention. As I was in the city, I took a stroll down Union Street to have a look at the building. I share the concern of the member and Aberdeen City Council that it has taken more than three years since the fire for repairs to the building to commence. It might be helpful if I briefly run through the powers that exist. [MEMBERS: "No."] I could be brief about the powers under the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) (Scotland) Act 1997, but if the member wishes to write to ask me to investigate the particular case in greater detail, I would be happy to do so.

Yes. I am sorry that I was not allowed to go through the various provisions that are available to local authorities. I share the member's concerns about the matter, which is being dealt with in the courts, as she will be aware. A number of powers are available to Scottish ministers and local authorities, but sometimes there are cost problems in using those powers. I am aware that costs can sometimes deter local authorities from taking action.

Following discussion with Highland Council and Highlands and Islands Enterprise last October, ministers were pleased to confirm their intention to support the costs of preparing the bid to the extent of £100,000 for this financial year and the next.

I have not, as yet, discussed the bid with colleagues at Westminster, although I will meet the relevant Cabinet ministers next month. I have, however, had very interesting discussions with Bryan Beattie, who is one of the organisers of the bid. He is very pleased with the level of support to date. John Farquhar Munro will be aware that the First Minister and my colleague Mike Watson pledged their support at a press conference only on Monday. A number of others did the same. I am not in a position to make a funding commitment on what would happen should the bid be successful. Obviously, any decision would depend on the outcome of spending review 2002.

Mr Ewing's question would really be better directed towards my colleagues in the transport department. However, my colleague Dr Lewis Macdonald, who is sitting on my right, assures me that the answer to Mr Ewing's latter question is yes.

I, too, start by congratulating Cathy Peattie on obtaining the debate and by congratulating the various contributors. This week, a certain rather vacuous female journalist on "Newsnight" referred, in her criticism of the Scottish Parliament, to the fact that we did such things as discussing Hamish Henderson, as if that were something that a proper Parliament does not do. I believe that commemoration of such an important Scottish figure and his contribution to Scotland's song and musical traditions is a worthwhile subject for debate in the Parliament. As other members have said, Hamish Henderson grew up in Perthshire in poverty. In growing up in that part of our country, he inherited the rich oral tradition of which he made great use later on. Linda Fabiani and Cathy Peattie both  referred to the importance that Hamish Henderson placed on recording forgotten people. The recordings of the Gypsy Travellers are a source of an oral and cultural tradition that would have been otherwise much neglected. Hamish Henderson's approach was not that of a detached observer. He had tremendous enthusiasm and, by transferring that enthusiasm to others, he encouraged them. One of the most famous people whom he encouraged to record was the singer Jeannie Robertson. As Ian Jenkins said, he followed in the tradition of many other Scottish poets and preservers of tradition. Robert Burns did much the same when he went around Scotland in the 18 th century, collecting what might have become forgotten works and traditions and preserving them for posterity. As Robin Harper reminded us, Hamish Henderson did not preserve songs for posterity alone. He also developed folk societies to sing and keep those songs alive. He recorded and, in some cases, wrote songs that were taken up by the most prominent folk singers of his time. Mike Russell reminded us that he was also a notable poet and songwriter in his own right. The poem "Elegies for the Dead in Cyrenaica"—that was difficult to pronounce—was highly regarded and the song "The Freedom Come All Ye" has attained iconic status. Hamish Henderson supported many causes, including nuclear disarmament, the anti-apartheid movement, international socialism, home rule and, possibly, independence for Scotland. He saw no contradiction between being a patriotic Scot and being a believer in international solidarity. That is an important factor, because there is often a contradiction in people, who believe that, somehow, pride in one's nation or culture means that one cannot respect the traditions and cultures of others. That is not the case—it is through understanding, creating and caring for one's own culture that one learns to respect and appreciate the pride that others have in their cultures. That was an important gift that people such as Hamish Henderson gave our country. He was also a great linguist and a highly original translator of poetry. He often translated new poetry from Gaelic, French, German and Latin—often into Scots. As Jamie McGrigor reminded us, Hamish Henderson made a distinguished contribution as an intelligence officer during the war. He gave shrewd advice on the invasion of Sicily and accepted the surrender of Marshall Graziani of the Italian army. Hamish Henderson did not seek publicity and recognition for himself. His poems and ballads were often published obscurely—sometimes they were later attributed to other people or taken to be part of the folklore tradition. Unfortunately, the  ballad "The D-Day Dodgers" is not always attributed to him although it was his work, as Jamie McGrigor said. Hamish Henderson was generous with his time and money for people of creative talent. He was even generous towards Hugh MacDiarmid—who came from my constituency—with whom he had a famous and public dispute, as Cathy Peattie said. How important the topic of that dispute is for us today. Poetry and all culture are there for the enjoyment of all people, not just for the enjoyment of a few privileged, educated people. Our culture belongs to all of us because it comes from all of us.

That is an interesting point of view. I hope that when the Scottish Parliament finally gets its new building we will be able to commemorate those Scots who came before us and who helped us to attain the Parliament. The traditional cultures of Scotland, along with the many other cultures that have enriched Scotland over the generations, are part of our national identity. They help us to understand and interpret our roots and our past. Traditional arts are not just about the past—those art forms can express our lives today and our hopes for our nation's future. They are also part of the uniqueness of Scotland and an important contribution to the richness of the experience of visitors to our country. In an earlier debate, Roseanna Cunningham referred to a recent project that linked traditional arts and tourism. Our culture is an important aspect of the experience that a visitor can have of our country. Only in Scotland can one experience Scottish culture. One can experience many other sorts of cultures here, which one can experience elsewhere, but Scottish culture is unique and special to us. We should be proud to project our culture to our visitors from overseas. I am pleased that the Scottish Arts Council is giving greater recognition to the role of traditional arts and that more money has been devoted to the promotion of those arts. I am sure that traditional art forms will continue to flower in Scotland. As John McAllion mentioned, Hamish  Henderson campaigned for inclusion and social justice and was—perhaps above all—an international socialist. He commemorated Scotland's socialist traditions in works such as "The John MacLean March", which Cathy Peattie recited. I recall looking all over the place for a copy of "The John MacLean March"—a task that seemed to be completely impossible—during my 13-year period of exile in the south of England. Hamish Henderson's work will help us to appreciate the value of our living tradition. To appreciate and value our Scottish culture and traditional arts would perhaps be the greatest memorial to Hamish Henderson that we could create. In celebrating our culture and in celebrating Scotland, we celebrate him; in celebrating him, we celebrate our culture.  I congratulate everybody who took part in the debate.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

Okay. Thank you, Presiding Officer. The debate has been interesting. It started off with the usual old moans from the Conservative party and the SNP. Despite that, there were constructive comments from all parts of the chamber during the course of the debate, which was a welcome change. I feel that Kenny MacAskill, Alasdair Morgan and  David Davidson have a misconception about what the tourism document is about. We have been told to stop lecturing and start acting. The document is called "Tourism Framework for Action 2002:2005" and it is about actions. It is intended to provide a clearer sense of the way forward for the industry. For the benefit of David Davidson, I point out that there was a full consultation exercise with the industry, which received 300 responses. The tourism businesses were fully involved in the preparation of the framework through the representative bodies and their views shaped the document. That has been borne out by the fact that the document has been widely welcomed by the tourism industry, as Mike Watson and I found out when we attended the launches in Oban and Dumfries. The Scottish Tourist Forum and the area tourist boards said that it was exactly what the industry has been looking for. The British Hospitality Association said that the framework reflects the priorities of the industry and that the industry will work with the Executive to ensure that it is fully implemented. The Association of Scottish Visitor Attractions said that it welcomes the framework and fully endorses its vision for tourism and the collaborative approach that is suggested. There seems to be a high level of agreement about the necessity of going forward in this manner.

I will come to that in a minute. As the British Tourist Authority has been mentioned, I should make it clear that the BTA has statutory responsibility for the marketing of Britain overseas. The SNP talked about the fact that we do not give the BTA any money. That is correct. The Scottish Executive does not give the BTA any money; the British Government does. The BTA spends about £5 million marketing Scotland overseas. That money allows Scotland access to 26 offices in 11 countries. I doubt whether VisitScotland would be able to provide that should the UK Government decide to pass the £5 million to it, which is unlikely. The role of VisitScotland is to supplement the activity of the BTA and the two bodies have a regularly reviewed marketing agreement that specifies what each body will do. I hope that that has clarified some of the issues, as I would like to talk about some of the constructive remarks that have been made today. Tavish Scott made some useful comments about the need for community information centres. Such centres would provide a way in which to bring community activities together. Mary Scanlon and Maureen Macmillan referred to the importance of Scotland's food and drink,  which play an important part in the partnership between the tourism industry and other industries that promote Scotland. Roseanna Cunningham is pushing at an open door with regard to the traditional arts. I was sorry to hear that she had had a problem in her area with the promotion of the soundtrack initiative. I know that it was successful in Dumfries and Galloway and I will be taking an active interest in the review. I am sure that we will tell members more about the initiative in future. Irene Oldfather referred to the need for customer focus, which is one of the main thrusts of the document. She made a pertinent point about the linguistic deficits of the British and the fact that we are not good at communicating in other languages. However, I am not sure what we might do about that. Maureen Macmillan pointed out the opportunities that will be afforded by Euro 2008.

I would be more than happy to talk to the member about that later, but I have only one minute left and a few other matters that I want to mention. Irene Oldfather referred to redundancies at the Scottish Maritime Museum. I want to make it clear that those redundancies were due to the loss of the European structural fund training budget, which was worth £150,000. In 2001, the Executive provided £70,000 of emergency support, which was followed by a further £110,000 in December. That was in addition to £160,000 for three years from April 2001. The Executive has done its best to support that tourist attraction, which is in Irene Oldfather's constituency. I have not had time to deal with all the points that have been raised but I would be happy to deal with them individually if members write to me. I notice that the SNP members are not paying any attention, so I presume that they have no points that they want to raise with us. The implementation of the framework will lead to further improvements in marketing. We are developing methods of assessing progress. That is fundamental and seems to have been missed by some of the critics. The steering group that Mike Watson will chair will consider the way in which we monitor progress. That progress will be reported to the Parliament annually and members will be able to judge whether the framework for action has worked. The Executive believes that it  will help to take forward tourism, which is a most important industry. Therefore, I ask members to support the motion and to reject the characteristically negative amendments of both Opposition parties.

Will the member give way?

We work with education authorities and sportscotland to ensure that children have access to as wide a range of sporting activities as possible. Particular initiatives that sportscotland supports include the school  sport co-ordinator programme, the active primary school programme and the TOP programme.

The issue is indeed often a problem in rural areas. That is principally the responsibility of the local education authority. Nevertheless, in targeting assistance through, for example, the school sport co-ordinator programme, which disburses money through local authorities, the Executive is making resources available so that councils can promote physical activity in ways that are most suited to local need. The education authorities in rural areas will require rather different programmes from those in urban areas. We are targeting money through local authorities in the hope that they will concentrate on the best way of delivering sports education in schools according to the needs in their localities.

I am assured that it has increased. The national guidance in the curriculum for five to 14-year-olds recommends that 15 per cent of time should be spent on expressive arts, which include physical education. The guidance is that at least one hour per week should be spent on expressive arts in schools. Schools provide for sports in different ways. The projects provided by sportscotland and local authorities include various after-school activities, lunch-time activities and activities in which young people volunteer to work with young children. I believe that, through those programmes, the amount of physical education that is available to young people is increasing and that sporting facilities are improving.

I met the board of sportscotland informally on Monday 29 January and we discussed a number of sporting matters that are of interest to the Executive and sportscotland. My colleague Mike Watson will meet the chairman and the chief executive on Monday 4 February. They will discuss sport 21, the national sport strategy for Scotland.

I reassure the member that the planning provision is against the presumption of development on school playing fields. A case would need to be made that suitable alternative sites were available for football pitches if playing fields were to be developed. The wider issue of physical activity in schools is a major concern of the Scottish Executive. A number of programmes are under way at the moment, including the school sports co-ordinator programme and the active primary school programme. We are awaiting the physical activity task force's careful consideration of any recommendations in respect of increasing levels of physical activity in the population, for people of all ages, but particularly young people.

I assure the member that I will continue to take a strong interest in the participation of young women in physical activity. That participation might be in sport, or it might be in activities such as dance. I was interested to see recently that 88 per cent of equestrians in Scotland are women. Like Rhona Brankin, I am anxious to promote physical activity among girls and young women.

I am happy to reassure the member that both Mike Watson and I are keen supporters of football supporters' trusts. We have had a number of discussions about how those trusts might be progressed and I advise the member that an announcement on the matter will be made very soon.

I congratulate Angus MacKay on securing the debate on the life and work of Dr O'Riordan, who contributed greatly in the service of young people and music. I echo whole-heartedly members' comments on the loss of so dedicated an educator and someone who obviously loved music so much. He was clearly greatly devoted to giving opportunities to young people to experience and participate in the magical world of music. The trust that his family and friends have set up is a fitting memorial and tribute to the man and his work. Unlike Sarah Boyack and Robin Harper, I did not know Colin O'Riordan personally, but undoubtedly I saw him perform, as I used to go to Edinburgh Youth Orchestra concerts in the 1960s. I was  sufficiently inspired to become a member of the EYO in the early 1970s. Unfortunately, Mr O'Riordan had left the orchestra by then, but at least I had seen him perform. Performing in youth orchestras in my mid and late teens was a wonderful experience, although I was a violinist of limited ability. Like Sarah Boyack, I was often seated at the back of the orchestra; I often seemed to be put near the timpani, which was possibly done to drown out the noise that I made. To rehearse intensively and perform with talented young people and professionals was a terrific opportunity. As Sarah Boyack said, the EYO gave an opportunity to play real music at a much higher standard than would have been possible in a school orchestra. Music provides useful lessons for later life. Donald Gorrie said that a person cannot be an egotist and play in an orchestra. We learned many things. I remember the violin instructor talking about a difficult piece. He said, "If you cannot keep up with it, just smile, keep your bow going and catch up at the end." I am sure that that advice stood me in good stead in later life. I was impressed and moved by the enthusiasm and passion of the professional conductors and musicians who worked with young people. They seemed to have a real joy in sharing their talents and experience. I know from what has been said about Dr O'Riordan that he brought that passion and talent to his work with young people. It may not always be apparent that such passion and talent are appreciated. As a not very good musician, I always felt that it was a great honour to work with such people and experience their love of music. I have been asked to indicate the Executive's commitment to music and the arts. I cannot disagree with Donald Gorrie, Margo MacDonald or Robin Harper that music is a vital part of every child's education and that all young people ought to have the opportunity to experience music. That music does not always have to be western classical music. I came to music through western classical music, which I enjoy, but other forms of music—such as traditional Scottish music and contemporary music—can be equally important in young people's development. All such forms are valuable in helping young people to develop their skills. An effective music department makes a positive contribution to the overall ethos of a school. Margo MacDonald referred to the importance of culture in educating the whole person, but said that some people regard it as a frill. I do not regard culture as a frill. Culture and arts education are essential and are as important and useful as any other part of the education system.  Practical music making has been proved to be a particularly strong stimulus to motivating pupils and boosting their creativity. Brian Fitzpatrick spoke about how musical education often results in greater achievement in other subjects. Music is valuable in itself and for the many skills that it helps to develop in young people. Nowadays, most—if not all—pupils in primary school and the first two years of secondary school experience music and music making in timetabled music classes. A range of instruments and singing are involved. However, as Brian Monteith and Sarah Boyack said, there can be problems with the cost and provision of instruments. On Friday, I presented a £5,000 cheque from the Scottish Arts Council to a local group of clarsach—Scots harp—players. I got the opportunity to play one for the first time, which was thrilling. I was amazed that that money can buy perhaps two and a quarter harps. Musical instruments are extremely expensive, which is a problem for authorities. Reference was made to councils' charging policies. Authorities decide whether to charge for music tuition, but I strongly opposed charging in my time in local government. Music education should be free, as other subjects are, and I hope that authorities can provide that. The five-to-14 expressive arts curriculum contains advice on the music and arts provision that should be available in classrooms. More broadly, school concerts and Christmas concerts involve communities in schools. That is important, as such concerts bring people from the local community into the school to appreciate and value the contribution that teachers and pupils are making. The issue does not just centre on what happens in schools; we must also recognise the contribution of the voluntary sector, which has been extremely important to the musical tradition in Scotland. Although Colin O'Riordan did much work as a professional, he also did a hell of a lot above and beyond that as a volunteer and as someone who believed in and gave to the subject. Members will be aware that the Executive is currently examining the details of a pilot programme for cultural co-ordinators in schools, which I hope will help teachers to maximise the potential contribution of cultural activities such as music to young people's education. Such activities are vital for developing self-confidence and skill. I hope that the details of the pilot programme will be announced in the very near future. The need to develop excellence among young musicians was mentioned. One of the interesting aspects of the sports and culture debate is the recognition that even people like me who might not be very good at something can get enjoyment  simply by taking part in cultural or sporting activity. At the same time, we also need the inspiration that excellence—the importance of which Donald Gorrie mentioned—can give us, which is one of the reasons why the Executive has allocated funding for the excellence fund. Indeed, one of the projects that will receive funding is the City of Edinburgh Music School at Broughton High School, which Angus MacKay mentioned and which Dr O'Riordan was instrumental in establishing. Members will also be aware of the Donald Dewar scholarships. One of the ways in which the Executive wanted to reflect Donald Dewar's contribution to Scottish life and his love of arts and music was to establish a scholarship for fostering excellence in the arts and to offer youngsters from less-privileged backgrounds the opportunity to develop their talents. Twenty students will initially benefit from the scholarships; four will be funded with each of the four national arts companies for the performing arts and four will be funded in the visual arts with the Scottish Arts Council. We are currently discussing how the scholarships will operate. I join members in lamenting the great loss of Dr O'Riordan to music education in Edinburgh and Scotland and in celebrating the contribution that people like him make to our country's cultural life and the development of our children. I congratulate Dr O'Riordan's family and friends on their vision in establishing the trust. I wish them well and hope that the trust and other initiatives will carry forward his passion for music and education in the years to come.  Meeting closed at 17:58.

I thank Donald Gorrie for his question, which gives me my first opportunity to answer questions at question time. The Executive promotes and supports football at all levels in Scotland, including amateur football. Generally, that happens through a number of sportscotland initiatives, such as the sports facilities programme, the junior groups programme and the awards for all programme.

If Donald Gorrie has in mind a particular football club that has particular problems, the Executive would be interested to hear more. I assure him that the Executive remains committed to amateur football. He will have noted the First Minister's statement yesterday on Euro 2008, in which he made it clear that, in going for six stadiums, we want additional investment to go into amateur football and into football for young boys and girls in Scottish schools. The Executive's commitment to football at all levels has been made quite clear over the past couple of days.

I thank Mr Canavan for his question. I agree entirely with the points that he made. I refer him to the statement that the First Minister made yesterday, which I hope will offer Mr Canavan some reassurance. The First Minister said that he wanted "part of the bid to present competitive bids for" the additional stadiums to "maximise the benefit to ... communities.—[ Official Report , 23 January 2002, col 5653.] Therefore, community benefit will be central to our bid for Euro 2008.

I know that Trish Godman was a footballer previously and I realise that the sport is of particular personal interest to her. Although I have never been a good footballer, I, too, have an interest in women's football. Trish Godman might be aware that specific funding is available from sportscotland for women's football development officers and that women's football is probably the fastest growing sport in Scotland.

I assure Annabel Goldie that neither she nor I will be forced to play football.

I thank members for their kind wishes. I start with two apologies. First, I have been Deputy Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport for less than 25 hours and may not yet be quite up to speed with the issues. Secondly, I am not able to contribute in what was undoubtedly the language  of some of my forebears. Like many Scots, I have lost that part of our culture, but the Executive is considering how people can regain it. I welcome the debate, which was initiated by my colleague Maureen Macmillan. I am well aware of her hard work as chairman of the cross-party group on Gaelic. She has done a great deal to promote interest in the language. I also pay tribute to Alasdair Morrison's work as minister for Gaelic. Education through the medium of Gaelic began as recently as 15 years ago, but it has been a success story and has helped the language's prospects. Maureen Macmillan's motion covered three main issues, which I will deal with in turn. The first issue is teacher supply, which was referred to by a number of speakers, including Mike Russell, Maureen Macmillan and Ken Macintosh. I am happy to look into some of the suggestions made by members. For some years, the University of Strathclyde has taken five or six Gaelic-speaking candidates on to its post-graduate certificate in education course, and the total number of Gaelic-medium teachers who qualify in primary education has averaged at around 12. However, when the Scottish Executive asked local authorities how many Gaelic-medium teachers they would need for primary schools over the next seven years, the answer was that they would probably need around 20 a year to replace retiring teachers. That is considered by some to be an underestimate and, from Ken Macintosh's comments, he is probably among them. The teacher work force planning exercise is conducted annually. Local authorities are once again being asked to identify their need for Gaelic-medium teachers. The Executive has advised the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council that Gaelic-medium teaching should be regarded as a priority subject. As a result of that pressure, the funding council concluded that the guidance was not sufficient and allocated additional funding for 10 places at the University of Strathclyde for Gaelic-medium teaching. This year, the University of Strathclyde has taken 12 Gaelic-speaking candidates on to its PGCE course. Across Scotland, 24 Gaelic-medium primary teachers are expected to graduate at the end of the current academic year. That means that the number of Gaelic-medium teachers who come out of the system will have doubled. The Executive has also provided funding for education authorities to enable Gaelic-speaking teachers to train for Gaelic-medium education. We have set up a website with important information that is available in Gaelic. I am confident that those measures will help to tackle the demand for  Gaelic-medium teachers. The measures will need to be maintained for a few years so that we can overcome the backlog to which several members referred. On initial teacher education for Gaelic-medium teachers, it is not only the numbers of entrants but the quality of the education that is of concern. The GTC report "Teaching in Gaelic-medium Education—Recommendations for Change", to which Ken Macintosh referred, reviewed the training of Gaelic-medium teachers and made recommendations on courses, on student selection and on teacher qualifications. The report also identified a number of possible options for the teacher education institutions to implement developments in Gaelic-medium teacher education. The Executive welcomed the publication of the report. I am sure that the GTC and the teacher education institutes will push to put the recommendations into operation. In 1997, the Gaelic education group saw a need to strengthen confidence in the future of Gaelic-medium education. Its report called for a national committee on Gaelic education to co-ordinate planning and, as has been mentioned, for a statutory right to Gaelic-medium education.

I recall that the matter was raised, but I think that there was an issue about the competence of the amendment. Indeed, local authorities' views on the issue would also need to be discussed. Michael Russell said that the budget is now static, but the truth is that the budget has been increased by £200,000 a year for the past four years and now amounts to £2.8 million. That is thanks to the work of people such as Alasdair Morrison and Peter Peacock. The number of schools and the number of pupils in Gaelic-medium education have increased, although I admit that the rate of increase has slowed down and needs to be looked at. Peter Peacock and Alasdair Morrison concluded that a better system that was more responsive to parents' wishes was needed. The Executive has  made provision for that through the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000, to which Maureen Macmillan referred. Education authorities are now required to include in their annual statement of improvement objectives what they are doing in Gaelic-medium education and what they plan to do. That gives a clear opportunity to parents and parents' organisations to express their views on the service to the education authorities. The first annual statements of improvement objectives are due by the end of this year. I hope that all who are interested in Gaelic-medium education will take the opportunity to make their views known to their education authorities. Requests for Gaelic-medium education should be made in writing to the authority—in each academic year if that is required—and copied to the Scottish Executive education department. I agree with Brian Monteith that one need not be a Gaelic speaker to support Gaelic. Gaelic is crucial not only to the Gaelic-speaking community but to us all. Scottish Gaelic is part of the cultural wealth and diversity of Europe.  The Executive has already taken steps to develop Gaelic-medium education. Teacher supply is being expanded. New consultation arrangements are in place. I inform Mike Russell that Gaelic has a place in the education system, which is becoming more and more capable of meeting the demand from parents and pupils for Gaelic-medium education. I will be happy to continue to discuss Gaelic-medium education with my colleagues in the education department as, obviously, it is a joint responsibility.

I draw members' attention to my entry in the register of members' interest, which lists my continued membership of the Association of University Teachers. I stress that that involves me giving them money, rather than them giving me money. Like Sylvia Jackson, I have direct experience of working as a fixed-term contract researcher in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when I worked in scientific research in Cambridge and London. I had three fixed-term contracts, two of three years' duration and one of two years' duration, but I only worked 27 months of the first one, two years of the second one and one year of the third one. That was not because I was particularly fickle but because, as soon as one gets halfway through a contract, one is looking to see where the next contract will come from. In each case, I changed specialisms and in one case, I changed institutions. That is not a good way to conduct research. The project is not completed if somebody leaves early and it is unlikely that anybody else will pick up the contract if there is only a year left. In my experience, most research institutions are quite resourceful in recycling the funding that is left over. The alternative to looking around for a contract was to try to secure additional funding for the existing one. I tried that halfway through my second contract and spent a considerable amount of time and imagination putting together a research proposal. It came back from the funding organisation with an A band, accompanied by some kind remarks but, unfortunately, not accompanied by any funding, because it was not considered to be a high enough priority. There was not much joy in going down that route. I am talking, of course, about something that happened a long time ago—that well-known scientist, Mrs Thatcher, was Prime Minister at the time—but I am sorry to say that I have not seen things improve much since then. If anything, things are getting worse, because there has been an increase in the use of short-term contracts in research institutions. The AUT found that, among those on fixed-term contracts, there are a disproportionate number of women and ethnic minorities, which means that they are particularly disadvantaged. The fact that employment rights do not transfer between contracts even when the contracts are from the same funding body was mentioned. That can affect entitlements such as maternity pay. In Scotland, we pride ourselves on the quality of our science. Much of that science is performed by people who are poorly paid in relation to their qualifications and who have no longer-term  security of funding. That is not a sustainable situation. I left science in 1988 before the birth of my first child. That was no great loss to British science, but the current method of funding research could bring losses: it means that we could lose valuable and good scientists who might make an important contribution to the Scottish economy. We need to stabilise the situation if we want the development and commercialisation of science to improve.

Until recently, I was not aware that Annabel Goldie had secured a debate on the rural economy. I wondered whether we would debate yet again the  aftermath of foot-and-mouth disease or other problems with tourism. I am therefore slightly surprised that the debate is concentrating on this particular piece of United Kingdom legislation and taxation. I concur with Annabel Goldie's remarks about the problems faced by the rural economy over the past year, particularly those of rural tourism. However, I believe the dreadful events elsewhere in the world have presented opportunities in tourism to promote Scotland to the UK and northern Europe. I hope that VisitScotland and the area tourist boards will make every effort to cash in and promote tourism in Scotland wherever possible. I have a bit to say about the history of the aggregates tax. Sometimes, the impression is given that it appeared from nowhere, that the Chancellor of the Exchequer did not listen to anybody and that the views of the producers were not taken on board. That is not the case. As members have described, the aggregates tax was intended to make some reparation for the environmental impact of quarrying. It was first announced in the budget in 1997 and a formal consultation was launched in June 1998.

That is not the basis of my argument. The legislation was introduced in recognition of the fact that quarrying has significant effects on the environment—it creates noise and dust, for example—and tends to take place in areas of scenic beauty. Although there are economic benefits, there are environmental disadvantages and that is why the taxation was brought in. The Quarry Products Association offered a package of voluntary measures in 1998, but the Government at Westminster did not feel that that went far enough. However, in March 1999, the Government invited the QPA to come back with another series of voluntary measures that might fit the bill. It was not until later in 1999 that the Government indicated that the suggestions that the producers had made did not address sufficiently the environmental concerns and not until the budget in 2000 that it produced legislative proposals, which eventually received royal assent on 11 May 2001. The Westminster Government has suggested that it is still interested, in principle, in a differential rate—so the door to that is not absolutely closed. By giving some of the background, I hope to indicate that there was a dialogue on the issue over four or five years and that the aggregates tax  was not just about political correctness or stealth taxation or any of the other allegations that are often levied at Government. Having said that, we must recognise that there are several concerns in Scotland. Fergus Ewing referred to the impact on Scottish local authorities, which has concerned me. When the issue was raised originally in the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, I was interested in learning about the views of local authorities, because they are responsible for most roads in rural Scotland. We must go into more detail on issues that relate to their budgets.

I am grateful to the minister for outlining some of the projects that are under way, but I wonder whether he is aware how urgent this problem has become in Dumfries and Galloway and, indeed, in the town of Dumfries, where—sadly—dentists are leaving the national health service and going into private practice. I have constituents who have serious decay problems and are in considerable pain, but who simply cannot get a dentist in Dumfries. It is affecting adults, children, and, unfortunately, pregnant mothers. In that area dental health figures are below the average for Scotland. I am grateful to the minister for his various actions, but is he aware how urgent this matter is becoming in Dumfries and Galloway?

During the summer, I was asked to stand in for the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development at short notice to perform a most unusual and enjoyable parliamentary duty: I had to release some red kites into the wild from a secret location in Dumfries and Galloway in the hope that the species might again become established in the south of Scotland, as it has in the Highlands. The red kite is a large raptor. It can predate small mammals, birds and amphibians, but it is primarily a scavenger. Due to ignorance of its behaviour, it was persecuted to the point of extinction in England, Scotland and most of Wales by the end of the 19 th century. The event that I attended was extraordinary. There was high security and we had to creep through the forest to the cages. Releasing the huge and spectacular young creatures and seeing them gradually, one by one, plucking up the courage to fly from their cage and sweep up to the high trees to look at their colleagues' progress was moving. It was not only a symbol of hope for the species: in some ways it was also a symbol of hope for Dumfries and Galloway. Earlier in the year, we felt that we were almost at the point of extinction ourselves. Members can imagine my wrath when I discovered that, two months later, one of those  fine creatures had been found poisoned. I do not know whether it was poisoned deliberately or by the reckless use of poisons for other purposes. I welcome the proposals—they have been welcomed throughout the chamber—to tighten up the law on reckless behaviour and on the intentional behaviour that results in wild birds being injured, killed or disturbed. I ask SNP members—particularly the Mr Angrys who feel that if they agree with the Executive they must sound cross about doing so—what could be sooner than "as soon as possible"? Do they want us to say "as soon as not possible"? The minister referred to SSSIs, a designation that has been in use since 1949. There has been some criticism of SSSIs, particularly of the fact that people who work on the land in an SSSI are given long lists of potentially damaging operations that they must avoid and on which they must go to SNH to seek its views. Rhoda Grant referred to the fact that landowners are sometimes paid for not doing things that might damage the SSSI, even though they may not have intended to do those things anyway. It is also true that designation as an SSSI does not always provide the optimum protection for conservation sites. I think that Keith Raffan made some reference to that.

The legislation has to be more reflective of people's views. Fergus Ewing does not disagree with the Executive's proposal to strengthen the role of local authorities and communities in defining an SSSI or with the proposal to consult and provide independent scientific advice to those stakeholders. Everyone welcomes those proposals. As Rhoda Grant, Sylvia Jackson and others have said, Scotland's natural heritage is one of our greatest assets and the Scottish Parliament has a duty to protect and preserve it. I believe that the whole chamber welcomes the Executive's proposals, however much people may whinge and carp about timetables or the level of detail in the proposals, as the Tories have done. One would expect the detail about issues relating to communities and so on to be in the bill and the associated memorandums, not in the proposals. I thank Fergus Ewing for his explanation of the acronym "SNP" and wonder whether he is suggesting that, in the unlikely event of an SNP electoral success, a programme of mass emigration from Scotland would take place.

rose—

It may not be unusual to find the Tories and the NFUS in bed together, but it is unusual for them to be joined by Advocates for Animals and other organisations. It is clear that there are a number of issues of widespread concern. A similar debate has already been held in Westminster and Margaret Beckett, the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, has rejected the call for a full public inquiry, in particular because the definition of a full public inquiry is specific—such an inquiry would be extremely costly and time-consuming. She felt that matters should be progressed much more quickly than they could be if a full public inquiry were held.

Time is the principal reason for her rejection of an inquiry.

I wish to proceed. [Interruption.]

Given that that is the view of UK ministers in relation to England, would there be any real benefit in our having a full public inquiry in Scotland? Such an inquiry would be time-consuming and would report much later than the Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and the other inquiries that are being carried out down south. There are four independent inquiries. The minister referred to UK inquiries that will be chaired by Dr Iain Anderson and Dr Brian Follett FRS. There will also be a policy commission on the future of farming and food, to be chaired by Sir Don Curry. The Royal Society of Edinburgh's inquiry will involve a wide-ranging assessment of the disease on animal health and will examine its social and  economic consequences on the countryside and the rural economy. Mr Ewing did not seem to appreciate that.

Any inquiry is constrained in some respect. The RSE is an extremely distinguished body of academics with huge expertise that is probably not available anywhere else. That expertise covers many disciplines. It is insulting to the society if the Conservatives and the SNP are implying that its inquiry will be anything other than well-informed and totally independent. There would be absolutely no benefit to the RSE in attempting to cover up for the Executive. Indeed, to do so would jeopordise the high regard in which the society is held. Moreover, members of the society hold various political views. Why on earth would they want to act as apologists for the Scottish Executive? I agree with Alex Fergusson that the matter is serious and that vital lessons must be learned in respect of future outbreaks. I was reluctantly of the opinion that the vaccination that is currently available could have been used only in association with a subsequent cull, which would have been even more distressing to the farmers involved. It is a matter of concern that research into improved vaccines does not seem to have taken place in the 30-odd years between the 1967 and 2001 outbreaks. The process of mass cull, incineration and burial was appalling, atrocious and medieval. I never want it to happen again in my constituency or any other part of Scotland. Research is needed to produce a vaccine that is not live, does not mask the disease—and therefore transmission—and is distinguishable from the disease. That would allow routine protection of stock in the same way that many other animal diseases are controlled. Discussion would be needed in the European Union for its views on vaccination, but it is important that progress is made. The outbreak has been extremely costly—£1 billion has been paid in compensation to farmers and probably more than three times that amount has been lost to the tourism industry. We must consider the possibility of insurance against such outbreaks, particularly if a vaccine is developed. We also need to consider the way in which detection can be improved. There is certainly a need for a rapid and reliable on-farm system of testing for infection, which would negate the need for slaughter on suspicion of flocks and herds. Most of the flocks and herds in Dumfries and Galloway that were slaughtered on suspicion were  later proved to test negative. We need a system of testing that prevents that from happening. It is generally recognised that the epidemic was better controlled in Scotland than south of the border. For example, there were 176 cases of foot-and-mouth disease in Dumfries and Galloway but 893 cases just across the border in Cumbria. There is a lesson to be learned about the way in which control was progressed here. Much of that relates to the strength of the public sector ethos and local government in Scotland. The Conservatives might like to reflect on the fact that local government in Scotland survived 18 years of attack from a Conservative Government. They might also like to reflect on who ran down the state veterinary service. I would be interested to hear what they have to say about that. I await with great interest the results of the four independent inquiries, which will progress our understanding of the disease far better than any opportunistic debates by Opposition parties.

I am grateful to Mr Mundell for securing the debate. I share his frustration that disabled travellers who wish to alight at Lockerbie have to go to Carlisle, wait for another train and come back again. Until a recent intervention by my colleague Russell Brown, they also had to pay for a single journey from Carlisle back up to Lockerbie. Fortunately, that fare has now been waived. I also pay tribute to the Executive for its recent announcements of additional funding for public transport, including extra money for a feasibility study on improved transport in Lockerbie. Mr Mundell mentioned a number of people who have been involved in the campaign over a number of years. Lavinia Vaughan's predecessor, Councillor Steve Berry, was involved, and it is a matter of great frustration to people in the area that we seem to be getting nowhere. I am indebted to Russell Brown for some information that he has managed to root out from the House of Commons library, which illustrates some of the problems that can arise from passing legislation that is not particularly good. Many of the difficulties arise from problems with the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. I shall quote selectively from the research by the House of Commons library. One problem seems to be that the 1995 act established a general right of access and then made that subject to a test of reasonableness. It is difficult to interpret what is and what is not reasonable. In addition, the structure of the industry at that time was such that specific responsibilities under the act remained unclear. Let us hope that, whatever happens to Railtrack, things will be improved. Railtrack owns, or owned, most of the stations in Britain—around 2,500—and was responsible for their maintenance and renewal as well as that of the rail infrastructure. However, it managed only the 14 major stations and leased the remainder to the train-operating companies. Virgin Rail was the train-operating company at Lockerbie station. It  has worked with Railtrack and Dumfries and Galloway Council to find a solution. Because of problems in legislation, it is not clear who is responsible for costs. Railtrack has some responsibility for costs that the station facility owner, which is the train-operating company, incurs in complying with changes, but it does not bear responsibility for all costs. The station facility owner must provide some finance, too. The landlord—Railtrack—also has some responsibility in ensuring that it enables the work to be done. Research carried out by the House of Commons library indicates that specific responsibilities in the industry were unclear in the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. The problem seems to be the line of definition between the individual train operator, the station facility owner and Railtrack, as the landlord of the station. The issue is unclear. For possibly four or five years, people have campaigned and they seem to be getting nowhere. We would like clarity on what is required of Railtrack by 2004. Is it required to make the necessary changes, or does the test of reasonableness mean that it is not? There seems to be a suggestion that the successor might have until 2020 to come up with the goods. Meanwhile, we continue to have a problem. Disabled, elderly and other people are unable to access the southbound platform. A great deal of suspicion arises from Railtrack's withdrawal from the project, among a number of other projects. The explanation was that, after Hatfield, there was a determination to move away from passengers crossing lines and from level crossings. There is a suspicion that it might have opted out of a number of projects. I appreciate that the matter is reserved and that funding must be found from Westminster's purse rather than the Executive's. However, if the Executive was able to bring any pressure to bear on the organisations that are involved in trying to solve the problem, I am sure that all concerned would be most grateful. Representations should be made to solve the problem once and for all.

I appreciate that the minister cannot write a blank cheque for Dumfries and Galloway but will he assure me and others from the area that, when considering any application from Dumfries and Galloway Council for gap funding, he will take into account the fact that school rationalisation is significantly more difficult in rural areas than in urban areas? Will he assure us that he will consider the issues that are particular to rural communities?

I intend to talk about the forward strategy rather than the problems with the CAP. Labour's manifesto for the Scottish Parliament elections in 1999 made a commitment to "build a modern sustainable farming industry able to compete successfully in changing world markets." That, of course, is much easier to say than to do. Major changes have to be made to achieve that aim. The Executive's forward strategy is a starting point in the debate that has to happen for that aim to be achieved. The foot-and-mouth epidemic forced us to recognise a number of factors, to which the minister alluded. It proved for ever that agriculture is inextricably linked to the rural economy. It forced us to realise the importance of the countryside to our nation. It also gave rise to a more widespread discussion about why agriculture attracts public support and what that support is expected to achieve. Why does agriculture receive a level of support that has not been available to sustain other traditional Scottish industries, such as mining, shipbuilding or textiles? One answer, which was given to me by Jim Walker of the NFUS when I asked him that question at the Rural Development Committee, is that we are obliged to give that support under European Union rules. The farmers unions in Europe have been more successful in pressing their cases than many other unions have been. Certainly, there is no reason why Scottish farmers should not be entitled to public subsidy under the CAP in the same way as their counterparts elsewhere in Europe. Agriculture supports a plethora of other businesses in rural areas. It supports a valuable food and drinks industry, in which Scotland can and should achieve a level of excellence and which is worth £417 million a year to the Scottish economy. Mr Walker pointed out to the Rural Development Committee that every £1 that is spent on agriculture generates £3.16 in other sectors of the economy. Agriculture plays an important role in the rural infrastructure. It is vital to rural development and the growth of rural businesses.  There is also the land. Three quarters of the landmass of Scotland is farmed. The land management role of farming will be increasingly important. It is not always appreciated that the rural landscape that we know and love is the product of centuries of land management, predominantly by farmers. The casual observer of the countryside may presume that the landscape is somehow a natural phenomenon, but it is not. The public would not appreciate all that land being left to revert to the wild. We need only think about the complaints that we get if grass verges or untended plots of land become overgrown. The public do not want three quarters of Scotland to revert to weeds. The problem with public subsidy is that, over most of the past 50 years, it has been concentrated on production rather than on the other roles of agriculture. In the Common Market, that was exemplified by the creation of wine lakes and butter mountains. Even when the problems with that method of subsidy were recognised, the successor scheme still concentrated on production by subsidising headage of stock. One consequence of that focus is that it has rewarded farming practices that have damaged the environment. Over the past 50 years, we have seen the destruction of rare habitats and a significant reduction in the populations of many birds and mammals, including many songbirds that were common in the time of our grandparents. Schemes such as the rural stewardship scheme, on which we have had some discussion today, are intended to address some of those issues. The mechanics of the scheme have been criticised, but we should not lose sight of the scheme's intent, which is to reward farmers for preserving the environment or for creating environments that will improve the situation for the increasingly rare wildlife in parts of Scotland. It is not fair to blame farmers for all the problems, because farming has been directed by public policy. However, we have to take stock of the situation as it exists. Scotland will not be able to compete in the cheap market. Our climate is too harsh compared to that of New Zealand, Argentina, Botswana or even eastern Europe. Our hill sheep, for example, are unable to be finished on the holding of their birth. In the longer term, there is little point in subsidising production over and above what the market can sustain. Why should the Scottish public accept the need to subsidise products that they do not want to buy? Rory Dutton of the Scottish Crofters Union said in his evidence to the Rural Development Committee a couple of weeks ago: "It is necessary to justify where the money is going."

I accept that there has been a major problem in markets post-BSE. However, I am talking about the level of support. We are dealing with supporting an industry. The people of this country and the people of the European Union support the industry. That has to go with an acceptance of what the industry is about. We are talking about the way in which we value agriculture and why. We are not just talking about whether the markets are open or closed. I return to what Rory Dutton told us. He said: "The issue is no longer simply about maximising food production. We would argue that it is about maximising broader benefits. If the money is being spent to support agriculture, let us get as many other benefits as possible from it, such as socioeconomic or environmental benefits."—[ Official Report , Rural Development Committee , 18 September 2001; c 2145.]. Agriculture has a huge role to play in improving the environment and in regenerating habitats that are now in decline. Scotland's countryside is one of its most valuable assets. We may not have the weather, but we have the scenery. Our natural heritage is the basis of much of Scottish tourism. Every year, walking tourism is worth £488 million to our economy; cycling is worth £73 million; field sports are worth £53 million; and wildlife watching is worth £57 million. The new rural development regulation provides more flexibility to support economic, social and environmental benefits, rather than simply paying for production. By the next financial year, more than £110 million of support will be paid in that way, compared to just over £400 million paid for production. I am aware that there is a view that we do not make the best use of the rural development regulation in Scotland. As the minister knows, I have some sympathy with that view. The Scottish Labour Party is committed to fundamental change in European policy and further movement away from supporting production through price guarantees towards rewarding farmers for their stewardship role. The current application of the less favoured area scheme seems to have little cross-party support. We all agree that it needs to be reviewed. There also needs to be more transparency in the way in which subsidies are given. The rural development regulation is already stimulating discussion of how multifunctional  farming can be promoted. As has been mentioned, "A Forward Strategy for Scottish Agriculture" highlights the way in which the French Government uses the rural development regulation for land management contracts, which support economic, environmental, employment and land use objectives through one scheme, rather than making farmers apply for a mixture of subsidy packages. The Scottish Executive's intention to develop a similar scheme in Scotland has been widely welcomed—although it did not seem to be welcomed by Fergus Ewing. That is not to say that production is not important. Scotland should be able to compete successfully at the high-quality end of the market. That includes the important export markets of Europe and beyond. John Scott made an important point about the closure of those markets. Costs have to be kept down and the strategy suggests how business advice might be improved, how the enterprise network could help farming industries to improve their competitiveness and how co-operation and schemes such as machinery rings could help to reduce expenditure. Attention is also given to how the food supply chain might be reduced and how farmers and retailers can better identify their customers' needs. For example, farmers markets have already gained valuable experience in direct selling and through links with local shops and tourism; others can learn from that experience. Whenever the Scottish Executive produces a strategy document, there are those whose prime objective is to state all that they think wrong with it, whether that be its content, its form or the paper on which it is printed. Opposition parties may indeed see blanket criticism as their role—the SNP amendment seems to be a classic example of that approach and it is no wonder that the minister struggled to find the parliamentary language to describe it. I note that the minister has accepted Mr Fergusson's amendment. Indeed, I do not think that anyone could disagree with it. However, I remind Mr Fergusson that BSE did not do much to improve farmers' morale. Some of the rather Europhobic policies that are outlined in the Tory document "A Fair Deal for Farmers" would do little to help. In fact, they would leave a funding gap of about £472 million, which I do not think would help farmers' morale much either. It would be a pity were the SNP's blanket criticism allowed to mask genuinely constructive—but possibly critical—comment on the content of the document. Any progress has to involve critical friends. For example, there are concerns that the role of crofting and organic farming is not sufficiently emphasised. My colleague Rhoda  Grant will expand on those sectors. There are also regrets that the trade unions involved in agriculture were not represented on the steering group—I should add that there were also no women on it. My colleague Elaine Smith will say more about the trade union response to the document, as well as talking about health and safety matters. Sylvia Jackson will draw on the experiences of the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park campaign and on how working together will promote environmental and economic progress. How "A Forward Strategy for Scottish Agriculture" links with other Executive strategies on tourism, cultural heritage and forestry is unclear, but the articulation of such concerns does not detract from the fact that the document contains 54 action points, illustrations of successful case studies, a number of radical proposals and a commitment to creating a prosperous farming industry that promotes rural development and sustains and enhances our environment. I am surprised that the SNP finds that difficult to accept. The document and the debate that it has stimulated are to be welcomed and I will be pleased to support the Executive's motion as amended.

Does the minister agree with the water commissioner, Alan Sutherland, that the establishment of a new single water authority should not necessarily mean the centralisation of services in Edinburgh and Glasgow and that centralisation does not necessarily equate with efficiency?

When the bill was originally proposed, I expected to support it. I did, however, undertake to listen to the views of my constituents and to the evidence that was presented to the then Rural Affairs Committee. The proposals generated much correspondence—as one might expect—expressing strong views divided evenly for and against the bill. That equality of division might not be typical of other members' postbags. However, there are two registered hunts in Dumfries and field sports are important to the economy of the region. I also listened to the evidence that was taken by the committee. I visited gamekeepers and hunt kennels in my constituency and I was invited to attend local meetings. I learned about matters of which I would otherwise have known nothing. I found that contradictory evidence was presented on some matters and I changed my opinions on others because of the evidence that I heard. As a consequence, I present to Parliament an alternative approach for the Scottish Executive to consider as the basis for legislation. I fully support the original intention of Mike Watson's bill, because the current situation is hard to accept on moral grounds. However, I believe that the bill would miss its target of reducing animal suffering. The bill has highlighted the need to change existing legislation and, through the evidence that was taken during stage 1, has brought an enormous amount of information into the public domain. The work that has so far been undertaken by the Rural Development Committee and others should not be lost. Instead, it could form the basis of a new and workable law, which could achieve the goal of giving greater protection to Scotland's wild mammals. Unfortunately, the widely accepted principles of the Watson bill are not served by targeting hunting with dogs. My amendment recommends a comprehensive approach to the issue. It will address unacceptable practices while balancing fairly the rights and responsibilities of those who take part in wildlife management activities. The current legislation includes the Protection of Animals (Scotland) Act 1912, which applies to domestic animals and captive animals, such as zoo animals. The act states that it is an offence to "cause unnecessary suffering" to such animals. In contrast, the Wild Mammals Protection Act 1996, which covers all wild mammals, restricts prosecutable offences to specific actions in which a person "mutilates, kicks, beats, nails or otherwise impales, stabs,  burns, stones, crushes, drowns, drags, or asphyxiates any wild mammal with intent to inflict unnecessary suffering". The 1996 act was brought in after a number of offences against hedgehogs. As well as protecting wild mammals in specific circumstances, it exempts people who are involved in hunting and coursing. My amendment, which is based on a proposal by Lord Donoughue, would enable the Executive to consider replacing the list of proscribed actions with a section stating that it would be illegal to cause unnecessary suffering to any wild mammal. That would treat wild animals in a similar manner to domestic and captive animals. The committee heard of an incident involving cruelty towards a fox, which could not—and, under Mike Watson's bill, would not—be prosecuted because it did not involve dogs. Legislation along the line of my proposals would allow prosecution in such cases. The Executive should also consider removing the exemption for hunting with dogs, thereby putting the law on that point on a level playing field and again bringing the law on wild mammals into line with the law on domestic and captive animals. Therefore, an individual or an organisation could bring a case against a hunt if there was sufficient evidence to show that there had been excessive suffering to the quarry. Actions against activities such as hare coursing could, I believe, be successfully prosecuted, as could actions against sending dogs underground to bait a fox. If proven evidence of cruelty came forward, and if a case was successfully brought to court, mounted fox hunting could in effect be banned altogether. The law relating to the protection of wild mammals would then be similar in principle to the law that currently covers domestic animals, which dictates those actions that are viewed to cause an acceptable degree of suffering, and those that cause unnecessary suffering. A change to the Wild Mammals (Protection) Act 1996 would not mean that illegal acts would be the same for all species. The law that covers domestic animals allows for different actions to be undertaken on different species, depending on the nature of each species. For example, actions that are acceptable in the case of a horse would be quite unacceptable if applied to a hamster. The crucial question is not just what was done to the animal, but whether it was acceptable in the circumstances and whether it went beyond what was necessary. In animal welfare terms, prohibiting one control method—hunting with dogs—would merely allow that to be replaced by other methods, which are equally capable of causing suffering. The issue of hunting with dogs cannot be viewed in isolation.  As the Rural Development Committee report states, hunting "dogs ... are not the common factor in determining cruelty."

I am sorry—I need the time to develop my arguments. Although Mike Watson has said that his intention in introducing the bill was to end cruelty, I believe that it is a mistake to predicate that on the use of dogs. The evidence that was taken by the committee convinced most of us that dogs may be used either humanely or cruelly. In some cases, the use of dogs might be the most effective and humane method of pest control. That is particularly true on difficult terrain. Examples of that might include the use of foot packs for the control of foxes in parts of the Highlands. Foot packs sometimes kill the fox. Another option is the use of terriers to flush foxes to waiting guns on rocky hill terrain, where lamping cannot be employed. The use of dogs in controlled circumstances need cause no more suffering than other methods, including shooting, snaring and trapping. Being chased by a dog or dogs will obviously cause some suffering to the animal that is being chased and there would need to be enforceable guidelines to make it clear what is and is not acceptable. That could be resolved by a mechanism—perhaps licensing—that lays down a code of conduct that specifies fairly and workably the rights and responsibilities of those who work with dogs. All dogs have a propensity to hunt, and the exact wording of any legislation must therefore be carefully considered. The wording of the bill as introduced could be interpreted in such a way that a person walking their dogs might be prosecuted were the dogs to chase a wild mammal. I appreciate that that is not the intention of those who support the bill. Unless it is specific in its intent and wording, courts could interpret the law—if the bill is passed—differently. It is generally accepted that the scope of the bill is wider than we originally expected. Some members will argue that the problems that are inherent in the bill as introduced will be resolved by amendment at stage 2 and, if that is not possible, that the option of rejection at stage 3 remains. That is true, but I ask members to consider whether that would in the end produce the best legislation, and whether that would be the best use of committee time—whether the Rural Development Committee's time or another committee's time. Would not it be better to examine the body of evidence that the committee collected, to supplement it where necessary and to return with a more considered and reflective bill? Let me make my own position clear. I find hare  coursing abhorrent, and the pursuit of one small, red wild dog by a gang of people, hounds, horses, quad bikes and so on is at the very least distasteful. I would not hunt, shoot or fish, because I have no desire to seek recreation in killing live creatures. I will not support the Rural Development Committee amendment, because I do not believe that it goes far enough. Given the amount of committee and parliamentary time that has already expended on the matter, and that which is to come, I ask how far up our list of priorities the bill should be. Does it help one drug addict relinquish his or her habit? Does it lift one child out of poverty? Does it allow one elderly person to live in dignity? Does it house one homeless family or offer anybody better wages, education or training? Will it aid rural development or help my constituents overcome the problems that have been created by foot-and-mouth disease? The bill before us might be iconic, but the icon is one of a bygone age. The problems of workers in the global capitalist system will not be addressed by banning hunting with dogs. If members seek to improve the welfare of wild mammals, I urge them to support my amendment. I move amendment S1M-2078.1, to leave out from "agrees" to end and insert: "does not agree to the general principles of the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill because, while accepting the desire of the sponsors to end cruelty to wild mammals, it does not believe that this Bill adequately addresses the issues presented in evidence to the Rural Development Committee and considers that the Scottish Executive, as an alternative, should examine the existing law in relation to wild mammals, in particular the Wild Mammals (Protection) Act 1996, in order to take action against any unnecessary suffering caused through the provisions of this Act and to bring the legislation covering wild mammals into line with that which applies to domestic animals."

Mr Jenkins's original question referred to resuming exports from Scotland. In view of Commissioner  Byrne's comments yesterday, will the minister inform Parliament of the status of negotiations with the European Union on the resumption of exports and confirm whether he is continuing to push for the resumption of exports from Scotland as a whole?

There has been scepticism in some quarters that the Scottish Executive would deliver on its commitment to land reform. I am therefore pleased to hear the First Minister say that the land reform bill will be introduced in the next year. Land reform is an important, and in some cases contentious, issue. Time has to be taken to get it right, but I am glad to hear that the Parliament will soon get the opportunity to discuss the bill. Land reform is important to me as a member of the Labour party. The Labour movement has held the land reform agenda dear since before the inception of the Labour party—from the time of the  Land League protests in the 1880s. Land reform was one of Keir Hardie's commitments, and it fuelled the Kinder Scout trespasses in the 1930s. It has already inspired legislation in the Parliament, in the shape of the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000. The issue of access has been contentious, and I am sure that MSPs of all political persuasions have been heavily lobbied from all sides of the debate. The right to roam—for the people of Scotland to enjoy the land in which they live—is a fundamental principle. There are of course important balances to be struck: the environment has to be protected; people's livelihoods have to be protected. The principle of maximum responsible access must be upheld. The access forum produced, by discussion and consensus, a detailed draft code, and I look to colleagues on the front bench to ensure that the agreements that were reached are reflected in the bill when introduced. There are two other important strands to the land reform bill. The first is the community right to buy. The so-called new politics sometimes appears to be so consensual and pragmatic that there are no issues of principle left. Let me say, however, that when a community is under threat from an absentee landlord or when its members' livelihoods are threatened by undue cost or lack of concern, the Labour party knows what side it is on. It was clear from Mr McLetchie's comments that the Tories also know what side they are on. Communities look to the bill to right such wrongs. There is also reform of crofting tenure. That may not affect my constituents nor those of most members, but it affects the lives of people in some of our most fragile rural communities. That strand in the bill is also to be welcomed. The introduction of the land reform bill will demonstrate again the value of the Scottish Parliament. This legal reform is long overdue and, without this Parliament, who knows when the bill would be introduced? It might have been many more decades, or even centuries, before it was discussed at Westminster. The ramifications of the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak brought to the attention of all our citizens, both urban and rural, the problems of rural Scotland. The land reform bill presents all our citizens with the opportunity to treasure, value and enjoy the pleasures of the countryside, and it gives long-overdue rights to rural communities. It will therefore be an important piece of legislation. I suspect that the passage of the bill will not be straightforward, but I very much welcome its imminent introduction.

Like the Labour MP whom Mary Scanlon quoted, I was one of many who opposed the national lottery when it was introduced in 1993. A Calvinist streak in me remains slightly uncomfortable with the idea of Governments promoting gambling to provide services. Some of the most high-profile recipients of lottery funding have not helped the lottery's image. I acknowledge the concerns of several members that the principle of additionality must be adhered to. The published criteria for the new opportunities fund make that clear—I checked that in their most recent publication. Mike Russell referred to a briefing that the SCVO e-mailed to all MSPs this week before the debate. I felt that the briefing had a strangely nationalistic tone.

I take some exception to Mr Russell's quotation about the effective use of significant funds. To illustrate that, I will refer to several projects in Dumfries and Galloway that received funding this year. The first is a Macmillan Cancer Relief project that received £1.5 million. That went not to the national health service in Scotland, but to a charity, to provide 50 per cent of the construction  costs of a purpose-built cancer, oncology and palliative care facility at Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary. At the present time, some of my seriously ill constituents are forced to travel to Edinburgh, Glasgow or Carlisle for cancer treatment. Far from being ineffective, when taken together with funding for the training of staff in the voluntary and statutory sectors, those are important and welcome funding developments for the Dumfries and Galloway region. Over £1 million has been allocated to healthy living centres in Dumfries and Galloway. The centres support community health development workers in four areas including, as it so happens, the area in which I live.

No, I am sorry, I am pressed for time. Some of the areas that are benefiting from the investment are rural and others are urban. All have a higher-than-average level of deprivation. Seventeen partner organisations, including voluntary sector organisations such as the Maxwelton umbrella group, worked hard for two years to secure funding. Over £500,000 has been allocated to summer-school and after-school projects across the region. Those projects are additional to work that is being done by the council, and they allow it to extend the range of opportunities that are on offer to young people. At the turn of last year, a further £100,000 went to Dumfries and Galloway College to enable it to develop a website as part of its on-going lifelong learning partnership—a partnership that is becoming an extremely important facility with an emphasis on skill development in rural areas. That is also an effective use of funding. The third round of NOF initiatives, currently under consultation, will be worth an additional £1.5 billion. My attention was drawn to the section on youth work and the funding for building and refurbishing outdoor adventure facilities. I was approached recently by about 30 young men from my constituency, aged between 13 and 25, who want to develop a BMX and skateboarding facility. We had a productive meeting with the council. I see that as a great opportunity to empower those young people and to allow them to take ownership of and to develop a partnership project that would otherwise not be open to them. That is potentially an effective use of lottery funding. Back in 1993, when the lottery was introduced, donations to charity fell. Many people saw the lottery as an alternative way of giving funds to charity. The debate gives us an opportunity to  encourage people to try to contribute directly to charities that they wish to support. That would be a better way for people to support charities.

On restocking, has the minister considered resolving possible problems with autumn sales of pedigree rams in infected areas? That will require animal movement, at least in those areas, to allow breeding of next year's lambs to progress.

The minister is well aware of the problems with school buildings in my constituency—and while I am on that topic, I briefly digress to welcome a party of pupils from St Andrew's Primary School in Dumfries, who are in the public gallery. [ Applause. ] When does the minister hope to give further consideration to the possible PPP bids from areas such as Dumfries and Galloway for large-scale school building and repair programmes?

I thank the minister for his statement, of which I did not receive an advance copy. I join him in thanking all those who have been involved in the process—many of whom I have witnessed working at first hand—for their efforts. I have three points to raise. First, a number of farmers are experiencing significant delays in receiving their compensation cheques. I spoke to farmers this week who have waited more than eight weeks for compensation cheques. I wonder whether the minister can do anything to facilitate that. Secondly, in welcoming the arrangements that the minister announced for cattle that are ready for slaughter, which will start on 1 June, I ask him to clarify whether similar arrangements are being introduced for sheep. Surprisingly enough, there are still clean farms in infected areas that have sheep on them. The situation is particularly difficult for farmers with fat lambs and so on. The minister has said that we must try to find alternative methods for the control of foot-and-mouth disease. I have witnessed scenes in my constituency—including funeral pyres and lorry loads of animals being taken for burial—that I hope I never have to see again. Does the Executive have plans to commission research by the rural affairs department's research institutes to try to find alternative ways of controlling the disease?

To ask the First Minister what new initiatives the Scottish Executive is taking to improve the availability of transport in rural areas. (S1F-1101)

I have recently had conversations with constituents who have indicated that the availability of transport is an issue of great importance to them and a vital factor in social inclusion. It is unfortunate that one of the major private bus operators in my constituency has recently withdrawn a number of routes. How can the Executive's intentions to improve public transport be safeguarded against the vagaries of the deregulated public transport that we inherited from the Conservative Government?

Foot-and-mouth disease arrived on 1 March. Since then, 176 cases have been confirmed in the region and nearly 1,300 farms have been affected, the vast majority through the pre-emptive cull strategy. More than 0.5 million sheep and more than 60,000 cattle have been slaughtered. Many ancient and established herds and flocks have had to be sacrificed. Dumfries and Galloway, which has 0.2 per cent of the United Kingdom's population, has endured more than 11 per cent of the cases. Within Scotland, 96 per cent of confirmed cases have occurred in the region. Scottish Enterprise Dumfries and Galloway has undertaken a four-week survey to track the effects on the local economy, the results of which were expected today. I have not been apprised of them yet, but preliminary results indicate that 50 per cent of the region's businesses have been affected, with an average loss of £22,000. Stena Line reckons that its losses now approach £1 million. In Ayrshire and Dumfries and Galloway, 584 people have registered for benefit as a direct result of foot-and-mouth disease, but the figures for job losses are much greater. Self-employed people are not entitled to jobseekers allowance and 132 temporary jobs associated with the cull and disinfection process were available for agricultural workers who had been laid off from their usual employment. Those jobs will cease in the near future and the problem of retaining staff where farmers intend to restock will become more urgent. If no further cases arise in the region—and we all hope fervently that that will be the case—the slaughter is expected to cease by tomorrow.  The Army will be withdrawn, the seconded vets will leave the area and the full impact of the outbreak on employment will begin to be felt. Seasonal employment is crucial in the region, especially during the summer. It is crucial to many household economies. Usually, 24 per cent of businesses employ seasonal labour, but this year that is likely to halve. The situation is worse in tourism, with only 19 per cent of businesses, compared with the usual 48 per cent, expecting to employ seasonal staff. The cost to Dumfries and Galloway Council of combating the disease reached £4.9 million at the end of April and is expected to rise to £8.5 million at the end of May. This morning, the Executive announced £2 million to assist. I understand that additional expenses will be met by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and others. That illustrates the level of the council's involvement. More than 30 council staff were redeployed and more than 100 other staff changed working patterns and duties in the fight against the disease. They have made a vital contribution to preventing the spread of the disease to other parts of Scotland. The council agreed a hardship relief package in April, which includes deferral of rates for three months, a hardship rates relief scheme, a small business loan fund of £100,000 and £500,000 seedcorn money for a multi-agency community fund. That is costing the council around £6.5 million. I understand that the council is a bit disappointed that only £2 million was made available in this morning's announcement, but I have reassured it that that is an interim package and that longer-term measures are being considered. The outbreak has drawn public attention to the number of local businesses that depend on agriculture. That is perhaps not surprising, as Dumfries and Galloway is one of the few areas of the UK where the local gross domestic product for agriculture and related services, at 23 per cent, is higher than it is for tourism. Before the foot-and-mouth outbreak, 14 per cent of the region's employment was in agriculture. Forty-two per cent of businesses in Dumfries and Galloway have a direct connection with agriculture. Those businesses include farm machinery retailers, veterinary services for farm animals, farriers and builders. They have not even been able to get access to many of their clients. Downstream industries are also included—food processing in Dumfries and Galloway has a turnover of £314 million and employs 2,500 people. Glanbia Foods UK, which owns the Lockerbie Cheese Company and relies on milk production in  Dumfries and Galloway and Cumbria to supply the factory at Lochmaben, has expressed serious concerns about the reduction in local milk supply and the possible consequences for the 215 people who work at the plant. This morning, we discussed the value of tourism to the region. The May bank holiday helped some, but not all; one publican in Langholm who took £1,420 over the May bank holiday in 2000 took only £85 last weekend, primarily because of the loss of the self-catering market. Other leisure industries have experienced a downturn. For example, visitor attractions have had fewer visitors. Last week, the manager of the zoo at Kirkcudbright told me of the problems there, which have been caused in particular by the public interpreting advice to keep away from animals as applying to zoo animals as well. The equestrian centre where my daughter works on a Saturday has had 30 per cent fewer pupils as a result of the outbreak, with a much steeper loss on the retail side. Other major events in the area, such as agricultural shows and the common ridings, have had to be cancelled; all of them attracted visitors and encouraged spend in host towns and villages. I do not want this debate to be a catalogue of woes, as that would be unfair to all the organisations that are looking to the future and planning for the recovery of the region. The council, the area tourist board, the trade unions, the Federation of Small Businesses, the National Farmers Union of Scotland and various local community group initiatives have shown the determination to fight back and to use this terrible experience as an opportunity for improvement. This morning, the Executive announced an interim package of measures in response to the recovery plan from Dumfries and Galloway's joint economic impact group. I welcome the additional £5 million from Scottish Enterprise to assist with business survival and look forward to hearing further details about how that money will be used. I understand that a portion will be allocated for infrastructure projects and for a business loans scheme, for which there has been strong local demand. Furthermore, on Tuesday, the Executive announced that it would match public donations to the voluntary sector made by the Scottish Community Foundation for relief for rural communities affected by foot-and-mouth. The economic recovery plan proposed by the impact group is substantial and amounts to more than £40 million over three years: £3 million for rural development and agriculture; £17.5 million for business; £7 million for tourism; and £12.5 million for people and communities. That final category recognises that community spirit and civic pride are one of the region's greatest assets and that, as with past problems, that spirit is  helping the area to survive the crisis. The determination of local communities in Langholm, Annan, Moffat and throughout the region will play a pivotal role in the area's recovery. By improving locally based training and business opportunities and developing local information and communications technology centres, we will build on the unique strengths of each community, as owned, identified and appreciated by its citizens. Assistance with funding a recovery programme could come from several sources, such as the Executive, or from redirecting the existing spending priorities of local or national agencies, as we have seen today with the redirection of £5 million of Scottish Enterprise funding to the local enterprise network. Money could also come from UK sources, objective 2 funding and lottery funding. If lottery funding could be used to keep the millennium dome open for a year, surely it could be used to keep open visitor attractions in Dumfries and Galloway or indeed to fund new attractions to bolster tourism throughout the region. No amount of funding can take away the sadness of the past 10 weeks. If we had a pound for every tear shed over foot-and-mouth, all our problems would probably be solved. That said, tears and sympathy will not provide a way forward and I welcome the Executive's interim measures, including those announced this morning. My constituents are not holding out a begging bowl; the people of Dumfries and Galloway have never believed that anyone owed them a living. What we seek is further investment in local communities to create a transformed, modern and forward-looking local economy. I am grateful to all who have contributed to what has been achieved so far, but I hope—and ask—for further, longer-term measures, because I believe that economic recovery in Dumfries and Galloway will bear fruit for the entire Scottish economy, not just for the region.

Will the minister confirm whether the £2 million that was announced this morning towards the expenses that have been incurred by Dumfries and Galloway Council is additional to the expenses that are likely to be underwritten by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food? Could the minister comment on how that and further assistance might be affected in the event of a Conservative Government in Westminster cutting the Scottish budget by £16 billion?

The Conservative motion talks about the efforts to regenerate the Scottish tourism industry being undermined. It is important that politicians do not undermine efforts to promote Scotland and its regions in the wake of the foot-and-mouth outbreak. There is a temptation, particularly during a general election campaign, to create headlines, but we and the media must beware of talking down the industry and contributing to its considerable difficulties. The problems created by the foot-and-mouth outbreak for the economy of Dumfries and Galloway will be debated later today and, obviously, tourism must be part of that discussion. I am concerned about the efforts that are being  made by the local tourist board which, as Alex Fergusson just said, has had problems. However, we must give credit to the chief executive and the chair of the board for their sterling efforts to turn around the situation. Last week, for example, they made an effort to rebrand the region. We must not lose sight of those important initiatives due to the fact that the media likes to concentrate on personalities and problems within visitscotland. Many of my constituents who are struggling to survive at the moment feel that such matters are an irrelevant distraction from the issues that face us. Tourism is worth £82 million a year to Dumfries and Galloway. It provides around 8,000 jobs and attracts 700,000 visitors. I should point out that few of those visitors are from the diaspora—I, too, have a dictionary, so I know what the word of the day means. Most of the visitors to the region are from the UK and Europe. The foot-and-mouth crisis is estimated to be losing the tourism industry around £2 million a week. Last week, the area tourist board launched Operation Azalea to try to counteract the damage that has been done. That project was funded through the £300,000 that was allocated to the region's recovery plan by visitscotland. I know that £300,000 is not really enough—I do not think that any of us feel that it is—but it was a start, and was allocated for a particular purpose. That funding enabled the ATB to commission the services of experts, who already had experience in the regeneration of tourism in the Shetlands after the Braer oil spill disaster, for example. I note from today's speech by the minister that discussions between visitscotland and the ATB are under way on the subject of the additional resources. I can tell members that the ATB wants £7 million over the next three years and is prepared to approach a number of funding sources for that, including the EU and the UK Government. That may seem a lot of money, but, compared to the £82 million a year that tourism in Dumfries and Galloway is worth and to the £2 million that is being lost each week, that is a reasonably small investment to try to turn the situation around. Clearly, much ground has to be made up in tourism in Dumfries and Galloway. Alex Fergusson mentioned that the figures were down by 20 per cent on the previous year, which was itself a poor season. However, the reduction varied across the region and across sectors. The self-catering sector, for example, suffered worse than some others. I understand that preliminary data from the recent holiday weekend show a similar variation, with very poor returns in the east of the region—in my constituency—but rather better returns in the west. In fact, Threave gardens were busier over  the May holiday than they have ever been. The ground still has to be made up in the parts of the region worst affected by the foot-and-mouth outbreak. That is why it is so important that we project a positive image of the region, and that that is not obscured by the political badinage that inevitably accompanies a general election campaign. We should bear in mind that 85 per cent of tourist attractions in Dumfries and Galloway are open. That figure is increasing. Forest walks may be reopened; the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development was in the area on her bike last weekend; all the golf courses and all the beaches are open. In my view, the region still possesses, despite the lack of animals—which is a very sad sight—the greatest variety of beautiful scenery in the whole of Scotland. I did not see a single pyre all weekend, except for some smoke across the Solway firth, near Silloth. The Conservative motion calls for a number of actions to be taken. I think that the Conservatives are somewhat pre-emptive in doing so, because we have received only this morning the announcement of further interim measures in response to the recovery plan that was put to the Executive by Dumfries and Galloway Council, the area tourist board and Scottish Enterprise Dumfries and Galloway. As the minister has told us, the plan includes a small amount of loan support to the affected businesses. I was pleased to hear today's announcement, but I look forward to further announcements about more long-term measures. I am convinced that tourism in Dumfries and Galloway, like many other industries, has a future. I hope to see the tourism industry rise like a phoenix from the pyre of the disaster that has taken place over the past couple of months. I look forward to support from the Executive and the Parliament on that.

Will the First Minister congratulate Dumfries and Galloway Health Board on its successful application for £1.5 million of lottery funding towards a new oncology unit at Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary? Does he agree that the patients in Dumfries and Galloway who will benefit from that service will not be unhappy that the money they spend on lottery tickets will be put to that purpose?

I, too, welcome the measures that the minister announced. I hope that they will go some way towards preserving what remains of the beef and dairy herds in the south-west of Scotland, which are important to the local economy. I wish briefly to check on two aspects of the new policy. I draw the minister's attention to a couple of documents on the protection of rare breeds and hefted sheep in England and Wales on the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food's website. Is the minister saying that a similar policy will not apply in Scotland? In the minister's statement to Parliament on 15 March, he suggested that pigs would be treated in a similar way to cattle. However, the guidance from the Scottish Executive rural affairs department suggests that pigs should be treated in a similar way to sheep and that they will be culled if they are within the 3km zone. Today, there is some media interest in a pet Vietnamese pot-bellied pig, named Porky, which lives within 3km of an outbreak that was reported on 7 March. The case highlights the fact that, although there are not many pigs in Dumfries and Galloway, there seems to be a little confusion about how the policy applies to them.

I will offer Alasdair Morrison a drink if he comes to the Dumfries constituency for his holidays. I am pleased to hear about the minister's action to encourage residents of the UK to holiday in Scotland. I was going to ask him how we are to promote Dumfries and Galloway and get over the idea that it is closed. There is still plenty that can be done there. I hope that the minister will take all possible action to encourage people to go there. What action is the Scottish Executive taking to encourage public bodies to hold events there? That suggestion was made by the interim chief executive of visitscotland. Is the Scottish Executive acting on that advice?

Will the minister advise members when he expects the 48-hour target for a cull for contiguous farms to be achieved? There are still some problems with the notification of contiguous farms. I am aware of one constituent who heard on the 6 o'clock news that his farm was contiguous. Will the minister look into the problems that people continue to have with help and advice? I am told that it is still the case that some people are being passed between Ayr and Dumfries although the council has put in its own helpline.

Some farmers in my constituency, especially those in areas that are contiguous to farms where there are confirmed cases, have been receiving misleading advice on whether their animals are to be culled. Can the First Minister and the Minister for Environment and Rural Development reassure me that they will do all they can to ensure that all farmers in the affected areas receive the correct advice? It is extremely distressing for them to hear that their animals are to be destroyed; it is even more distressing to find out that the letter they received was a mistake.

Excuse me.

Excuse me. Will the member give way?

On a point of order.

Yes, it is a point of order. Is it in order for that gentleman there to insult me across the chamber? Is that in order?

I am objecting to being called a patsy. I asked a question of the Executive that was extremely relevant to my constituency.

I object to being called a patsy.

A patsy.

The crisis caused by foot-and-mouth disease in rural parts of Scotland, particularly in Dumfries and Galloway, graphically illustrates the interdependence of key sectors of the rural economy. Much attention has so far been focused on the appalling consequences of the outbreak for the farming industry. There were 61 cases reported this morning in Dumfries and Galloway, including some extremely valuable pedigree cattle and sheep in the Ruthwell area. We will also face the elimination of all sheep in parts of Dumfriesshire in a mass cull that is due to commence shortly. The effects are not restricted to agriculture. Local surveys that have been undertaken by the area tourist board and the Federation of Small Businesses have produced some alarming statistics. The area tourist board had returns from 355 tourism businesses, which indicated that £650,000 of business had been lost to tourism in Dumfries and Galloway between 1 and 19 March and that 182 people had moved from full-time to part-time work and 73 people had been laid off in less than three weeks. The crisis has come at a particularly bad time for  the tourism industry. Small, seasonal businesses have accumulated significant overdrafts over the winter months. Normally, such overdrafts would be reduced during the spring and summer season. This year, that will not happen; those people will have little or no income to service their debts. Nor will they be able to offer seasonal employment, which is important in rural areas. They also do not require the services of suppliers, so enterprises down that chain are affected.

That is quite likely. Do I get extra time for interventions, Presiding Officer?

I have already referred to the problems experienced by visitor attractions. We need to consider action in order to keep attractions open, such as the possibility of using lottery funding, as I suggested to the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning. If our visitor attractions are closed, there will be less for people to see in the area, which will have a long-term effect on tourism. The forestry trade is affected because machinery is not moving and logs are deteriorating while they lie around. The building trade has laid off workers who are unable to work on farms in restricted areas. Retail sales are down and town centres are lying quiet because there are few visitors to spend money and many local people are too insecure about their future to spend money on anything other than essentials. Other areas of local life have been disrupted. For example, 25 per cent of pupils at Lockerbie Academy are unable to get to school—many have important exams to sit in the near future. Even the common ridings and the ridings of the marches—important and historic cultural celebrations—have had to be cancelled. We need two strategies: action for survival during the crisis and action for regeneration once the crisis is over. That is true for all rural Scotland, but mostly for Dumfries and Galloway as we have a longer and steeper hill to climb. The message must be reinforced that rural Scotland is not closed and that Dumfries and Galloway is not closed—there are restrictions on outdoor pursuits, but there is no danger to human beings visiting the area. A colleague has just told me that she had been advised not to come on holiday to Dumfries  and Galloway because she has a dog. That advice has been rescinded, but it is just the sort of misinformation that we can well do without. The measures that are needed in the short term have also been mentioned. I welcome the measures in relation to tax, rates relief and support from the financial sector to which the Minister for Environment and Rural Development referred. I repeat my urge that the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning consider lottery funding—I am pleased with her response to my question on that. The cull of sheep must be completed as quickly as possible, to minimise the pain and destruction experienced by local communities. I wonder whether the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Scottish Executive rural affairs department have actively considered the belt-and-braces approach that has been adopted by the Netherlands, which involves vaccination followed by cull. In the longer term, we need an active campaign that promotes Scotland, and especially Dumfries and Galloway, in order to attract tourists and new businesses. The Executive is planning to introduce broad-band technology into schools—I urge that that is progressed as quickly as possible to enhance the information and communications technology infrastructure of rural areas. The minister referred to the need to kick-start the economy. The FSB has suggested that that could be done by supporting the building trade. Again, the Executive has plans to increase the supply of housing for rent in rural areas. The council has plans to rebuild and repair a number of local schools. There is the possibility of putting money in to help to restart the economy in the area. We need a strategy for diversification. I hope that Nick Brown will follow through his willingness to support farmers who want to leave the industry. I ask whether it is possible to re-examine aspects of modulation of common agricultural policy moneys in light of the crisis. These are desperate times. It is extremely difficult to catch a glimpse of the light at the end of the tunnel, especially when, in Dumfries and Galloway, that tunnel seems to be full of smoke. However, creating such a glimpse of light is a duty of Government, and I urge the Executive to do all that it can. I support the motion.

Will the minister advise me whether the Scottish Executive or the UK Government have examined the possibility of lottery funding being used for short-term assistance to visitor attractions that might close permanently if they are not given assistance soon?

To ask the Scottish Executive what consideration it has given to the recent report "North Channel Economic Study", which was commissioned by the North Channel Partnership and produced by Pieda Consulting. (S1O-3124)

If the minister has had a chance to examine the study, which was produced by a consortium of local authorities and commercial interests in south-west Scotland and Northern Ireland, she will have noted that, in addition to the £21 million that is provided for the local economy, the A75 supports 2,500 jobs in Scotland through the Lochryan ferry operations and half a million tourist trips, and that it contributes £114 million to the Scottish economy, which equates to another 3,800 jobs. Does the minister agree that the A75 and A77 are roads of national and international importance? Will she confirm that the Executive will seriously consider their economic importance to Scotland?

I welcome the minister's speaking to us today about the current development. I am absolutely stunned about the effect that it will have on my beleaguered constituents. At the moment, many of  them are living in a pall of dense, stinking smoke, and are surrounded by fields bereft of animals. The minister may be aware of the disappointment in Dumfries and Galloway that, two weeks after the outbreak, he has not yet been down there to witness the sterling work being done by Dumfries and Galloway Council, in its attempt to try to contain the disease. I plead with the minister yet again for him, or another senior minister, urgently to come to Dumfries and Galloway. I know that he cannot do anything to make this situation better, but I plead with him to come to express his solidarity with the suffering and the courage of my constituents.

On past occasions, I have been critical of motions that the Conservative party has put forward for debate. However, today I am happy to welcome the opportunity to discuss further this extremely important issue, which is currently the major topic of discussion in Dumfries and Galloway. I agree with Alex Johnstone that imports must meet the same high standards that we expect of our meat production, but I do not agree that we should unilaterally ban imports. I realise that he has a professional interest in that area. A unilateral ban could make things worse. The EU has powers to close down offending abattoirs. We must insist that those powers are used as vigorously as possible. Everybody is aware of the problem that exists in Dumfries and Galloway. The minister has said that there are 13 cases. The figure that I was previously aware of was 11; I do not know where the other two cases are, but I have a nasty feeling that they may still be local. Farmers will be compensated at full market value for the slaughter of their beasts; that will cost about £30 million for the whole of Scotland. As members know, losses consequential on movement restrictions or losses by businesses dependent on meat production are unlikely to be compensated. That may seem hard, but compensation for consequential loss is not usual practice and its potential cost, as a precedent, could be very large. We should perhaps be more imaginative in the way in which we deal with that matter, because the knock-on effects of the epidemic are widespread. I urge the Executive to work with other agencies to ameliorate the situation as far as possible.  Yesterday, I met representatives from the Federation of Small Businesses, which is conducting a survey in Dumfries and Galloway to investigate the cost of the foot-and-mouth epidemic for local enterprises.

The way in which information is currently being disseminated and who is saying what is an issue. Much of the information on the web is of good quality, but not everybody can access it. I am sure that the Executive will take on board that point, about the way in which we put information out to people. The FSB made several suggestions as to how help could be offered to small businesses. I hope that the Executive will work with other agencies and the UK Government to examine those suggestions and consider how they might be implemented. We know that there are problems for hauliers, meat processors, others in the food processing chain and, as Alex Fergusson said, tourism. The local area tourist board is contacting its members to try to find out the likely effect locally over the next few months. It is sad, as rural tourism is one of the sectors into which farmers have diversified, and they might be hit in that sector as well. One farmer said to me, "It is not the loss of my beasts that will finish me off; it will be the loss of my holiday business." That is an extremely sad example. A quick perusal of the website of Dumfries and Galloway Council, which is a good source of information on the matter, shows how deeply the crisis has bitten into everyday life: events throughout the region have been cancelled; there are problems in the forestry industry; all council-owned and emergency service vehicles must be washed and disinfected at least once a day—members can imagine how problematic that will be; children are being kept off school; school transport arrangements have been changed; the mobile library service has been suspended; and access to cemeteries has been restricted. That is on top of the grim and ghastly task of slaughtering and disposing of livestock.  On whether slaughter is necessary, I associate myself with the comments made by Alex Johnstone and Fergus Ewing. This disease is extremely infectious and unpleasant; mortality in young animals is high. Without control, the disease would become endemic in wildlife. That would be economically disastrous. The public have a distaste for eating infected meat; that would destroy our export markets and any hope that Scotland had of promoting a reputation for quality produce. My understanding is that the vaccine is a live vaccine, so it would not help the situation. Efforts are currently concentrated on containing and eradicating the disease, but we must consider a number of other issues. One is how this strain of the disease got here in the first place and into the pigs involved. Rumours are rife; one involved the feeding of waste from the airport to pigs. That is not quite the same as giving pigs swill from the local primary school, but there is a potential for infection if it is happening. We must examine that later. Another issue that has been mentioned, which has shocked many people, is the distance that animals are transported. It is fortunate that the regimes that have been brought in to control BSE have allowed animal movements to be tracked. If we had not been able to track animal movements, it would have been much more difficult to contain the disease.

We must also examine the quota schemes. One sheep farmer explained to me that if he falls below quota, he must buy an extra, say 20, sheep from somewhere else so that he can keep up to quota, so a dealer is travelling around dropping off 20 sheep here, 15 sheep there and 10 sheep somewhere else. That has helped to spread the disease.

We must also examine the problems caused by globalisation of food production. We must find alternatives to the stranglehold that the supermarkets have, which Fergus Ewing mentioned, over the British food chain. We must allow animals to be slaughtered and food to be processed and marketed near the point of production. The system must allow producers to achieve a fair price for their products and consumers to benefit when prices are reduced.

Obviously, I am sad to hear that cases of foot-and-mouth disease have been confirmed in my constituency. The First Minister mentioned that he has been working with the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and with a number of other organisations. What communication does he have with local authorities such as Dumfries and Galloway Council—the leader of which I spoke to earlier today—to ensure that problems that they identify are addressed as quickly as possible? Councils are responsible for much of the emergency planning and for the implementation of enforcement measures.

I point out, for the purposes of the Official Report , that I voted erroneously in the previous debate. I offer my apologies to Robin Harper; I was not paying attention when the vote on his amendment was being taken. I hope that that is sufficient to prevent me from getting a doing from the whips. I shall talk about a related issue. I know that Kenny Gibson has worked hard on the issue of Ballet West, and the school has been in touch with me. There is a severe problem with the support that is provided to young people for dance, drama and music classes. The issue is not so much the payment of tuition fees as the maintenance payments for those young people. The issue was drawn to my attention by the case of a very talented young woman from Langholm, who won one of the dance and drama awards in Manchester. That enabled her to have her tuition fees paid there. I imagine that a young  person from my constituency would find it easier to go down to Manchester than to go up north. The problem that she faced was in getting her maintenance paid. She was advised that, if she had been a student from England, she would have received a maintenance grant from the college. Because she was a student from Scotland, she had to approach her local authority to apply for a grant. Unfortunately, Dumfries and Galloway Council is one of approximately 50 per cent of local authorities that no longer give discretionary bursaries, as a matter of policy. Although the young woman had her tuition fees paid, she did not have her living costs paid. During the first year of her course, she attempted to support herself through employment. Her family were on a fairly low income and helped as much as they could, but they found it difficult to support her. The situation became impossible as time went on. In dance and drama courses, students are expected to undertake a lot of rehearsal and practice, and it becomes difficult for them to support themselves by means of employment. Unfortunately, the young lady had to give up her course because she was no longer able to support herself. That is a tragedy. A young Scot with a lot of talent was unable to continue with her course because of the way in which our system works. Normally, I do not support the withdrawal of funding from local authorities to be held centrally. However, in this instance, as there is such a difference in policies between local authorities, I suggest—I have suggested this to the Executive although, so far, it has not bitten—that the element of grant-aided expenditure that is distributed for discretionary bursaries be held centrally. Young Scots from all over the country should be able to apply for that funding, to ensure that there is no longer postcode provision and that all young, talented Scots have equal access to funding—not just for tuition fees, but to maintain them as they develop their talent to the benefit of our country and our cultural identity. It is important to view the matter in the context of our national cultural strategy, and we must encourage our young people as much as we can.

I welcome the minister's statement. I also wish to express my dismay that two farms in my constituency are awaiting test results. I can only hope that they are negative. Has the Executive any definitive information on the origin of the outbreak, given that there are many rumours on how this particular strain got into the UK? Can the minister reassure us that the Scottish Executive and the UK Government are drawing up plans to reinvigorate the meat and livestock industry once this epidemic is over?

I agree with much of what Mr McGrigor says about the needs of gypsy traveller children. Can he explain how, if the Conservatives were able to implement their policy of removing all schools from local authority control and making them all grant-maintained or opted-out schools, the services that he is requesting for traveller children could be provided?

Will the Executive consider changes to the remits of the SHEFC and the Scottish Further Education Funding Council to facilitate joint funding of courses provided by higher and further education establishments working in partnership?

The minister may be aware that I wrote to him this week about changes in prison officers' conditions of service. I wonder whether the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service has made the Executive aware of changes in absence management that have been introduced retrospectively over 12 months. They penalise workers disproportionately for short periods of  absence. Does the minister share my concern that that may constitute sexual discrimination, as, statistically, women are absent from work more frequently than men?

I hope, Presiding Officer, that you will give me, as the constituency member representing Lockerbie, a little bit of leeway. I add my congratulations to those in Dumfries and Galloway constabulary on all the tremendous work that they did in bringing the case. I also pay tribute to the community of Lockerbie, which coped tremendously well, not only with the terrible and horrific event 12 years ago, but with all the repercussions and publicity that have gone on since then. I want to put that on record, because it has been a tremendous community. My constituents want to move on to a future where Lockerbie is known for its potential and its location rather than for the tragedy that bears its name. Nevertheless, there are a number of unanswered questions. I would therefore like to ask the Lord Advocate how he and the Executive will be able to contribute to the UK Parliament's discussions on the feasibility of a public inquiry. I am aware that there is considerable interest in a public inquiry and I know that the issues surrounding that may be very complex.

I have a constituency interest to declare. Robert Burns lived the last few years of his life in Dumfries. Sadly, he passed away at the early age of 37, his death partly brought on by bathing in the Solway, which was apparently prescribed as a treatment for chest trouble. I am pleased that medical services in Dumfries and Galloway have improved significantly since then. In the election to which Mr Gallie referred, the successful candidate's name was Murray. Although I may be the first female to represent Dumfries, I am not the first Murray to do so—which is rather surprising, given that Murray is not a Borders name. David Mundell correctly referred to the work of the Robert Burns World Federation and of the individual Burns clubs in keeping alive the works of the poet. Burns lived in a time of great political and cultural change, and tasked himself with preserving for the appreciation of future generations many of the traditional Scottish songs and much of the music that might otherwise have been lost. To their great credit, the Burns societies and clubs have carried on that good work to ensure that successive generations of young Scots will enjoy the music and poetry of previous centuries. Like many parents, I have been involved in rehearsals of Burns's poetry over the past few days. In the case of our family, it was the "Address to the Tooth-Ache". In these days of a McDonald's-oriented, predominantly transatlantic culture, it was a rare pleasure to share with my son something of lowland Scotland's traditional language and humour. More than two centuries on, Burns speaks to us on universal subjects such as passion, loss, inequality, endurance, the environment and human weakness. In his countryside, his experiences and in his and his fellow man's frailty, we recognise our countryside, our experiences and our frailty. All politicians like to believe that Burns, had he been alive, would have been a supporter of their particular political party. I find much in his later works in particular—which were written in Dumfries—to support my notion that he was a socialist. On that note, I cannot resist advertising the fact that the biggest Labour movement Burns supper takes place in Dumfries every year. It is organised by my constituency Labour party. This very  Saturday, we will be entertained in words and, I hope, in music by Cathy Peattie MSP. There may yet be a small number of tickets available.

You would be most welcome, Jamie. Whatever Robert Burns's politics may have been, I am sure that he would have been pleased that "A Man's a Man for a' That", which was composed in Dumfries in 1795, was sung at the official opening of the Parliament—despite the fact that a parcel o' rogues like us went and joined in. Two years ago, my daughter was charged with designing a poster to attract tourists to a Scottish town. She came up with the slogan, "Come to Dumfries—deathplace of Robert Burns", which, for whatever reason, has not yet been adopted by the area tourist board.

The minister has already answered my question.

The minister will not be aware that I have written to the Minister for Finance and Local Government on the issue of rateable values for properties based on rents that cannot be realised, which has been brought to my attention by the Dumfries town centre manager. The current appeals process does not seem to allow for the problem of declining rental values. Will the Executive undertake to examine that problem, which leads to significant numbers of empty properties in town centres such as Dumfries?

I agree with many of the sentiments in the Conservative motion and with much of the content of previous speeches, but I am not happy that this matter has been debated in this way. First, the debate is premature because the results of the economic impact survey have not yet been published. Secondly, I would have preferred not to debate this issue on a Conservative motion in Opposition time. We should have debated it on a cross-party motion, which would have reflected the genuine level of cross-party support at all levels of  government and representation.

I am sorry, but I have no time to take interventions. All credit must be given to Dumfries and Galloway Council and its partners in the north channel partnership for their campaign for the upgrading of the A75. I believe that that campaign has already claimed some success, as the Executive amendment demonstrates. In particular, I acknowledge the hard work of the council leader, John Forteath, who is a Labour member, and the council convener, Andrew Campbell, who is an independent member. For both of them, no effort to promote this route has been too great and no journey has been too far. At the end of last year, they travelled to Brussels to promote the A75 in Europe. The A75 is unique in Scotland in having the status of being part of the trans-European network. Accompanied by the chief executive of the council, the director for infrastructure and the director for finance, they travelled to Edinburgh on 13 December to discuss with the First Minister the A75 and the Crichton campus development. The council representatives were most encouraged by Henry McLeish's response, as he was very keen to read a copy of the economic impact survey when it was available and suggested that we should investigate whether some of the £30 million that was already in the route action plan for the A75 could be brought forward. Some play has been made of the council's concern, but I have it on the authority of councillors and council officers that the council welcomed the fact that £30 million of work has been identified. However, it believes that the case can be made for considerable additional expenditure. The economic impact survey was commissioned to provide ammunition for that case. I put it on record that I, too, believe that the case can be made. That is why I arranged the meeting between the council and the First Minister and why I have lobbied the Minister for Transport and her colleagues in enterprise and lifelong learning and in rural development. I will continue to try my best to convince the Executive of the case, but I admit that there will be fierce competition from other route action plans, including those for the A7 and the A76 in my constituency. I ask the minister to repeat her commitment to meet Dumfries and Galloway Council to discuss two issues once the economic impact survey is available: first, the funding and the timetable; and, secondly, the question, which Murray Tosh asked, of which projects should be prioritised, as there is disagreement between her officials and the council on that. If she will do that, I am content—for the time being—to support the Executive amendment,  but I will be back.

The debate is badly timed: it is too late to influence discussions on a cod recovery programme and it is too early to address the actual plans. Discussion between the Commission, the Government and industry representatives is continuing as we speak, and we will not know the outcome of that until tomorrow at the earliest. The important debate on what will happen as a consequence of the finalised plans will have to take place after that. I am pleased that Rhona Brankin has been able to accept an invitation to attend the Rural Development Committee at the end of this month, and I look forward to having meaningful discussions at that time. The minister will then be better placed to describe to us how the Government can "secure the best deal for Scottish fishermen while ensuring a sustainable fishing industry."— [ Official Report , 7 December 2000; Vol 9, c 716.]  That commitment to a sustainable Scottish fishing industry was reiterated by Ross Finnie, the Minister for Rural Development. I do not understand the confusion, concerning the way in which the Liberals and Labour are working together on that, as there is a coalition partnership within the department. I must question why the Tories brought this ill-timed debate to the chamber today. The talk of an imminent general election makes me suspicious.

The Conservative party selected the topic for discussion, but we are not able to discuss the matter with full information at the current time. I do not deny that the initial cod recovery plan put forward by the Commission was far from satisfactory. However, it was the Commission's plan, not the Executive's or the UK Government's, and the Executive has made it quite clear that it does not accept the Commission's approach. To suggest otherwise is misleading—I think, Mr Lochhead, that I am being generous in describing it in that way.

Yes, briefly.

I am advised by the minister that the minutes are not a record of the meeting, that the Executive has not agreed the minutes and that it has made that position clear to the Commission official concerned. As we have heard, cod stocks have been in decline for 20 years. Between 1992 and 1997, the number of UK fishing vessels declined by 29 per cent—that is 3,167 vessels. Admittedly, that decline does not equate directly to a decline in fishing effort, but Conservative members can perhaps enlighten us as to what exactly the Tory Government did during its 18 years in power to reverse that position. Mr Johnstone reminded us of one of the things that it did: Mrs Thatcher signed the Fontainebleau agreement, which is now creating problems in funding the decommissioning of vessels, although I feel strongly that that is a problem that we must face. I am grateful to the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, the World Wide Fund for Nature and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds for the briefings that they have provided to members. I was impressed by their arguments for the protection of spawning grounds through the establishment of closed areas and the extension of technical conservation measures such as the use of square-mesh panels—which, I was advised  by fishermen yesterday, fat fish such as cod escape more easily than they do traditional diamond-mesh panels—and thinner twine. I was perturbed to learn from the fishermen last night that the square mesh-legislation has not yet been introduced south of the border. I hope that our Westminster colleagues will follow that up. Perhaps that is a job for Mr Salmond. It will give him something to do, given that the SNP believes that Scottish MPs should not vote at Westminster. This is an important issue for Scotland, and for many rural communities in particular. I hope that a sensible cod recovery plan will be agreed. I note the Executive's commitment to involve the industry in all discussions. I trust that we can move forward to provide what, despite our differences, we all want—a sustainable future for the Scottish fishing industry.

I have no interests to declare in salmon conservation other than having three important salmon fishing rivers in my constituency. I want to return the debate to reality—having been prompted to speak by Fergus Ewing's rather extreme remarks.

I think that unfettered remarks is a very good description of them. Let us get back to what we were talking about. We were talking about ministers making regulations. We should remind ourselves that, in doing so, ministers must "have regard to any representations made to them by any person having an interest in fishing for or taking salmon, or in the environment." Ministers will not just sit there, writing regulations and passing them with reference to nobody; they have to refer to local people. There seems to be a perception that ministers will have nothing better to do than fiddle around in the fishery interests of various Scottish rivers for no reason, or that district salmon fishery boards will require fisheries to give them daily information updates. That is unrealistic. Members of Parliament are elected to do a job of work for our constituents. If a regulatory order is proposed for a fishery in my constituency, ministers will make that regulatory order, it will be placed before the Rural Development Committee and before Parliament, and it will be my job to ensure that it has been subject to proper consultation. That is why we are here, and I feel that the political point scoring that we have heard this morning is irrelevant to what we are discussing. I back up what Mike Rumbles said about amendments 3 and 4. His amendment was unanimously accepted by the Rural Affairs Committee at stage 2. At the time, Euan Robson withdrew his amendment and said that he might revisit it later. However, the unanimous opinion of the Rural Affairs Committee was that that amendment—amendment 12—would give rise to what Rhona Brankin described as "unnecessary duplication" and would place exploitation interests above those of conservation. That was not the balance that we felt was appropriate.

Years ago, I worked in a laboratory in London. On one occasion, I had a conversation with a colleague from Peshawar, in Pakistan, about another gentleman from the Indian subcontinent—I suppose that we were gossiping. My colleague said that the gentleman drank quite a lot, but I expressed some doubt because of the man's religious background. To that, and to my shock, my colleague replied, "Nonsense. He drinks like a Scot." My colleague was immediately embarrassed at having made such a racist remark concerning my nationality. Even 17 years later, I remember that incident, because it drove home to me the international reputation that Scots have as alcohol abusers. It is not just a Scottish problem; there is a problem with binge drinking in the United Kingdom—as other members have said—which seems to be shared with other far northern countries. I do not know whether that is a result of the climate or the fact that we have few hours of light in the winter, but we seem to have that problem. I am concerned that binge drinking appears to be culturally acceptable here. It worries me that television and radio programmes that are aimed specifically at young audiences often promote alcohol abuse and binge drinking, implying that it is cool to be out of one's face or to have a hangover. Being very drunk has long been seen as a rite of passage among young men and, as Shona Robison said, it is increasingly regarded as such among young women. It is extremely important to recognise that most alcoholics start off as binge drinkers, therefore binge drinking should not be regarded as cool or as a natural part of growing up. It can lead to violence and severe illness in the unfortunate partaker. I know from the alcohol liaison committee in my constituency that a significant number of young people end up in casualty because they have been binge drinking. In the long term, drunkenness also leads to a load of other equally bad or worse consequences—accidents, fires, vandalism, street fighting, anti-social behaviour, neglect of children, domestic strife, domestic violence, unwanted sexual activity, depression and suicide.  Alcohol and drug-related problems are often discussed in my surgery and I am sure that I am not the only member of the Scottish Parliament for whom that is true. I will not forget in a hurry the older couple who sat in my surgery in tears, begging me to find some treatment for their alcoholic and frequently suicidal son, before he was successful in attempting to take his own life. He got into Castle Craig and I hope that he managed to get the treatment that he needed. We cannot tackle the other issues that I mentioned without tackling alcohol abuse. We talk a lot about youth crime, but it cannot be tackled unless we examine society's attitudes and the examples that adults set for young people. It is important for the Government to provide leadership and education and there must be a review of the licensing laws. There must also be action on anti-social behaviour and local authorities must examine their byelaws. However, many of those measures address the problem, not the cause. It is important for us to examine our cultural attitudes and to look within ourselves to see why we have this problem. Alcohol misuse is a curse on individuals and families. It corrodes our communities and is a blot on our national dignity and on our national identity. I welcome the Executive's strategy and the minister's announcement.

I, too, look forward to attending the minister's forthcoming meeting with the Crichton campus advisory board to hear more about the joint working between the higher and further education sectors on the Crichton site. I, too, hope that the minister will visit the Crichton campus. Will the Executive review the funding structures, in order to facilitate the co-operation that is necessary between the further and higher education sectors at that site, and other sites in Scotland?

This is an important debate about a sad situation. The SNP's rather carping amendment is designed to disguise the fact that it approves of some of the actions that the Executive is taking but would rather choke than admit it. I was extremely surprised that Richard Lochhead objected to Franz Fischler coming to Peterborough to discuss the fishing situation with our ministers. That is extraordinary.

No, I do not have time. The member should sit down. The Tories were rather more generous, although at times Jamie McGrigor seemed to be casting his net rather wide and trying to bring in issues that are close to his heart but are not up for debate today. Alex Johnstone was right to recognise the importance of the Parliament's support at such a crucial stage in the negotiations that our ministers will be undertaking. The first main issue relates to total allowable catches. We must give credit to the Scottish Executive and to the fishing industry for the measures that they have taken, which are one reason why the settlement is not as bad as expected. I say to my SNP colleagues that that is not being self-congratulatory—it is giving credit where credit is due.  Jamie Stone, Alex Fergusson and some other members raised doubts about some of the scientific evidence in relation to quotas. The issue of bycatches must also be addressed. Some important points were made about the knock-on effects on the TACs of other species, such as nephrops. Richard Lochhead did not seem to have listened to what the minister said about the action that the Executive intends to take in concert with the Scottish Fishermen's Federation. Rhoda Grant made an important point about the waste created by bycatches and the fact that it may attract predators. The second important issue is conservation. It is heartening to note the policy agreement that has been struck between the industry and environment agencies such as the World Wide Fund for Nature. I was a little surprised by what Dr Winnie Ewing had to say, although I commiserate with her on her sore throat; I hope that I am not responsible for the outbreak of sore throats that we have in the Parliament at the moment. Dr Ewing seemed to imply that we should do nothing because other people were dragging their feet. I regard that as an irresponsible suggestion. A number of speakers noted the successes that we have had with square-mesh panels. It was suggested that we should also consider zonal management, the closure of spawning grounds and the protection of juvenile fish. Richard Lochhead made an important point about the improvement necessary in food supplies and the fact that the haddock cohort is small for its age at the moment. Industrial fishing of sand eels by the Danish and, to a lesser extent, the Norwegian fleet—I am told that sand eels are being processed and fed to pigs, which is yet another reason why I buy Scottish bacon rather than Danish bacon—is unnecessary and must be addressed, as must the problem with saith. On the general issue of predation, Alex Fergusson renewed the call for a seal commission. I remind him that there is already a special commission on seals, which reports to the UK Government with scientific advice. The Executive is advised by research carried out at the University of St Andrews sea mammal research unit. I am sure that Fergus Ewing will want to major on seals, because his dislike of wild animals is legendary. I look forward to hearing what he has to say about that. We must face the thorny issue of restructuring, which several speakers mentioned, including Jamie McGrigor, Tavish Scott, Jamie Stone and Alex Salmond. Alex Salmond had a long wish list, but as usual with the SNP, there was no price tag. As we heard, some money is available through the FIFG.  Members from all parties pointed out that we must reflect on the sacrifices made, in lives, by fishing communities in bringing fish to us. Moreover, we must recognise the great importance of the fishing industry to many other industries. Elaine Thomson, Lewis Macdonald, Irene McGugan, Tavish Scott, Iain Smith and Euan Robson pointed out the importance of those industries in many rural communities, especially in the provision of flexible and part-time employment.

Last week, I asked the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning a question that highlighted the loss of what I thought was 86 jobs at the knitwear manufacturers Robertsons of Dumfries Ltd. I have since realised that I gave the minister wrong information; unfortunately, the company has gone into liquidation and all 121 jobs have been lost as we approach Christmas. We have also heard that the Nestlé factory in Dumfries will, before Christmas, close its doors for the last time. Over the past 18 months, 100 jobs have disappeared from that factory. I do not mention all that because I am a new recruit to the doom and gloom brigade or the Jeremiahs; I mention it because what is happening in and to my constituency is happening elsewhere in Scotland. We have to face that. I believe that the framework document faces up to the realities in Scotland, especially in terms of the jobs that are being lost in the traditional industries as they change. Mr MacAskill mentioned one particular topic, and I would like to quote to him from the document: "there must be safeguards for those whose enterprises and jobs are lost, with a focus on the rapid reintegration of people into the workforce through the commitment to lifelong learning and the redevelopment of their skills". In my constituency, at the same time as jobs are being lost in traditional industries, jobs are being created in the new industries. I was present when a German company named Tailgate recently announced an initial 120 jobs in a call centre. Such work is a new venture for that company in the UK. The jobs are being created at the Crichton University campus. It is projected that around 700  jobs might be created on that site. We will therefore have to address training issues: people are losing jobs in the traditional industries and a number of new industries, needing people, are moving in. In respect of the Tailgate jobs, I was especially pleased to hear of the collaboration between Dumfries and Galloway College and Scottish Enterprise Dumfries and Galloway to ensure that people were being trained. What is happening in my constituency demonstrates why it is so important that we have a national strategy, which recognises the changing nature of employment in Scotland and the consequent requirement for training in order to match skills, people and jobs. I was pleased to hear the minister say that the new deal has been more successful in Scotland than we expected. However, we must not be complacent, because other news is more disturbing, such as the report by Her Majesty's inspectors of schools on the weakness of science teaching in the five-to-14 curriculum. That will not help future opportunities in Scotland and I am sure that the Executive will act to address that deficiency. One of the four objectives of the framework for economic development is "regional development: ensuring that all regions of Scotland enjoy the same economic opportunities". I want to make two points on that. We must address the fact that currently there is not equality of access to training and education throughout Scotland and that there are barriers of poverty, geographical access and access to electronic information. I do not dispute that the issues that the SNP raises are important, but I do not think that its amendment is necessary, because those points are highlighted in the document. There are issues for employees in small and medium-sized enterprises—often in rural areas, where there are more small enterprises and fewer very large ones. Smaller employers may not be able to offer their workers the training and skilling opportunities that larger employers can offer. That issue must be addressed. When we talk about entrepreneurial dynamism and enterprise, we must recognise that there are many different models of employment in Scotland that provide financial security and personal fulfilment. Many Scottish people work in the public sector and increasing numbers work in the voluntary sector. People also work in co-operatives, in community enterprises or as self-employed individuals, supplying services and goods to others in their community. Not everyone wants to be a millionaire. Entrepreneurialism and a culture of enterprise must never be seen as equating to an individualistic philosophy of, "We  are all capitalists now." Social responsibility and individual fulfilment within, and as part of, our community are absolutely necessary for—as it says in the document— "the kind of society we would like to see in 5 to 10 years time".

To ask the Scottish Executive what mechanisms exist for the discussions of the youth parliament to inform the Executive's deliberations. (S10-2603)

I thank the minister for replying to a question that was put to me by a school student from Lockerbie Academy, when I was on a series of school visits around my constituency. Does the minister share my concern that young people often feel disfranchised from the democratic process, to the extent that only one in four voters under the age of 25 cast their vote at the last general election? I am pleased to hear what the minister said, but does the Executive have any other plans to encourage citizenship and the participation of young people?

To ask  the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to support the textile industry in the south of Scotland and to retrain textile workers made redundant for alternative employment. (S1O-2590)

Is the minister aware that, a fortnight ago, 86 job losses were announced at the knitwear manufacturer Robertson of Dumfries Ltd, only days after the announcement of the creation of up to 700 jobs in the new technologies at the Crichton campus also in Dumfries? Does the minister agree that rapid action must be taken to ensure that people who lose their jobs in traditional industries are reskilled in the new skills that are required to work in the new technologies, which would allow them to take advantage of forthcoming job opportunities?

I am overcoming a bout of laryngitis, and hope that I can find my voice today. A politician without a voice is something akin to a fish out of water. The minister mentioned a number of rivers where salmon fishing is important; it is also important on the Nith, the Annan and the Esk, all of which run through my constituency. Some people may think this legislation a little boring, but I have been stopped on the street by constituents and have been lobbied on the issue. We should recognise the fact that this bill is only a small piece of legislation, responding to a small area of concern. We have brought up several other important areas of concern, which I also believe have to be addressed, but probably separately from the bill before us. The bill responds to two main concerns, the first of which is the major decline in stocks of wild  salmon and of sea trout. They fell by 39 per cent and 24 per cent respectively between 1998 and 1999. The second concern relates to our international obligations as members the North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organisation. NASCO was instrumental in reducing the west Greenland drift net fishery take of salmon down to 1 per cent of its previous level, but that agreement was predicated on European Union member states, including ourselves, taking action to reduce our wild salmon take at the same time. To preserve that international agreement, we have to be seen to be taking some action. I recognise the enthusiasm for fishing matters that Richard Lochhead always displays, but in reply to his unprecedented and, I think, unfair attack on my friend and colleague John Home Robertson for all the work he did over the past 18 months, if the SNP feels that salmon conservation is so important, why did it not attempt to lodge a member's bill or a committee bill on the issue? The Rural Affairs Committee took evidence on a number of points, including who can request that the minister make an order; what sort of information should be required for a request to be made; whether orders should be time-limited; whether wild salmon and sea trout should be differentiated in this bill, as is the case in the parent legislation; whether management should be explicitly mentioned as well as conservation; and the appropriateness of blanket and emergency powers. It is important not to give an impression that anglers and other river fishermen, such as haaf-netters, whom Alex Fergusson mentioned, are solely or even primarily responsible for the decline in the wild salmonid populations. As the minister said, many fish are lost in their marine phase, due to a variety of factors that seem to relate to location. There is a need for research into such causes, and I was reassured to hear from the minister that extensive and detailed research is being carried out. There are several problems relating to pollution, sea lice, drift net fishing, the destruction of river habitats and predation by seals, cormorants and goosanders, depending on the area of Scotland. Those factors were all brought to our attention in committee. I believe that global warming may itself be contributing to changes in the fishes' life-cycle. It was clear from what I was told during my visit to the Nith District Salmon Fishery Board, when I saw the hatcheries there, that even a small change in temperature makes a difference to the length of time that it takes the salmon eggs to hatch out. If there are problems with global warming and a rise in water temperature, that may be partly responsible for the reduction in the population.  We have heard from Mike Rumbles that fish farming issues will be considered separately by the Transport and the Environment Committee and the Rural Affairs Committee. The Executive has assured us that sufficient legislation is already available to deal with predators, in the form of the Conservation of Seals Act 1970 and the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. The committee accepted that assurance, although we also believed that action against predators should be taken only if the evidence points to predators being the cause. Concerns about predation should not be an excuse to go round bumping off seals or anybody else whom we happen not to like. The bill is generally to be welcomed, but it needs to be recognised that it is a small attempt at a solution to a big problem. We hope that it will help reverse some of the rapid decline among the wild fish species in question but, as Richard Lochhead has said, it remains to be seen how big a part of the solution the bill will be. We can say that probably it will not do any harm. The consensus in the evidence to the committee was that the bill is to be welcomed as an improvement on the status quo, but as John Home Robertson and Richard Simpson have already said, there are far bigger issues about the management of freshwater fisheries. I very much hope that those issues will be addressed in future legislation.

I can speak today.

Is the minister aware of any additional assistance that the Executive can provide to local authorities to enable them to pilot innovative methods of flood prevention, such as the hydro-science project that Dumfries and Galloway Council is investigating?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects the working group on deferred entry to pre-school education to submit its report to ministers. (S1O-2431)

I am very pleased to hear that. Does the minister share my concern about the current  level of pre-school provision—about the fact that, because children are entitled to pre-school provision from the term after their third birthday, and because most schools and many authorities have an annual intake, children who enter school at the age of four and a half go to school after one-and-a-half years' pre-school education, whereas children born in March go to school after two-and-a-half years' pre-school education? In the current situation, any local authorities and parents who feel that a child who is four-and-a-half years old is too immature to enter primary school have no provision for the year between—[MEMBERS: "Question."] Wait a minute. I am asking it.

I am asking whether the minister is concerned that there is no provision for the year between the ages of four and a half and five and a half. Is he aware that local authorities must provide funding from their own resources, and that that is particularly difficult in rural and remote areas—

I would like to ask for the—

I thank the minister for acceding to my request that she meet members of Dumfries and Galloway Council tomorrow. The A75 will be one of the issues discussed at that meeting. Is the minister prepared to liaise with other ministers in the Scottish Executive on the broader issues relating to the A75? It is important not only as a transport route, but to the economy of the rural areas of Dumfries and Galloway and the whole of Scotland, as it brings in trade from Northern Ireland. Will the minister take a more holistic approach to this issue, bearing in mind the contribution that the A75 makes to Scotland as a whole?

In my constituency, which as members know is largely rural, many council wards are larger in area than the average parliamentary constituency in the central belt. Very few of them are held by Labour councillors. Will the member explain how the electoral system that he proposes, with a large multi-member constituency for local government, could possibly retain the link between the councillor and the electorate in large rural areas?

I, too, welcome the introduction of the scheme. National  Farmers Union members in my constituency frequently raise with me the problems that they encounter and the bureaucracy that is involved in applying for a subsidy. One local farmer told me that he spends up to 22 hours a week on paperwork. Such complexity can lead to mistakes. Can the minister advise the chamber of any other measures that he is considering taking to deal with that? How is he consulting the industry on how such measures can be taken forward?

I will speak against the amendment and I want to make a similar point to that made by Richard Lochhead. It is fairly easy to prove damage, but it is very difficult to prove intent to damage. That difficulty could be used as a get-out clause when damage occurred because of carelessness or other activity. Mr McGrigor makes the point that creel fishers might not see the bottom of the sea and that weather conditions and so on could result in  unintentional damage. However, I imagine that the fishermen working in the vicinity of the shellfish would have a responsibility not to fish in such circumstances.

I imagine that the fisherman concerned would consult the weather forecast to find out whether any storms were expected in the vicinity, but that does not detract from the legal argument that intention is difficult to prove. Agreeing to Mr McGrigor's amendment would weaken Tavish Scott's bill, so it should be opposed.

The minister has mentioned that the maintenance of  students at drama, dance and music colleges is funded by local authorities through the discretionary bursary system. Is she aware that more than half of Scotland's councils have now taken policy decisions to withdraw the funding of discretionary bursaries? Does that cause the Executive concern, in so far as students from some areas are unable to access funding whereas students from other areas are?

I welcome the First Minister's statement on the legislative programme. I intend to be slightly controversial in my speech and, as a member of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, I look forward to consideration of the legislation on student finance. One of the reasons I have always believed in devolution for Scotland is that that would enable a Scottish Parliament to develop legislation that was appropriate to the circumstances of our people. The actions that have been taken by the Executive are a good example of that and are a significant achievement for the Executive in its first year of operation. Tuition fees have been abolished in Scotland, as of this coming term. That removes the need for graduate students and their families to pay tuition fees up front. That is an improvement on the situation in the rest of the United Kingdom. However, that is only part of the proposed improvements. The Executive's proposals will  redistribute further the balance of financial responsibility between low-income families and higher-income families, thereby better relating financial support to the ability to pay. Low-income families—who never had to pay tuition fees—will be entitled to a graduate endowment that will be worth up to £2,000 a year. The maximum debt at the end of study for a student from a low-income family will be reduced by an estimated £4,000. Those students will receive more maintenance during their study and will be less liable to debt at the end of it.

As I understand the benefits system, that matter is reserved to Westminster, so those decisions would be better made there. The Executive's proposals would remove some of the disincentives to study for young people from low-income families and would extend access to and participation in higher education. Entitlement to that endowment will be means-tested on family income, but the proposals include a taper to prevent any sudden cut-off in entitlement. People with high incomes—MSPs, for example—will be expected to pay a higher contribution to the support of their young people in higher education. I agree with that. Why should people such as me—if I still have this job when my children go to university—who have more money and are able to contribute more, not have to do so? I have no problem with that.

I have always believed in direct rather than indirect taxation. Unfortunately, that opinion does not seem to be shared by the majority of the population—at least, it was not prior to the beginning of this week.

In my previous employment, I was privileged to teach mature and part-time students, many of whom were engaged in distance learning. The proposals will improve the situation for mature students—who could not access student loans previously—by providing a £10 million access fund to universities and colleges for the provision of access payments.  Mature students will also be entitled to the full loan. Part-time students, such as those I taught at the Open University, were never entitled to student grants—they were always left out of the financial support arrangements that were available to other students. They will be entitled to proportional support for the first time. I think also that this is the first time that Government has recognised the need to support distance learners. I realise that my four minutes have nearly ended. I want also to welcome the Executive's commitment to provide funding to local authorities to assist with child care and the provision of access funds for lone parents and disabled students, thereby acknowledging the special access problems that such students face. In order to be economically successful, Scottish people must be equipped with the necessary skills, but education not only improves life chances; it improves the quality of life. Therefore I welcome the measures to increase access to and participation in education at all levels.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assistance it is making available to local authorities to prepare bids for public-private partnership funding for school buildings and how they are being informed of the availability of pump-priming funding and other forms of assistance. (S1O-2211)

I thank the minister for his response. He may be aware that Dumfries and Galloway Council has been investigating the possibility of school rebuilding and new building in my constituency, at Heathhall, Lockerbie and Moffat. The council's preliminary investigations suggest that funding those necessary projects through PPP may result in a revenue shortfall of between £3 million and £5 million. Will the Executive consider measures to help councils that are in that position to bridge the funding gap?

In his statement the minister mentioned a number of reviews: the full internal operational review of the SQA; the independent inquiry by the team of experts; and the bringing forward of the quinquennial review, in which—he said—all options would be considered. There will also be two inquiries by parliamentary committees—by the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, into the issuing of examination results, and by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, into the governance of the SQA. How will the results of those reviews be brought together? In particular, how will the parliamentary committee inquiries be informed of the deliberations of the other reviews? It is important that the parliamentary inquiries are as well informed as possible. I support the view of Johann Lamont, Margo MacDonald and others that, if issues relating to the accountability,  transparency and legislative basis of the SQA come to light as a result of the inquiries, the Executive should propose legislative changes as a matter of urgency. Will the Executive consider doing that because, as the minister said, we want to ensure that such a shambles never happens again?

I must take issue with Fergus Ewing's definition of "sustainable". I question whether his definition has any legal force. It could be argued that something is sustainable if it can be sustained in the longer term.

I am saying that the legal meaning of "sustainable" is not necessarily what Fergus Ewing wants it to be when he argues for the Sandford principle to be removed from the bill. We are discussing what happens when the national park authority exercises its functions; what happens when two voluntary sector organisations fall out is not relevant. If there is a conflict between the various aims of the national park, the national park authority is to give greater weight in the exercise of its functions to environmental considerations. We are seeking to strike an appropriate balance between conservation and development. Sylvia Jackson spoke about some of the concerns in the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs area, which to me—as an outsider—appear to centre on possible misuse of the environment. People feel that the institution of a national park might damage the  environmental heritage that they want to sustain. Equally, it is quite clear to me from talking to people from the Cairngorms area that their main concerns relate to the communities that live and work in the area. They are worried that their interests will be subordinated to those of the conservation minded and of environmentalists. When drafting enabling legislation, the Executive needs to strike the right balance. I believe that in this bill the Executive has done that. It is saying that if there is a conflict between the aims of a national park, the national park authority must in the exercise of its functions give greater weight to environmental considerations. I know that Robin Harper feels that that phrasing does not have quite the strength of "prevail", but I believe that it has the same intention. The intention is quite clear—that if there is a problem in the functioning of the park, environmental considerations must take precedence over everything else. That is probably the right approach, given that we are talking about national parks. Robin Harper was quite right to make that point. In our discussions of direct representation, we have concentrated on the local perspective, but our intention is to establish national parks with a national and international reputation. We must not lose sight of the importance of that.

By saying that he will not move amendments 22 and 24, Ben Wallace has stolen my thunder somewhat. The declaration of intent that Murray Tosh referred to already exists in the requirement for consultation with community councils and in the requirement placed on local authorities to make the proposals available for public inspection. As an addendum to that, many opportunities are presented by the use of information and communications technology. We have debated the use of ICT in public services at other times—I hope that national park plans and so on will be made available on the internet, so that members of the community can access them and comment on them.

According to recently published figures from the Executive, 60,000 people were employed directly in agriculture in Scotland in 1998, contributing about 1.4 per cent of the Scottish gross domestic product. Unsurprisingly, given that 75 per cent of Scotland's landmass is rural, those figures are significantly higher in rural areas. Eight per cent of the work force in rural areas is employed directly in agriculture, which is the third largest source of employment after the service sector and public services. In Dumfries and Galloway, about 11 per cent of GDP relies on agriculture. As the discussion document "A Forward Strategy for Scottish Agriculture" states, each agricultural job is reckoned to sustain another job in downstream industries, such as the production of farm machinery, animal feedstuff and so on. The food and drink sector in Scotland, which is heavily reliant on agriculture, employs another almost 60,000 people. The total number of people whose jobs are either wholly or significantly dependent on the survival of the Scottish agricultural industry is about 180,000, or nearly 8 per cent of the Scottish work force. Agriculture is clearly an important industry in Scotland, and I have no difficulty, either as a Labour politician or as an MSP for a rural constituency, in defending the need to consider the long-term interests of that important industry. We discussed briefly the document when it was published on 6 April, but today we have an opportunity to discuss in more detail the issues that must be tackled. Like Alasdair Morgan, I was rather disappointed by the response of the NFUS at last week's conference, when there was a demand for action, not strategies. It was interesting to note that, although the press release that was put out by the NFUS contained a demand for action, there was no indication of what action should be taken. Some of the MSPs who have joined the cross-party group on agriculture and horticulture met representatives of agriculture-related industries at the Royal Highland Show last week. I took that opportunity to ask each representative which two actions they felt would help turn round their current problems. There was only one common theme: that we should join the euro at the appropriate rate—that was quite interesting. Each representative also suggested actions that would assist their own industries and interests, but that would not have any particular value to other sections of the industry.

I do not think that there is a difference between Helen Liddell's point of view and Gordon Brown's. The Labour party's view is that we should consider joining the euro when the conditions are right, but that the final decision will be put to the people of the United Kingdom. One of the problems in the past has been that actions have been taken without accompanying strategy. Actions may assist with a particular problem or may help the industry to get over a crisis period, but they do not do anything to solve the underlying problems. When the discussion document was published on 6 April, the minister referred to such actions as a sticking-plaster approach, which was a rather good analogy. That is not to say that there are not times when short-term actions and injections of cash to deal with specific problems have been required. The Downing Street summit in April, at which a £39 million support package was announced for Scottish farming, was an example. Everybody agrees that support packages do not make the problems go away for ever. Whether or not the National Farmers Union likes the term "strategy", the actions that we take, in order to be successful, have to be set in the context of a long-term strategy that aims to consolidate the Scottish agricultural industry. Like any other industrial sector that aims to survive, agriculture has to have a vision about its future—its strengths and weaknesses, which market it will aim for, how it supports and is supported by other indigenous industries, what new products might be developed and how it can best utilise new technologies. We may soon come across the term e-farming. We have e-everything else—why not have e-agriculture? Like any other business, farming needs to be supported by good advice services. That means business development, financial services and, I believe, assistance with product and process development, especially if we are to raise value by developing food products rather than just selling raw materials. That is highlighted in the discussion document. I believe that SERAD and the enterprise and lifelong learning department will both have an important supportive role. We cannot expect people to develop new products or new markets in a vacuum. I shall cut out the rest of my speech and conclude by saying that, even in my constituency, Dumfries, which is largely rural and dependent on agriculture, people sometimes ask me, "Why are you so bothered about farming anyway?" Some  people still see farmers as over-subsidised and always complaining about things. It is a great pity that we have that perception of agriculture, because it is such an important industry to Scotland. I look forward to a time when everybody sees agriculture as one of our crucial industries and a successful contributor to both the local and national economies.

Will the Deputy First Minister assure us that the meetings of the Scottish Cabinet are conducted in an atmosphere of co-operation and constructive discussion, in stark contrast to that which pervaded last weekend's conference of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party? Will he agree that that conference demonstrated the depth of division between that party's warring factions, as represented in the chamber—

Once again, I am sympathetic to the intentions of the amendments, but an enabling bill is not the place in which to address the issues. Individual learning accounts should be one of a raft of lifelong learning opportunities. There are barriers to learning, some of which have been mentioned: travel, accommodation, child care, caring responsibilities and the costs associated with disability. There are a number of other potential barriers to learning for people in different communities, not just in rural areas; barriers to learning also exist for people in urban communities. Those issues need to be addressed. We need strategies that address barriers to learning at all levels of lifelong learning in our society. I hope that the Executive will develop plans to try to ensure that everybody has equal access to learning at whatever level is appropriate  to them. Many rural problems can be tackled by new technology and distance learning, which will bring learning opportunities to learners in their community, in their home, in their learning centre and possibly in their local primary school. Those aspects of lifelong learning ought to be properly addressed—it is not just about the tradition of people going from home to college, but about taking learning out to people in their communities.  When the minister spoke to us, in the stage 2 debate, about the pilot schemes in Lochaber and in the Borders in rural southern Scotland, he said that the schemes would be reviewed and that ministers would consider the results after the regulations had been in place for a year. His concern was to identify areas where need and the size of barriers were likely to be greatest. There is value in waiting to learn from the results of those pilots—there is not much point in having a pilot scheme, then pre-supposing its results. Unfortunately, I will oppose both amendments.

I, too, am far from hostile to the amendment, but I do not feel that I can agree to it. Individual learning accounts are one initiative in a whole spectrum of initiatives to encourage people to become involved in training and learning. Although I sympathise very much with what Fiona McLeod is saying—indeed, as someone who used to teach adults, I am well aware of the difficulty of attracting back to the education system people who are alienated from learning—I am not convinced that the method that the amendment  suggests will be more successful. I am not convinced that saying that 25 per cent of the money will be set aside, which nobody else can access, is the way to ensure that the most educationally disadvantaged sectors of society come forward to take it up. The way to ensure that people who do not traditionally associate themselves with learning regard the scheme as providing an advantage and an opportunity for themselves is by promoting the individual learning account and by being proactive about the opportunities for learning in disadvantaged communities. Regretfully, although I agree with the sentiments of what Fiona McLeod is saying, I cannot support the amendment.

I apologise to members whose speeches I missed. I was meeting a party of schoolchildren from my constituency, whose arrival was delayed by congestion of another sort. The creation of a dynamic, thriving economy must be a priority for the Scottish Parliament. That priority was recognised by the committee and by ministers very early in the first term of the Parliament. We embarked on the inquiry with the impression—which I think we all had—that local economic development and business support were neither as effective nor as streamlined as they might be. That impression was confirmed when we took evidence from national and local organisations. In some respects, we came to the end of the inquiry feeling even more confused about the structures that are in place in Scotland. Out of that confusion arose a set of conclusions which we believe will help to clear the congestion of the current situation. One of the committee's conclusions was, as we have heard, that services should be streamlined by the creation of local economic forums, which would be charged with forming the economic strategy of the region in the context of the overall economic strategy for Scotland. Some areas already have experience of such forums. A joint economic forum was inaugurated in Dumfries and Galloway this year by the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning in response to concerns regarding the loss of employment in manufacturing and agriculture in the area. Those concerns were  expressed by me and by others, including the local MP, Russell Brown. Some people asked for a task force to be set up, as has happened in other parts of Scotland when major manufacturers have left an area. In rejecting that approach in favour of one that is more long term and strategic, Henry McLeish and Nicol Stephen showed considerable foresight—not only because their approach accords with the committee's findings. Inward investment by major employers is desirable, but in rural areas, the bulk of employment is created by small and medium enterprises, which is why representation of the chambers of commerce and the area tourist boards on the economic forum is essential. Late on in our inquiry, the committee took evidence on tourism in particular, at the request of ministers, at the time when the Parliament held a debate on tourism strategy. Possible restructuring of the current system was suggested in evidence to the committee, achieved by reducing the number of area tourist boards by merger or incorporating the tourist boards within the local enterprise companies. There was general agreement, however, that as tourism is so important to local economic development, the area tourist boards must be an integral part of the economic forum. That is particularly true in rural areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, which do not at the moment realise their full potential. I was surprised to learn that some of the economic forums in Scotland do not involve their area tourist board. There was not time to debate radical options and considerably more investigation would be needed before we could come to conclusions about changing the structures of tourism. Nevertheless, the manner in which local tourism strategies cohere with the wider economic development of local enterprise company areas and with the national tourism strategy must be monitored, and the arguments will have to be revisited if the current approach does not work. I know that the minister and the committee will be monitoring closely both the funding and the performance of the current structures that support the tourism industry in Scotland, and I know that action will be taken if it is deemed necessary.

A portion of my constituency could be considered to be in the Borders. My constituency generally borders on the Borders, so I am particularly happy to speak in support of the motion. It cannot be denied that the Borders has been particularly poorly served against the standards of the rest of Scotland. As Christine Grahame said, the Borders has a population of more than 100,000, yet they have no railway station. That puts the Borders in a unique position with regard to its bargaining for funding, compared with other areas of Scotland. More than 70 per cent of the population of the Borders live more than 30 miles from any rail station. As a consequence, car ownership is the highest in mainland Scotland, despite the area being one of low wages and low  domestic product. The first reason for which the rail link is important is getting people to work. I have been involved in a campaign in my constituency to introduce an early morning train from Lockerbie to Edinburgh. Incidentally, it looks like that might have been successful. That will allow people in Lockerbie to work in Edinburgh but live in beautiful Dumfriesshire. That must be good for the economy of the area, as well as being good for the people who live in Dumfriesshire. The same is true for the Borders, as a good train service would encourage people to travel to work by public transport, rather than taking their cars. As Ian Jenkins said, that would be good for Edinburgh, as it would reduce the capital's congestion problems, which exercise the minds of many MSPs as we travel around the city. Reinstating the rail line would also be good for tourism. As we know, the Borders, which is within striking distance of Edinburgh and Glasgow, has splendid and varied scenery and a rich history, but tourists can access the area only by car. As some of the more traditional industries decline, it will become increasingly important for the area to realise its tourist potential. The promotion of the south of Scotland generally as a tourist destination must be much improved. Recently, I attended the Scottish Tourist Board's fair in Glasgow, where I was depressingly struck by how poorly represented the south of Scotland was. While the area tourist boards were present, very few industries were represented, in comparison with the efforts put into the fair by the cities, the Highlands and Islands, the western isles, Orkney and so on. The south of Scotland remains neglected, and it is unfortunate that it is often seen as that bit of Scotland between the English border and the cities of Edinburgh and Glasgow. We must do much more to promote the area, and reinstating the rail line is an important part of that work. I will argue the case for the reinstatement of the entire line from Edinburgh to Carlisle, although I recognise that that would take a long time. I heard, and was encouraged by, the minister's comments that she recognised the potential of reinstating the entire line. I support the idea of "to Galashiels and beyond", although that sounds rather like a misquotation of Buzz Lightyear. That would link the Waverley line into the Dumfries and Galloway network by allowing people to change trains at Carlisle. The Dumfries and Galloway network reaches up into Upper Nithsdale and passes through Ayrshire into Kilmarnock, Troon, Prestwick, Ayr and Girvan. While people are able to travel by train throughout parts of the south of Scotland, reopening the Waverley line would give visitors a great opportunity to explore the Borders.  That would also allow residents in the south of the Borders to commute by train to work in Carlisle, although I do not think that that is as major an issue as commuting to Edinburgh. Most of all, reopening the line is important for freight, particularly given the increase in timber traffic in the south of Scotland and the Borders. Recently, some serious—and fatal—road accidents have taken place in the Langholm and Sibbaldbie areas in my constituency. In one case, a timber lorry was directly implicated in the deaths of two people and the state of the roads used by timber lorries seems to have contributed to another accident. We must learn the lessons of those accidents because more and more trees in the south of Scotland are reaching maturity and will be harvested. Therefore, it is essential that, as far as possible, freight is transferred from road to rail. Although some timber will always travel by road, it is important that we promote the use of rail. As other members said, funding is the main issue. I believe that any and all possible methods of funding for the reinstatement of the Waverley line must be investigated. I hope that the SRA will have a significant involvement in funding, but, like Alex Johnstone and Ian Jenkins, I realise that probably we will have to seek other funding partners. Nevertheless, we have today an opportunity that is important to the Borders and to the south of Scotland and that we must seize.

This is a road with which I am extremely familiar, and I am aware of the announcements that the minister made in March about the new projects. Will the minister tell us whether other projects are planned for future years, especially on the section between New Cumnock and Dumfries, which is particularly hazardous?

Will Alex Fergusson take an intervention?

Could the member tell us which Government was in power at the time of that great disaster in rural communities?

The challenges and opportunities that are faced in rural Scotland are, of course, extensive. I will concentrate on the first element of the vision statement, which is given on page 5 of the document: "Our future prosperity depends on combining traditional strengths with an appetite for change." Obviously, some of the traditional strengths of rural Scotland are its traditional industries, such as agriculture. One of the appetites for change that we need to have is to harness our burgeoning knowledge economy to support rural Scotland, expand the markets for its traditional industries and give rural residents access to employment and education. Eleven per cent of Scotland's rural population works in agriculture. We have debated the problems of that industry many times in the chamber. Short-term assistance to the industry relies principally on actions that are taken in Westminster and Brussels, but long-term strategies to support agriculture and to help it survive are the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament. We should concentrate on those strategies instead of yet again reducing every issue to a debate on the constitution. The Executive's commitment to agri-environment schemes such as the countryside stewardship scheme is welcome. Farming is extremely important to the environment, but environmentally friendly practices often impact on farm incomes and it is difficult for farmers to bear the cost.  The document makes a welcome commitment to using Scotland's science and research base to support the industries on which the rural economy depends. For example, the use of technology to reduce bureaucratic burdens on farmers will be welcomed. I will talk about the use of research and development. I was pleased to read on page 12 that the Executive is working with the food and drinks industry, enterprise bodies and research institutes throughout Scotland, to maximise the industry's potential. On page 14 the document says that "the five Scottish Agricultural and Biological research institutes, and the Scottish Agricultural College"— contribute— "by identifying innovative products and technologies which could be exploited commercially." I am relieved to read that, because when I asked a question at the meeting of the Rural Affairs Committee on 9 May about the role of agricultural colleges in supporting primary producers and commercialising research, the Scottish Executive rural affairs department representative told me that the research programme is not near market and is not aimed at solving today's problems; that near-market research is done by the private sector. I was concerned about that and would like reassurance from the minister that the Executive's intention is as stated and that the rural affairs department will use its research and development base, which has a budget of £40 million, to support rural industries. I have already mentioned the importance of new technology in enabling people in rural areas to access employment and education. I agree with Alasdair Morgan about the need for the infrastructure that would allow remote and rural areas to get access to the internet. I hope that the Executive, in partnership with others, including the telecommunications companies, will address the problem caused in rural areas by the fact that the cost of installing the necessary infrastructure increases in inverse proportion to population density. Unless we overcome that problem, there is a real danger that rural areas will become information poor and will be disadvantaged. I was interested in the report of the digital Scotland task force, which also came out this week. Recommendation 60 suggests: "the Scottish Executive, working with SEn and HIE, should continue to review telecomms infrastructure capacity and availability throughout Scotland." Recommendation 61 states: "The Scottish Executive should work with Scottish Enterprise, HIE and telecomms companies and others, to review supply of and demand for digital links in remote and rural areas . . . the enterprise bodies should explore with  the telcos ways of encouraging investment in services". Unless we do that, rural areas will not be able to take advantage of the opportunities afforded by new technology. I want to say a little more about education. In particular, I want to mention the Crichton campus in Dumfries, which I am pleased to see gets another honourable mention, and the University of the Highlands and Islands. There are a lot of important and interesting developments in education. I worked for the Open University for seven years. In that time, I witnessed a veritable revolution in the techniques used for distance teaching and learning. I hope that all those opportunities will be seized and utilised to stabilise and improve the economies of our rural areas.

Does Kenny MacAskill agree that the removal of section 29 would not prevent the creation of marine national parks, but would simply prevent the minister from modifying the bill to enable the legislation to take account of the specifics of marine national parks?

I too welcome the bill, which has been 55 years in arriving and fulfils one of Labour's manifesto commitments at the Scottish parliamentary elections. It has been a very interesting experience being a reporter at stage 1 of this bill, and I want to thank the conveners of the Transport and the Environment Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee for allowing me to sit in on their discussions and evidence sessions. Despite the very tight time scale that the Rural Affairs Committee report mentions, the committees have worked extremely hard to fulfil their obligations to consult on this issue at stage 1. Like Janis Hughes, I want to thank the clerks and also the Scottish Parliament information centre, which has complained to me that it is always forgotten in the thanks, for all their hard work in assisting the committees to meet their deadlines and obligations. The formulation of this legislation was the subject of extensive consultation by SNH and the Executive and I was pleased to note that some of the issues that were brought to the Executive's attention during the consultation resulted in changes in the bill as introduced. Such issues included the necessity to consult community councils; the need for the minister to consider including representatives of particular interests on the national park authority, although perhaps not to the extent suggested by John Scott; the possibility of establishing more than one advisory group; and the ability of the minister to modify the act in the case of marine parks. Although the committees involved in stage 1 have generally recognised that this is a good bill whose time has come at last, some suggestions have been made that I hope that Sarah Boyack and her colleagues will consider, as they might make this good bill even better. The bill deals with primary enabling legislation and the detail appropriate to each proposed national park will be set out in the designation orders. As those orders need to be responsive to local circumstances, the primary legislation cannot be over-prescriptive. Designation orders must be created through an inclusive and consultative process that enables the whole community, including the community of interests, to have  maximum ownership of the national park and that minimises conflict between the different stakeholders. However, the diversity of possible national parks presents challenges about consulting on the designation orders and the ability to amend them. Although I welcome the specific inclusion of consultation with community councils in the bill as introduced, it was clear from the evidence taken by the Rural Affairs Committee that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities does not expect to appoint anyone other than local councillors as its representatives. COSLA seems to think that ministerial appointments would take care of the representation of community groups; however, the minister must also recognise national and, where appropriate, sectoral interests. The sums do not add up. Although I was pleased to hear that the minister is prepared to consider whether the direct allocation of some places on the national park authority might be desirable, it would be inappropriate to dictate in the primary legislation how that representation would be selected. The Rural Affairs Committee was also concerned by the fact that there is currently no possibility of amending the designation orders, which would, for example, set the boundaries of the national parks. As the bill stands, such aspects would be subject only to affirmative action. I appreciate that the ministers may not want to set a precedent whereby every piece of subordinate legislation would be debated in Parliament, which would bog us down immeasurably. However, because of the diverse nature of national parks, from the totally terrestrial to the entirely marine, there is merit in considering some form of super-affirmative procedure, as has been suggested by the Subordinate Legislation Committee. I was going to say a little about marine parks, but much has already been said about that issue. Some suggestions for possible locations for Scottish marine national parks would help to illustrate the way in which the concept might operate in principle, and might allay some of the fears that fishermen's interests have expressed to the Rural Affairs Committee. I am happy to support the principles of this bill and look forward to consideration of it at stage 2.

rose—

On a point of order.

Mr Paterson has indicated that he is speaking on behalf of the cross-party group on domestic violence. I am not aware that that group has discussed this issue. Mr Paterson appears to be speaking from the benches of the Scottish nationalist party, which is rather different.

I thank the minister for reflecting on my constituency interests. I have relayed to the Executive the concerns of my constituents on this issue. On the more general point of getting rid of waste, does the minister agree that we need to promote other means of waste disposal, through renewable energy projects, to preserve the character of Scotland's rural areas?

It is a pleasure to be back in Strathclyde House. During my time as a councillor, I was never allowed to speak in this chamber, so I am pleased to be speaking now. I have not been provided with a copy of the minister's statement, and I have only just located the SPICe office, so I do not have a copy of the  report. I would like to ask about a problem of a constituent of mine. The constituent and his family have been tenant farmers for some time. The terms of the agreement that they have with their landlord have left them in a position where they may be liable to pay for the removal of outbuildings with asbestos that were erected on the land by the landlord. I wondered whether the regulations that the minister has in mind will provide adequate protection for tenant farmers in such a situation.

The A75 is an important route for the economies of not only Dumfries and Galloway, but Northern Ireland and northern England. What plans does the minister have to discuss the upgrade requirements with the local council, elected representatives from Northern Ireland and the UK Government?

Will the member take an intervention?

I have a strange feeling of déjà vu, because I am stuck in a debate that keeps repeating itself—a bit like that  film that I have not seen. An inordinate amount of time seems to have been spent discussing the matter, both in committee and in Parliament. As others have said, the debate was reintroduced in the chamber against the wishes of the minority on the Rural Affairs Committee. As Cathy Peattie said, the selection of this topic is slightly puzzling, given that there are so many issues that face rural communities, that would have been worthy of a two-and-a-half-hour debate. It is not that the adjacent waters boundary issue is unimportant—it is important—or that lessons should not be learned about the lack of consultation with the industry. Those lessons should be learned and I am pleased to hear the minister tell us that they have been learned. However, we seem to be spending a lot of time discussing an issue about which the Scottish Parliament is unable to do anything. It is not a question of meddling in other people's affairs; this is a reserved matter and we have Scottish MPs who are elected to represent our constituents in Westminster. It is the business of those MPs to represent our constituents there.

We have debated that matter once, as Alex Fergusson knows, just as we have already debated the adjacent waters boundary. My contention is that we keep returning to the issue like a dog to its unfinished dinner. The nationalist agenda is obvious. As Mr Rumbles said, the issue presents an opportunity to bash the Labour UK Government. That is fair enough—it is what Opposition parties are all about. Perhaps I am less shocked by that than Mr Rumbles is. It also presents an opportunity to stir up anti-English sentiments—

I will finish my sentence before giving way. The use of terminology such as "disputed zones", and even "stolen waters", stirs up such sentiments.

I am not taking any lessons from Mr Lochhead about silly statements. I am not attacking the fishing industry—as I said, the issue is important. What I am attacking is the amount of time that we have spent debating the issue in the Scottish Parliament. The motivation of the Scottish National party is clear. The motivation of the Tories is less clear cut. The Tories also want an opportunity to have a go at the Labour Government, yet in doing so, they are being rather inconsistent.

That is not what we are debating—we are debating a take-note motion. Jamie McGrigor has expressed an opinion which is very similar to that given by Irene McGugan today, about the importance of the fishing industry to the Scottish economy. However, the Tories in the House of Commons take a very different view. Indeed, English Conservatives, such as Oliver Letwin and Michael Fabricant, have argued that the eastern part of the line is too far south and should extend further north. Scottish Tories appear to have more in common with Scottish nationalists than with their colleagues at Westminster. What has brought about such a curious meeting of minds? There is only one situation in which the difference between the fisheries boundary and the civil jurisdiction offshore activities boundary might be problematic, and that is if the nationalists are successful in separating Scotland from the rest of the UK. Again, I can see why the nationalists want to press that agenda, but why should the Tories? The Tories like to portray themselves as the bulwark of the union. The Solway boundary is a median line. It was not always so. The Royal Navy used to patrol up to Ballantrae. According to Mr Davidson's argument about custom and practice, that boundary should be retained. I am sure that nobody particularly wants the western boundary to go up to Ballantrae again, and that people would prefer it to stay at the median in the Solway. If separation happens, constituents such as mine in Dumfriesshire are likely to have much more to exercise their minds than a line in the sea 12 miles east of the mainland.  I have no problem with the take-note motion, but I feel that we could have better spent two and a half hours debating issues that have not already  been debated, and that really affect the lives of people in rural communities.

Members will have to forgive me, as one who was raised in this city, for not knowing about the intricacies of farming. However, nobody can deny—certainly nobody who, like me, represents a dairy farming area—that over the past three years dairy farmers have been hard pressed. As we have heard, milk prices have fallen from 25p in 1996 to 22p in 1997, to 19.3p in 1998 and to 18.3p in 1999—and there are dire predictions of further falls this year. As production costs range from 14p per litre to 22p per litre, it is not difficult to see that dairy farmers are operating very close to the edge. Farmers compare the prices that they are getting with the prices that dairy products command in the shops and, not surprisingly, ask questions. Scottish dairy products are highly regarded for their quality, yet the primary producers can barely break even. Unfortunately, the price paid to farmers for milk is not within Government control—it is set by market forces. Over recent years, UK farmers have been affected by weakened international markets and the BSE crisis. It is unfortunate that some countries in the middle east still refuse to take UK dairy products, despite the fact that no link between those products and BSE has ever been established.

I find that a curious intervention. Of course I would be concerned if the supermarkets were profiteering and I believe that the issue has been referred to the Office of Fair Trading.  Another issue that I am sure Fergus Ewing will be interested in commenting on is the strength of sterling. It cannot be denied that that has contributed to the problems in the dairy industry. European Union support prices are set in euros and their value, which acts as a floor in the market, has fallen in the UK as the euro falls against the pound. As the minister has demonstrated today, it is incorrect to give the impression that the Government, whether in Scotland or the UK, is unconcerned about the situation. That is why charges for cattle passports have been deferred and why the UK Government has agreed to pay £12 million in agrimoney compensation to Scottish farmers.

That is something that we must take on board when we consider whether it is in Britain's interest to join the European single currency.

I must press on, or I will run out of time. I will take an intervention from Mr Scott later, as I have something to say in which I am sure he will be interested. I am very pleased that the Minister for Rural Affairs—supported by the Rural Affairs Committee—has made such a strong case for the payment of agrimoney, and I congratulate him on his success. There has also been remission of the dairy hygiene charges and an extension of the weight limit for cattle sold under the over-30-months scheme, which will be worth around £3 million—provided that the European Commission agrees to it. I should say in passing that the petition relating to that was the one petition from the National Farmers Union of Scotland that the Rural Affairs Committee did not support. However, it has been successful elsewhere. The new measures are part of a £39 million package of support to Scottish farmers that was announced after the Downing Street summit on 30 March. As we have heard, aid on its own will not solve the underlying problems that the dairy farming industry, along with many other sectors of British agriculture, faces. That has been widely recognised. The only way in which we can tackle those problems is by the Executive and the industry working together to examine problems and identify solutions. That is why funding is being made available to provide business advice, grants  for marketing, processing and training, and a new web-based advice service. Farmers throughout Scotland and the UK have expressed a desire to add value to their products by producing and selling foods more locally. As members know, I hate to be parochial, but I am particularly pleased that the Executive has set up a pilot project with organisations and producers in Dumfries and Galloway to examine ways of developing viable markets for locally produced goods. That has been welcomed recently in the local press. The president of the National Farmers Union of Scotland, Jim Walker, said:  "This is something that could produce very significant results in the future." He also said: "If we are going to survive we have got to do something different that reflects the different cost structure and quality of the food we produce". The Government must recognise, as it has done, the problems that are faced in this beleaguered industry and the need for short-term assistance. I do not subscribe to the view that, because Tory Governments allowed other important manufacturing industries, such as mining, shipbuilding and steelworking, to die, a Labour Government should do the same to farming. Two wrongs, or four wrongs, never make a right. However, I believe, as does the NFU, that subsidies are not a valid long-term solution. We must work together to find solutions that stabilise the industry and help farmers to diversify—although, looking round the chamber, I see that several farmers have already found other forms of diversification—and to promote our quality Scottish products.

I welcome the opportunity to debate these issues. People are right to be cautious, because there could be risks to human health or to the environment from some transgenic organisms. People have the right not to touch GM foods with a bargepole if that is what they want, and that is why labelling is important, as Tavish Scott said. Nobody should be forced to consume genetically modified foodstuffs against their will. There is, of course, a difference between those foods that contain genetically modified materials and those that are produced by genetically modified plants but are themselves chemically and biologically indistinguishable from the naturally occurring product. People should have the right to produce and to consume organic food without any fear that that food may inadvertently have been contaminated by cross-pollination from genetically modified plants. That right must not be compromised, and that is why we need to know more about the possible hazards of cross-pollination. Of course, scientists working in the field of genetics are themselves divided on the potential benefits and hazards of this technology. On the anti side, there is concern that genes may be  transferred to other plants—not necessarily potatoes and oilseed rape, but other plants that are compatible—and thereby inadvertently alter the genetic makeup and characteristics of those plants and the ecosystems in which they survive. There are also well-founded anxieties that genetic modification could alter plants' metabolisms, and possibly result in the production of toxins that could get into the food chain through the consumption of GMOs by farm animals. That is why it is important that no trial GM crops enter the food chain. The experience of the BSE crisis, as Alex Johnstone said, naturally makes people cautious. There is concern about the introduction of terminator genes into GMOs, which prevent the organism from replicating, and thereby tie in producers to the annual purchase of seeds from powerful monopoly suppliers. On the other hand, there are the possible benefits of gene technology. Contrary to much public knowledge, pharmaceuticals have been produced by expression from genetically modified bacteria such as E coli since the early 1980s. That is possibly scarier than some of the matters that we are discussing today. Genetically modified plants can be used to produce vaccines. Axis Genetics, which went bust last year through investment problems, was producing an oral hepatitis B vaccine in plants. Plants can also be developed that have resistance to pesticides and to herbicides, which makes them less environmentally invasive than those plants that are used at present, although I have some concerns about herbicide and pesticide resistance. Plants that are adapted to hostile environments, such as dry, hot, wet or saline conditions, might be developed to enable food production in currently infertile environments. Plants that produce biodegradable plastics, for example, could have environmental benefits. They may produce plastics that do not pollute the environment for evermore, and such plastics would emanate from a renewable source and therefore not use up the world's finite oil reserves. Labour's position is not pro-genetic modification, nor is mine; neither is its position necessarily anti-GMO. There needs to be more medical and scientific opinion, and there must be no general cultivation of GM crops until scientific and medical opinion is completely satisfied that there are no unacceptable effects to either public health or the environment. However, we cannot resolve those dilemmas without knowing the facts. Banning GMOs for evermore would be impractical, because they will be used in other parts of the world and could be introduced illegally into our environment. We need to know the facts. We need to know if  there will be an environmental price for the use of GMOs, but we need to make informed choices using knowledge that is based on rigorous scientific method, and not on melodramatic pseudo-science or 19 th -century horror stories—a point that was well made by Janis Hughes and something that, I am sorry to say, was illustrated by Kenny MacAskill. The only grounds on which such choices can be made are independent, controlled and rigorously evaluated research, using organisms that are proven not to be hazardous, but which can provide information about the possibilities of, for example, genetic transfer to other plants. Controlled farm-scale experiments have to be used, because that is the only way in which we can get that information. No committee of this Parliament can report on the implications for the environment or agriculture of GMOs at this time. We must proceed cautiously, but we must let our scientists collect and analyse the data, provided that carefully controlled experimental conditions are used. We can discuss the implications, but the research needs to be done first. I commend the Executive's motion to the Parliament.

Does Janis Hughes agree that it is scientifically impossible for genetically modified oilseed rape to cross-pollinate a potato?

I take Mr Harper's point about the earlier field trials, but the field trials that were announced last week are intended to consider pollen transfer and cross-pollination. I am sure that he will welcome that.

Will Mr MacAskill explain how cross-pollination of crops, for example, can be tested in laboratories and greenhouses?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it intends to take to improve the number and quality of community houses for rent in rural areas. (S1O-1433)

As far as the pilot project in the Highlands is concerned, what advice would the minister give to the housing agencies in Dumfries and Galloway—an area which, like the Highlands, contains a number of pressured rural communities and a shortage of community-rented housing—so that Dumfries and Galloway may also access the extra available funding to address housing problems in its rural areas?

Colleagues, I am old enough to remember the first automatic teller machines—

Thank you, David. I first used an automated teller machine—or hole-in-the-wall cash dispenser—some time in the mid to late 1970s. It exchanged a little £10 voucher for a crisp, spanking new, freshly minted note. Since then, technology has moved on a great deal, with the advent of debit cards, telephone banking and now internet banking. Sadly, there have been consequent employment losses for staff in the banking sector, which we continue to hear about to this day. Despite the advances, cash continues to be important, not just to the older generation, which picks up its pension in cash, or to young people, who get their pocket money in cash, but to the majority of the public. In November 1998, the United Kingdom Government commissioned a review of banking services under the chairmanship of Don Cruickshank. Charging and access to the ATM networks fell within the remit of the review. The review's interim report was leaked to the BBC's "Watchdog" programme of 24 February. As a result, a copy of the interim report was made publicly available on the internet. I have some of that report here—it took some time to download, but I managed to beat the technology and get a copy eventually. Apart from anything else, the report gives insight into the daily life of the average automated teller machine which, in 1998, processed 206 cash transactions, 72 balance inquiries and 18 mini-statements each day. One of the striking statistics in the report is that 66 per cent by volume of  personal transactions in 1998 still used cash, as opposed to only 4 per cent of business transactions in 1997. Personal transactions tend, of course, to be low value. With work patterns making it less easy to visit the bank, and with the reduction over the years in the number of small branches, ATMs are increasingly used as the primary source of cash withdrawal. In 1998, 77 per cent of the adult population owned an ATM card. Cash machine withdrawals account for something like 55 per cent of cash acquisitions, so the imposition of charges has the potential to affect a huge number of members of the public. All the UK's ATM and debit card issuers are now members of the LINK network, which was set up in 1986, originally to bring together the smaller banks and building societies. LINK now has a virtual monopoly on ATM services and is in a position to squeeze out rivals, should new players try to develop similar networks. LINK's proposed charging policy would have a disproportionate effect in rural and deprived areas. The ATM network's proposed changes to cash machine charges would have an adverse effect on many of my constituents in rural areas, because many smaller towns and villages have only one cash machine. The number of remote ATMs increased by 200 per cent in the five years from 1993 to 1998 and now totals almost 6,000 throughout the UK. The number of ATMs in customer areas where banking services are available during normal working hours fell during that period. Customers in remote areas have little choice other than to use their local cash machine and could be charged £1 every time that they do so. Charging would also disadvantage low-income customers. ATMs are generally used by the better-off; 70 per cent of people in socio-economic group E never use ATMs, whereas 50 per cent of people in group AB use them regularly. That means, however, that at least 30 per cent of people in group E possess a debit card. Less well-off areas are less likely to attract a choice of cash machine services. The Scottish Parliament information centre report on cashpoint services, which was produced yesterday and which I found today, lists the number of cash machines in each social inclusion partnership area. There are, for example, two cash machines in north Ayr—this is possibly the last opportunity to make a play for Ayr before the by-election. There is only one cash machine in the SIP area in the Borders and one in the greater Easterhouse area. The proposed £1 charge per transaction is independent of the amount that is withdrawn—the charge would be £1 whether the sum was £20 or  £200. People who were withdrawing smaller sums of money would be especially disadvantaged. Organisations are already recompensed through LINK for transactions that involve customers from other banks. The average cost of each transaction is between 12p and 31p, not the proposed £1 that is to be passed on to the customer. ATM transactions cost the banks about one third of the cost of branch transactions. Some organisations already charge their customers for so-called disloyalty. However, as long as there are banks that offer their customers free access to other machines, users can choose to transfer their accounts in order to receive free services. Disloyalty charges are characteristically in the region of £1 to £1.50. Double charging—first by the ATM provider, then by the account provider, which could penalise the customer by up to £2.50 per transaction—is likely to be debated at the next LINK board meeting on 28 March. The Government and Stephen Byers have expressed the view that the public take the issue of double charging very seriously. No information about the charges that may be levied on the user is available when a cash withdrawal is being made. The review of banking services is likely to recommend that all charges incurred by customers—both issuer and acquirer charges—should be displayed on the cash machine screen before cash is withdrawn. Another likely recommendation is that charges, if levied, should be at only one end of the transaction and should be imposed by the owner of the ATM, rather than by the supplier of the account. That would prevent double charging. On several occasions, we have debated post offices, in particular rural post offices. We all thought that one possible area of progress would be the Horizon project, which will link computer services in post offices by the end of 2001. Negotiations with high-street banks are under way to allow post offices to offer banking services. We all recognise that that is an opportunity for small rural communities to regain the banking services that they lost many years ago. However, I would be concerned if the proposed charges had an impact on the Horizon programme, which is an important development in rural communities. I also wonder about the impact of the increasing use of cashback services in supermarkets. We might find ourselves being charged for cash withdrawal in different ways. Financial institutions such as the Co-operative Bank, the Bank of Scotland, the Royal Bank of Scotland, the Clydesdale Bank, Lloyds TSB and the Nationwide Building Society—I apologise to anyone left off that list—are to be congratulated on coming out against the greedy proposals. Some  have time-limited their pledge to 1 January, but in the interests of low-income and rural communities in particular, I urge them to continue to take that principled stance.

I am sure that Alex Salmond is a little surprised to see me here, as I represent a constituency at the other end of Scotland. I am here because last Friday, I met trade union representatives from Dumfries young offenders institution, who told me some rumours that they had heard on good authority. They suggested that a second review of the prison estate had been commissioned, hard on the heels of the previous review, which resulted in the closures that were announced last autumn. They said that the review had identified four further candidates for possible closure: Inverness, Aberdeen, Peterhead and Dumfries young offenders institution. Apparently, Inverness and Aberdeen prisons were ruled out on the basis of their importance to their local communities. The remaining choice would appear to be between Peterhead and Dumfries. Apparently, the review was to be laid before the Prison Service board this week for a decision. If that is true, I want to know why it has happened. As recently as the end of last year, I received several assurances from ministers that Dumfries young offenders institution was not going to be closed. I refer members to the answer that I received from Jim Wallace to a written question: "The staff savings, prison closures and the management changes will be enough to enable the Scottish Prison Service to operate within its future baseline provision. The £13 million did not form part of this baseline and was reallocated to elsewhere in the Justice Programme."— [ Official Report, Written Answers, 3 February 2000; Vol 4, p 219.]  At that point, the minister did not expect further closures to take place. From what Mr Salmond is saying, Peterhead is an excellent institution and I accept his views as the local MSP. However, let me put the case for Dumfries young offenders institution, or Jessiefield, as it is known locally. It is a class A secure institution, which provides 140 jobs for local people. I remind members that we have just lost Penninghame open prison and that staff from there have been reallocated to Dumfries. Jessiefield is valued by its local community too. Significant sums of public money—more than £2 million—have just been invested into the buildings and the prison could be fairly easily adapted to take increased numbers of inmates. It could also provide for the local adult prison population. That would reduce the costs per head; at the moment, the costs per head at Dumfries are rather high. The prison also has internal sanitation for all prisoners, so there are no human rights issues relating to slopping out. The prison is only one and a half hours by train from Glasgow, so it is accessible to families of inmates who come from  the central belt. If it comes down to a fight between Dumfries and Peterhead, Alex Salmond can be absolutely certain that I will be fighting for Dumfries. However, I very much hope that it will not come down to a fight. I want to know why, after all the assurances that I and others have received from ministers, 140 of my constituents are once again being subject to rumour over the future of their jobs and are suffering anxiety. Whose agenda is this? I do not believe that it is the minister's agenda. I want to know the truth. I believe that my constituents deserve the truth and I can assure members that I am very angry on their behalf.

Does the First Minister agree that the figures released by the registrar general are for a worst-case scenario, because they do not take into account issues such as the opportunities that are presented by the manufacturing strategy, which we discussed this morning? In Dumfries and Galloway's case, no account was taken of such issues as the development of the Crichton university site and the possibilities that arise from the world-class new technology that is being installed there. Indeed, many of us here hope that the Scottish university for industry will be based at that site. The registrar general's figures give us a baseline above which we have to perform. Instead of being pessimistic about the opportunities for areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, we should be moving ahead optimistically and making the most of all the new opportunities that exist in those areas.

It is good to hear the Executive and most of the members who have spoken talking with confidence about the future of the manufacturing industries in Scotland, as we sometimes get the impression that manufacturing is in terminal decline. It is true that manufacturing employment in Scotland has fallen by about a third in the past 20 years but, compared to the rest of the UK, Scotland's manufacturing industries are doing well. Productivity has grown by 1.4 per cent in the year to October 1999 while it has fallen by 0.7 per cent in the rest of the UK. However, there is no room for complacency. There have been recent job losses in manufacturing throughout Scotland and a number of regrettable closures and reductions in my constituency. One of the measures that I will be using to assess the success of our policies will be a reversal of those job losses in my constituency and throughout rural Scotland. Manufacturing has been in a process of change for some time and only those industries that can adapt will be able to survive in the long term—that is one of the main principles of evolution. Some businesses are adapting well and are taking advantage of the emerging knowledge economies and are blurring the distinctions between services and products, adding value to what they do.  Lessons can be learned from the success of those businesses and from the failure of others. I was pleased to note that the Executive document was produced after extensive discussion and close working with representatives of all parts of the business community. On several occasions, we have talked in this chamber of the importance of improving the business environment, of the vital role of the knowledge economy and of the need to continuously improve the skills of our working people by investment in lifelong learning. Talk is fine, but it needs to be translated into objectives and actions. The document contains a series of specific actions to be taken by the Scottish Executive and the UK Government to address the needs of manufacturing in this country. Last week, I asked an oral question about the progress of the science strategy. At the risk of boring the minister by droning on about science again, I will say that I am particularly pleased that the Executive has listed its plans for the development of the science base and the encouragement of commercialisation. It has become axiomatic that—due in part to the low level of investment in research and development by Scottish business—Scotland produces good research but does not turn that into good technology or jobs for its people, but the axiom will change. I was pleased to hear from the minister of the discussions that he is having with members of the scientific community to work out how that change can be achieved. The Executive has invested £11 million of additional funding to aid the promotion of commercial activity. That money will bridge the gap that exists between laboratory research and marketable products. We need more mentoring for scientists to allow them to turn their work into saleable products and we need to change the way in which research is funded and assessed. The Executive is also investing £6 million in improving the infrastructure of higher education institutes to assist with the development of research for commercial uses. Research equipment is extraordinarily expensive: a mass spectrometer costs about £6 million and needs constant upgrading. However, without that type of equipment, our laboratories will not be able to produce saleable commodities. I welcome the success of Scottish bids in a number of UK initiatives such as university challenge, which was a panel game on television when I was young but is now the name of a science enterprise challenge. Research and development is essentially related to the businesses that it supports in the cluster strategies. The "Created in Scotland" document  and the Scottish Enterprise network cluster strategy documents that tie research and development into job creation show that we are developing templates that will enable us to improve our manufacturing base and put Scotland back on the international manufacturing map.

Is the minister aware that Age Concern is undertaking research into domestic abuse of the elderly by partners, children and other carers? Will he make a commitment to consider the results of that research thoroughly, with a view to Executive action if necessary?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in developing a science strategy for Scotland. (S1O-1264)

I thank the minister. Is he aware that, although there have been recent developments in the commercialisation of scientific research, there remain barriers such as funding and assessment procedures that make undertaking research by universities and research institutes that can be used for commercial purposes more difficult? Has he discussed those issues with members of the scientific community?

Does Mr Davidson accept that although the Labour party always opposed the poll tax, at no time did it advocate non-payment? Many of us were implacably opposed to the poll tax, but continued to pay because we knew that, at the end of the day, it was the poor—the people whom councils served—rather than Mrs Thatcher who would suffer if we did not.

I was a local councillor for five years prior to being elected to the Parliament. During that time, we knew nothing other than lean times. The yearly announcement of the following year's aggregate external finance hung over every council like an impending poor exam result. Issues have arisen over many years that may take many years to resolve. Keith Harding mentioned rural areas, and Dumfries and Galloway Council is predominantly a rural council. It has received an increase in funding of 3.7 per cent this year, which approximates to the Scottish average. That is fair, in the sense that it is the average, although it is not a settlement that anybody is dancing in the streets about, and I would appreciate the minister's reassurance on several issues. I was pleased to hear what the minister said about considering the indicators for rural deprivation, as the distribution of rural poverty differs from the distribution of urban poverty. Rural poverty is often less visible, but it is still there and needs to be recognised. The cost of delivering services in rural areas must also be taken into account, as it is often higher than in urban areas. I am acutely aware that almost £40 million of repair and rebuilding work needs to be carried out on  schools in Dumfries and Galloway. My car is also acutely aware of the outstanding problems of rural roads, and has developed a few creaks, groans and sighs to remind me of them. Much more seriously, the social services department in Dumfries and Galloway Council, in an effort to reduce its overspend, has introduced a system of charging for home care that many people feel could be described as draconian. An elderly lady of modest income attended my surgery the other week. Her husband, who has Alzheimer's disease, receives two sessions of day care and seven and a half hours' home care a week. She is now expected to pay a bill of more than £80 a week for that. I find that unacceptable. That is a local council decision, but the Scottish Parliament must work with local councils to overcome such problems. I am also extremely concerned—and I have written to the minister on the subject—about the formula that was used to calculate the grant-aided expenditure for Dumfries and Galloway fire brigade, which left it with an increase of only 1.4 per cent. That is the smallest rise in Scotland, despite the requirement to give holiday pay to reserve firefighters—a problem that has arisen from the different way in which the fire service operates in a rural community such as Dumfries and Galloway. Such an issue should be reconsidered. Councils should be more effective in the collection of council tax. Sometimes, however, they need to be more efficient. There are too many cases in which people have been pursued for debts that have been settled. One of the outcomes of Mrs Thatcher's iniquitous poll tax was that people began to feel that it was acceptable—even admirable—not to pay local taxes. The system changed—arguably, it is not ideal—but unfortunately the attitude has remained. That must be addressed. People who can pay local taxation but do not are not smart; they are selfish and are failing in their duties to their local communities. Councils are to be congratulated on trying to introduce systems that make the regular payment of council tax easier. In Dumfries and Galloway, people are rewarded for using direct debit systems, whereby the payments can be spread over 12 months. There are opportunities, to which Allan Wilson alluded, to make the collection and payment of council tax easier through the use of new technology. That should also make easier the accurate detection of non-payers. Taxation is rarely popular, and few people will look forward to paying increased council taxes after the end of this month. However, if it is of any consolation, my family pays full council tax in two council areas—Dumfries and Galloway and South Ayrshire—so we will be hit twice. I do not know  whether that makes anybody feel better, but it might.

The central issue of this debate is the relationship between the Scottish people and their elected representatives at all levels. I am not proposing that we debate the merits or demerits of the various electoral systems, all of which have their advantages and disadvantages. More important than that is the way in which we arrive at open decision making and the way in which we develop a system of consultation that is seen to listen—that does listen—and takes on board what has been said. That is essential if we are to break down the cynicism towards the political process that is evident in Scottish society and seems to surround all consultation processes. I want to share an anecdote from my experience as convener of education in South Ayrshire Council. More than two years ago, we entered into consultation over the closure of three schools. Two of them were rural and one was urban. Parents in the local communities were outraged, and were certain that consultation would be as it had always been—that the council had made up its mind to consult for a month before doing what it jolly well wanted to do anyway. However, during that consultation I was convinced that we should do otherwise. One member of the community spoke to me about the importance of those schools and convinced me that they were right. Not only did we change our minds but, by using video-conferencing, e-mail and other new technology that was available to us, we were able to overcome the educational problems and allow the pupils to work with pupils of the same age in the larger school. Through listening, through being shouted at and through taking part in the debate, we came out with something much better—which would not have happened if we had not consulted and if we had not had to make difficult decisions. Consultation is important, because it gives politicians the opportunity to be taught by the electorate. I seize the opportunities in the modernising government agenda for us to get out and learn from the people we represent. Last week, consultation on the tourism strategy was mentioned in the chamber. All sides recognised that contributions from the public and from the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee had shaped that strategy. As members know, I was happy that consultation had influenced a Government strategy. It was disappointing, however, that when the debate was reported in the press no mention was made of  that. All that was mentioned was that Fergus Ewing attacked the Government on this, George Lyon attacked it on that and Mary Scanlon said so-and-so. The fact that consultation had taken place and that the strategy was widely welcomed by people of all political parties was ignored, and all the combative stuff and the negative comments were reported. That is seen as the way in which politics operate in this country. We have to overcome that. Real, consultative, open government does not mean that we do not have leadership or that we do not know our own minds.

That is what the modernisation agenda is all about: it is a vision of the relationship between the Government and the people it represents. That is core to the whole process. I do not want the process to be interpreted as lack of leadership. People say, "You are listening only because you do not know your own mind. You ought to be a strong leader and go out there and get them telt." That is the old view of politics. We must have a system of government that is relevant and important to people; which takes on board their opinions; which listens to them and which is seen to listen to them. It is vital that we do that, to restore confidence in our political system. Unfortunately, confidence has been damaged over the years. A terrible cynicism about politics at all levels has crept in. We see that in the turnout for local government elections. It is important that we do something to restore confidence in our political system. Modern, open government is one way of doing that.

I am pleased to hear it. As we have lots of time, I want to congratulate Mr Ewing on his new spectacles. They are very nice. It does not seem all that long ago that we last debated tourism. I hope that that is not a facet of my age, or Mr Lyon might be inclined to make rude remarks about my parents as well. Considering stress-busting holidays and breaks that allow re-connection with the self is particularly attractive at this time of year. I am pleased to have the opportunity to debate tourism once again. I do not know how many members saw the hotelier, Mr John Sloggie, on the "Newsnight" opt-out last night. He was enthusiastic about the Executive's plans because he had made a number of points to the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and he felt that the minister had addressed them. I am a member of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee and I feel a bit like Mr Sloggie. When I read this document, I saw that some of the points we made to Mr Morrison had been taken on board. That shows how the Parliament and its committee system can liaise with people and that the Executive is listening to what people are saying. Apart from anything else, the document made me feel quite useful as a member of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. I am pleased to see that the report sets firm targets. We made the point that there should be targets. I appreciate that Fergus does not feel that the targets are hard enough but, as he said, it is easy to set targets; achieving them is difficult. Our  targets must be achievable. It is also important to identify the mechanisms by which the aims will be achieved. It is a bit like going on holiday: we do not need to know only where we want to go; we need to know how to get there, how long it will take, and how much it will cost. The mechanisms that are referred to in the document are important. I welcome the approach to niche marketing. I know that all members will make a play for their constituencies on that one. We need to appreciate that different areas and regions have particular strengths. When I saw cultural tourism and genealogy listed in the document, I could see markets to be exploited in Dumfries and Galloway to the local benefit. Opportunities exist throughout Scotland, in the form of local attractions and events. Better marketing of arts festivals and other events will benefit our tourism industry. As in many matters, we must identify what we do well and build on that. The connection that was made between lifelong learning and the tourism industry is important. Quality can improve only if tourism is seen as a worthwhile career with recognised qualifications and—as Pauline McNeill said—decent wages, conditions and career development opportunities. I also welcome the developments in Ossian. It may be a bit late, but it is a vital development that will transform the tourism industry. I am pleased that the Executive recognises in the document that Scotland needs to be a leader in the information technology revolution in this sector. Many of us would say that Scotland needs to be a leader in the information technology revolution and information and communications technology revolution in many sectors. It is good that the document recognises that. Many people do not use the internet and prefer to use more traditional methods to search for information, so the development of a call centre approach and single number access to all information on Scottish tourism is welcome. I was pleased to hear Mr Morrison say that it is to be a multilingual centre. That is good, because Scotland—like the rest of the UK—has a reputation for not being very good at speaking other languages. A multilingual centre will send out a good message. John Swinney referred to the fact that we are reviewing the enterprise networks. It is to be welcomed by all members of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee that the review is to be extended to consider tourism support and development. I was involved in the study group that went to Prestwick airport with the Ayrshire Economic Forum. We have heard from other economic forums at the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning  Committee. I was astonished to discover that the area tourist board is not part of some economic forums, yet tourism is such an important business in many areas of Scotland. The enterprise network and the tourism network must work more closely together. I am not always impressed by glossy publications, but I am impressed by "A New Strategy for Scottish Tourism". It has both style and content—the content is more important.

The concept, in the Scottish Enterprise network strategy, of the knowledge economy is that it will increasingly be based on new ideas, software,  services and relationships, and less on products, with the result that the distinction between manufacturing and services will become harder to make. I find it a difficult concept to get my head round. The cluster strategy reflects a growing recognition that different players in each sector in Scotland—whether producers, employees, businesses or research institutions—need to work co-operatively, sharing information and knowledge, to compete at an international level. In some cases, it will be necessary to bring together the various parts of a previously fragmented and unco-ordinated industry. The Scottish economy must learn how to make the most of what Scottish industry does best. It is frequently stated that Scotland has a world-class research base. We have already heard that some sectors are showing considerable success in turning good science into jobs and prosperity. Successes in biotechnology, the pharmaceutical sector, semiconductors, opto-electronics and information technology spring to mind. The food and drink sector, which provides 17 per cent of the manufacturing jobs in Scotland and is of considerable importance in the south-west of Scotland, is another sector that has the potential for consolidation and expansion through the application and development of indigenous science. However, we must address the fact that there are barriers to the commercialisation of science and consider ways in which they can be overcome. Perhaps I should declare an interest, as I was a food scientist and my partner still is. Compared with the rest of the UK, Scottish firms have a poor record in research and development, accounting for 0.6 per cent of gross domestic product. Often, companies from other countries develop the technology and processes that utilise the research done in Scottish universities and research institutes, which means that those countries benefit from the employment and prosperity that is created. There are problems associated with the fact that performance in universities and research institutes is normally measured by the number of publications that appear in quality scientific journals. Because research that is commercially sensitive or patentable cannot be published in that way, the institution does not get any credit for that work, which can affect its funding. Core funding is generally project-based, and is not awarded specifically for commercialisation or industrial support. That can cause conflicting pressures on researchers' time. The professional assessment of the work of academic departments must be similarly examined, to give due consideration to research  with commercial applications. Such research might be blue-sky research or, equally important, near-market or process-related research. Process-related research is perhaps particularly applicable to the food and drink sector, where there is obviously considerable public resistance to very novel types of food—we need only think of the GM debate—but research into the processing of existing foodstuffs might result in considerable added value. Because of a general shortage of experience in commercialisation in the scientific community, mentoring is necessary. That would be most appropriately performed by other scientists, not necessarily from the same discipline, who have already been involved in successful commercialisation. There must be a mechanism that allows scientists involved in the process to be recognised, as researchers who turn inventions into jobs or help others to do so are obviously not able to sustain the level of their publishable work. We must recognise that commercialisation takes time and that instant results and successes should not be expected. Initial targets on job creation should not be over-optimistic; they must be achievable in the short term and sustainable in the long term. Last week, at the Royal Society of Edinburgh, I attended a meeting on commercialisation at which there was a real enthusiasm for the development of this part of the knowledge economy in Scotland's universities and research institutes. We must listen to what those communities are saying about barriers to progress and consider how Government action can help to reduce such barriers to ensure that Scotland, her people and her communities benefit fully from the employment and prosperity that might be created.

I start by expressing the hope that the British-Irish Council has a future. The recent news of the possible suspension of the Northern Ireland Assembly is of concern to us all. The difficulties being experienced in Northern Ireland put into perspective the problems that have been exercising political minds here in Scotland over the past couple of weeks. I am sure that we all fervently hope that a solution can be found that enables our sister administration in Northern Ireland to continue to operate. The British-Irish Council enables the Irish Government, representatives from the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, and the four Governments of the UK to work together on areas of mutual interest. Importantly, it should provide opportunities for us to learn from each other's experience. The First Minister has reminded members that the Irish Government has been involved in pioneering work on tackling drugs misuse. Its views on the success of its efforts, and even on those areas that have been less successful, will serve to inform us. I hope that a mechanism will be found to enable the proceedings of the next meeting of the council, in Dublin, to be reported to the Scottish Parliament so that we can hear at first hand what has been going on. I am sure that Irish successes in tourism—particularly cultural tourism—and promotion of the film industry, for example, will also be of interest to members of the Scottish Parliament when we consider our strategies for those matters. There will also be increasing opportunities for  educational links, especially as distance learning techniques and communication processes are rapidly improving. There are strong and historic links between Northern Ireland and the south-west of Scotland, not least in mutual interests in economic issues, particularly transport. I want to make a plea for the A75 Euro-route; I hope that there will be many opportunities to highlight its importance. For members who may not be familiar with the area, the sea crossing between Belfast and Stranraer is a key transport link between Northern Ireland and Scotland—and the rest of the UK—for both freight and passengers. Access to the main motorway network, north and south, is gained via the A75, which runs for more than 100 miles through Galloway and Dumfriesshire, parallel to the Solway firth. Many of us who represent that area, at different levels of government—councillors, MPs and MSPs—feel that the economic significance of the route, not only to Dumfries and Galloway, but to Northern Ireland and the north of England, has been underestimated over the years. I will not try to make a party political point about this, because it is a cross-party issue. Despite funding having been made available to upgrade some sections of the road, convoys of cars and lorries leaving Stranraer on their way to the M6 and the M74 are frequently still travelling together when they reach the Annan by-pass. I know that as a result of being trapped behind them on occasion. I look forward to the British-Irish Council providing another avenue for discussion about the economic importance of the A75 and other trade routes. I hope that informal interparliamentary links will be forged, allowing members representing constituencies in the different Parliaments to discuss matters of mutual interest. There is genuine cross-party support and cross-sectoral interest in promoting the inclusion of the A75 in future strategic roads reviews. That is one small example of the type of discussion which, if it is followed by meaningful action, will prove that the British-Irish Council is not just a high-level talking shop, but presents a real opportunity to make progress on matters of mutual interest.

I will try to be as brief as possible. I want to tell members why I have not signed David Mundell's motion. It is not because I do not feel that the Post Office is important—it is—but because it omitted to refer to important developments in the Post Office and raised the scaremongering spectre of closures, which will not serve well those communities that are in danger of losing their post office, such as a village in Dumfries where the post office is up for sale. The post office network has declined at a rate of 1 per cent per year during the past 20 years, so we should be concerned. I was pleased that David referred to computerisation of the network, because that presents an opportunity for rural post offices. Something like 12 times as many rural communities have post offices as have banks. If arrangements can be made—Cathy Jamieson may be able to tell us more about that—with the high street banks, they would allow rural post offices to provide an extra service in rural communities and thereby strengthen their role. The other fact that I wish to draw to members' attention is that the Government has said that it will not compel benefits payments to be made into bank accounts and that it will continue to be possible for claimants to withdraw all their benefit cash across the post office counter. That comment was made by Alan Johnson, the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, in a debate on this issue in the House of Commons on 17 January. This issue has been debated a number of times at Westminster. I will draw my remarks to a conclusion, as my two minutes are almost up. I would have liked to say a lot more, but I think it is important that we recognise and advertise the possibilities for the Post Office and recognise that rural sub-post offices can have an increased and valuable role in our communities in the future.

Does the First Minister agree that the issues that really matter to the people of Scotland are housing, health and employment, and that it is about those matters, not the behaviour of certain discredited advisers, that people want to hear? Does he agree that far too much time is being spent discussing those issues rather than the really important things that matter to the people of our country?

I share some of Mr Wilson's concern about the level of repayment and hope that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee will look at that. Will he accept, however, that the repayment figure is 9 per cent of the income above the eligibility figure, which is £7.50 a month per £1,000 above £10,000? When the sum of money is translated into the repayment figure, it is not huge.

rose—

David Mundell is aware that we share a concern for students who live in the areas he mentioned, for whom there may be no alternative to studying in the north of England. Does he accept that it may be a question of what is legal, as making out an exceptional case for those students may be prevented by EU law? Does he agree that we should ask the Executive to investigate whether other imaginative solutions exist that could alleviate the problem for those few students who fall into that category?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether, consequent to the recent influenza outbreak, it has any plans to improve uptake of the influenza immunisation programme by vulnerable groups in future years. (S1O-949)

I thank the minister for her assurances about the promotion of the immunisation programme. Will she comment on recent suggestions that an anti-viral drug might be used as an alternative to immunisation? Does she have any information about the relative efficacy of those treatments in preventing influenza and whether there are any contraindications or side effects associated with the use of anti-viral drugs?

Like Karen Gillon, I am contributing to this debate with some regret. From what we read in the papers, Scotland appears to be in the grip of some homophobic frenzy that is not mirrored south of the border. If that is true, it is much to Scotland's discredit, because it makes considered debate very difficult. The bill was debated and supported by Scottish MPs when they had legislative power over this area. It was overwhelmingly supported in the Commons and would have been law by 1 July had it not been for the Conservatives in the House of Lords blocking the will of elected MPs. Today's Tory amendment is yet another attempt to block legislation taking effect in Scotland. If successful, the Tories would block the protection that would be afforded to young people by the new offence of abuse of trust by adults in positions of responsibility. I speak as a parent of three children. I have two children who are approaching adolescence. Like most parents, I want young people to be protected by law from the unwanted attentions of adults who may have a particular relationship with them by virtue of their job or some other role. We all know that young people can become dependent on—or, indeed, develop a crush on—adults who work with them. Any of us who has been involved in education will be familiar with the syndrome of students having crushes on teachers. Young people deserve to be protected from any adult who tries to take advantage of that relationship. I do not care about the gender or the sexual orientation of that adult: male or female, straight or gay, adults should not abuse their relationships with the young people they work with, especially their relationships with vulnerable young people. I would be as angry about an older woman's attentions towards my young son as I would about an older man trying to interfere with him; I would be equally angry about an older man trying to become involved in a sexual relationship with my daughter as I would if he tried to approach my son. I do not think that gender or sexual orientation is important in such matters—abuse is abuse, and abuse of trust remains abuse of trust. I urge the chamber to allow the bill to apply in Scotland. In future, we can of course amend or repeal it in the light of experience. For example, if we find that the abuse of trust provisions do not do exactly what we want them to do, we can amend them. We have competence in that area and we should exercise it if necessary. Meanwhile, I urge members to support the motion.

Before I start, I apologise for having forgotten my jacket. My attire is not intended as a mark of disrespect to my colleagues. I do not intend to talk about the right to buy in particular, although I have received a couple of representations from local housing associations and councillors. As the strength of the Parliament lies in its committee system, I believe that the concerns that are being expressed will be examined in detail by the relevant committee and that the Executive will listen to what is said at that committee. I hope that that assures people who raise concerns with us. I wish to concentrate on the measures proposed on anti-social behaviour by tenants, which have been discussed in part by my colleagues Karen Whitefield and Paul Martin. As I have said in the chamber on previous occasions, it is a problem that is frequently presented at my constituency surgeries, and I am sure that that is replicated in the surgeries of colleagues and councillors throughout Scotland. Friction between people or families living in close proximity is often a source of irritation and annoyance. That does not just apply on council estates; it is true of owner-occupiers and people who exercise the right to buy. In the past, it has often been much more difficult to take action against owner-occupiers. That has been rectified in recent legislation. It is important that we do not just apply the stick of punishment in dealing with neighbour problems, although that sanction does need to be there and to be visible. One of the common complaints that I have heard from victims of anti-social neighbours is that the perpetrator believes that nobody is going to do anything about it. The residents who suffer from anti-social neighbours usually just want the problem solved. Often, they see the solution as moving the offender out of the area. That has to be the ultimate option, the force of which the Executive's proposals recognise and strengthen. However, as far as the wider community is concerned, it does not solve the problem, but merely moves it on. It can create new problems, especially where children are involved. Unfortunately, it is quite often the behaviour of children and young people that is the source of complaint.  There is a need for mediation and for helping anti-social neighbours to reform their behaviour, as well as for letting them know what could happen to them if they persist in their behaviour. Although not all nuisance behaviour is a cold-blooded and calculated campaign to upset and anger neighbours, I am sorry to say that some is. At other times, such behaviour results from a variety of problems: alcohol, substance and drug abuse, psychological problems or a general inability to cope. Those people need help rather than punishment, and I am pleased that the Executive's proposals include looking at and learning from mediation projects. A number of agencies need to be involved in dealing with those problems. They are not simply housing problems, but areas in which we need an holistic approach. We must also recognise that some tenants are extremely vulnerable. As Paul Martin said, some young people are not yet able to sustain a tenancy, to live alone, to look after themselves and, in some cases, to look after young children at the same time. I have anecdotal knowledge from my constituency of how such vulnerable young people are targeted in their communities by criminals and drug dealers. Those young people also need help. I hope that the Executive will consider how it can assist and expand supported tenancies, considering, for example, the experience of the various foyer projects that have been undertaken in some local authority areas. For all concerned, prevention is always better than cure, and I ask for the minister's views on how that area of social tenancy can be promoted.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether a speculative bid may be made by a private company for the purchase of Penninghame and Dungavel prisons and Dumfries young offenders institution, and whether it will rule out considering a positive response to an approach of that nature. (S1O-887)

I am partially reassured by the minister's response, as I was by the reply to my written question on the subject, which indicated that there were no plans for the use or creation of any privately owned and operated prisons in Scotland other than Kilmarnock. Is the minister aware that that is one of a number of rumours currently circulating in the Scottish Prison Service and that many prison officers believe that the current cuts and the loss of 374 jobs are only the first stage of a far more radical reorganisation of the service? Does he agree that there is a need for members of the Prison Service, through their trade unions, to be more closely involved in discussions on and plans for the future of their service?

I note that the proposals include new measures to prevent and mitigate anti-social behaviour by tenants and look forward to studying them in more detail. The minister will be aware of the provisions of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 and of the fact that several local authorities do not use the powers that were given to them in the act. How does she propose to ensure that housing authorities will be able to use the powers and exercise the responsibilities that might be conferred on them under the new proposals?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will encourage Scottish Enterprise to develop a national strategy for the textile industry. (S1O-769)

Is the minister aware of the recent successes of some textile companies in the Langholm area of my Dumfries constituency, which have overcome many problems to capture niche markets for quality products in Italy and  other parts of Europe? Is he aware that, despite that success, the directors of those companies believe that the Scottish textile industry would benefit from the development of a cluster strategy and from a move to address training problems to equip textile workers with skills in modern technology to ensure continued success?

I almost have to admire Phil Gallie for his persistence in applauding the record of the previous Tory Government. Members will recall that the Tories believed that there was no such thing as society.

I do not recall that she talked about blame. She said that there was no such thing as society and her policies made it clear that that belief was integral to the Conservatives' political philosophy. The Tories bear a great responsibility for the situation in which our communities find themselves and I am certain that the Scottish people will take a long time to forget that. The Tories have not changed—that was made clear by their recent conference. They remain as Thatcherite as ever. Since taking office, the Labour Government has taken action to rectify the trends of the previous 18 years. Last week, in a question to the Executive, I raised the issue of the new legislation on anti-social neighbours. It took a Labour Government—after all those years of Tory Governments—to introduce legislation to protect people from nuisance neighbours. I only wish that more councils would use the powers that they have been given.

Not all of them are; Dumfries and Galloway is not our council. I am more than happy for extra resources to be used in the fight against drugs, which are a major problem in my constituency and almost everywhere else in the country. I want improvements in crime prevention to ensure that fewer people commit crimes and have to go to prison. I want to ask the minister for his assistance. On 7 November, I met members of the Prison Service who work at the young offenders institute in Dumfries. They asked me questions that I could not answer. I wrote to the minister and to Tony Cameron, the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service, but have not yet received a reply. Although I am sure I will receive one at some point, I ask the minister for his help today. I have three questions. First, if the £13 million is an underspend—my understanding is that that means money that has not been spent—what is the need for further cuts in the Prison Service's budget? Are further savings being sought? Secondly, if efficiency savings result in job losses, what incentive is there for prison officers to look for further efficiency savings in the future?

I will finish on my third question. Why were the absence rates of prison officers compared with rates in the retail trade, when the levels of stress and assault in those occupations are in no way comparable? I would be obliged for the minister's views on those three points, so that I can answer the questions that have put to me by my constituents in Dumfries.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to monitor the effectiveness and operation of anti-social neighbour orders. (S1O-618)

Is the minister aware that many councils have yet to use the powers that have been provided to them by the legislation, which came into force in April this year? Is she further aware of the misery that the anti-social behaviour of a few residents causes their many law-abiding neighbours? I have had constituents in tears on the phone and at my surgeries because of the stress caused by nuisance neighbours. There is an allegation that one of my constituents might have committed suicide because of the stress caused by the problem. What will the Executive do to persuade local authorities to use the powers that they have been given?

I am a former member of South Ayrshire Council, but I am not speaking in that capacity. We thought long and hard about proof-of-age schemes during my time on the council. I make a plea from the heart. When I was 23, I was thrown out of a pub not because I was drunk and disorderly—for a change—but because the proprietor would not believe I was over 18. Despite my former husband and my colleagues telling him otherwise he would not believe me. Later on I took the precaution of marrying a 6 ft tall 14 stone ex-rugby player but unfortunately our three children all inherited my height deficiency. I support a voluntary proof-of-age scheme that extends to younger children. Cathy Jamieson said that South Ayrshire Council is considering that. I approach it from the point of view of young children and teenagers being allowed to access services to which they are entitled. When my eldest son was 12, he had the embarrassing experience of being turned away at the cinema—all his pals of the same age who were 5 ft 6 in with broken voices got in and my poor lad at 4 ft 6 in with his wee, piping voice did not. When he was eight, my other son was refused entry to the swimming pool. He had to phone me to come and say that he was old enough to swim with his mates. It was doubly embarrassing because I was the convener of the committee that ran the swimming pools at the time. I feel quite strongly about this matter. My children would love a proof-of-age scheme. It would be a great relief from embarrassment for all the wee, young-looking children and teenagers in Scotland.

I thank everyone who has supported this motion. I am particularly pleased by the genuine cross-party support that it has received. I also thank the media for their interest, and those members of the public who contacted me to offer their support. Our Parliament is not able to pardon the 39  Scottish soldiers shot by their own side during the first world war. That is reserved to the Ministry of Defence, as is the matter of the other 268 members of the British empire forces who were similarly executed. What we can do is express our view, using the knowledge and understanding that we have gained over this century, not to re-write history, but to add the final chapter to the history of the 1914 to 1918 war. In doing so, we remember the terrible suffering endured by the young men who offered their lives in the protection not of our freedom and democracy, but of the economic interests of the British empire. I have been asked what can be achieved more than 80 years after the conflict. Those most immediately affected—the parents, siblings girlfriends, wives and children of those soldiers—are probably deceased by now. We cannot lessen their pain or comfort them with the restoration of their loved one's reputation. There are families of executed soldiers who continue to campaign to clear the names of their relatives, such as the niece of 22-year-old Private Bertie McCubbin, who was executed because he felt unable, owing to the physical effects of shelling, to carry out the duties demanded of him. We are not too late to bring comfort to those relatives. We are not too late to recognise that, during that war, the demands that our country exacted of its young soldiers—some little more than boys—were too much for some to endure. Let us remember the conditions under which the private soldier at the western front existed. It was a pointless, static conflict over strips of earth, which achieved nothing other than the slaughter of millions of young men from both sides. The soldiers were condemned to existence in hell—floundering in mud in the winter, baking in the summer, rats and parasites their constant companions, never knowing whether today's sunrise would be their last, without respite, week after week, month after month, year after ghastly year. The ordinary private soldiers in the trenches did not often, if ever, come home on leave. They were subjected to constant shelling— "the monstrous anger of the guns" referred to by the war poet, Wilfred Owen, in "Anthem for Doomed Youth". They knew that they would be ordered to run towards that anger, witnessing the deaths of countless comrades in the futile exercise. Imagine the horror of sharing accommodation with the remains of other men, of seeking shelter from enemy fire to find it already occupied by the rotting carcases of fallen soldiers. Whether volunteer or conscript, those soldiers cannot have had any notion of what they were to face when they signed up to serve their country.  This was not the modern, familiar Europe that we know through our holidays and television travel programmes. France would have been as alien and foreign to them as, 50 years later, Vietnam was to the young American soldiers who fought there. Communications were poor—in addition to their personal discomforts, the soldiers would have been anxious about loved ones back home. The stress that the soldiers in the trenches—and their immediate superiors—suffered is difficult to imagine. That stress was physical and psychological, enduring and brutalising. We now recognise the effects of stress on the human body and psyche. Individuals who suffer traumatic events, over even a brief period, are now generally offered counselling and help towards recovering from the effects of their devastating experiences. There was no such knowledge at the beginning of the century. There were only vague references to something called shell-shock or loss of nerves—references that placed some blame on the individual, suggesting some weakness of character. Now, we know better. The argument may be made that the deserters endangered the lives of their comrades. Most of the men who were executed were not deserters—they went absent without leave, got lost, showed violence towards officers or injured themselves to avoid having to go over the top. Even those men who deserted during combat would hardly have endangered their comrades, all of whom were being ordered into the paths of enemy guns. If endangering life was cause for execution, surely it was the generals, who so recklessly and pointlessly threw away hundreds of thousands of young lives, who should have been shot. So far, the Ministry of Defence has refused to go as far as to offer a pardon to the executed soldiers. Dr John Reid, when he was Minister for the Armed Forces, recognised that those men should be regarded as victims of the war and should not be stigmatised. The ministry's advice was that there was insufficient evidence, because of the passage of time and the lack of contemporary records, to reassess each individual case. It was thought that a blanket pardon would be unsafe, as some of those executed would have deserved—by the standards of their time—the punishment that they received. I urge Her Majesty's Government to reconsider. Pardon is not exoneration—pardon implies some guilt. Surely it would be more compassionate for a few men to receive an undeserved pardon than for many innocent men to remain convicted. Even in the cases of those who committed actual crimes, what contribution did the brutalising effects of their experiences have on their behaviour? There is no suggestion in this motion of financial recompense. The soldiers' relatives are asking for  something far more valuable than that—the restoration of the reputations and the good names of the soldiers, the inclusion of their names on war memorials and the return of their medals to those who survive them. Today, on this last armistice day of the century, I ask members to remember those victims with understanding and compassion, as we remember all those who endured the horrors of war in the service of this country. May the coming century be kinder than that which closes. I am honoured to have been able to speak to this motion. [Applause.]

To ask the Scottish Executive what it considers to be the contribution of the pig industry to the economy. (S1O-542)

I am grateful to the minister for his reply, and to the drawer for eventually picking out one of my questions. Last week, the minister was able to announce a £5 million UK-wide aid package to promote the marketing of pigmeat. Could he provide more detail of how that will operate and, in particular, whether it will promote Scottish and UK pork in home markets, using animal welfare considerations in addition to quality considerations?

In the light of recent announcements on the reallocation of the underspend in the Prison Service and on possible new approaches to youth crime, will the Deputy First Minister say what effects, if any, there will be on Scotland's young offenders institutes?

As the minister has said, the Scottish university for industry will be a broker between individuals and organisations rather than a provider. As such, it will have an important role to play in widening access to learning and in addressing the difficulties that are experienced by adult learners living in remote areas who want to study courses relevant to their needs and their employment aspirations. Mature students with work and family commitments need flexible, usually part-time, provision that they can fit around other obligations. They may have additional needs. For example, some potential adult learners have had negative experiences of education in the school system and may have little confidence in their ability to learn. Community education services in local authorities have an important role to play in enabling those adults to tackle their personal development needs. I was pleased that the document said that councils have been asked to prioritise that issue, although, from what Mr Johnston says, perhaps more information is needed. Methods of teaching and learning are changing rapidly with developments in information and communications technology. Many education providers are already taking advantage of those developments to deliver courses to students in remote locations. The Open University has used distance teaching and learning throughout Scotland for a long time. During my time with the Open University, I taught chemistry to students living from Stranraer to Shetland without—perhaps unfortunately—anybody being required to travel. Last week, the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee enjoyed a presentation—I certainly enjoyed it, anyway—from the principal of the  University of the Highlands and Islands. He demonstrated how that institution intended to use new technology and short-break courses at centres of excellence to deliver to students from remote areas a wide range of courses, including, interestingly, engineering and applied sciences. Exciting developments are taking place in Dumfries, where the Crichton College of the University of Glasgow has just taken in its first cohort of students. I can miss out the next section of my speech, as Mike Russell has said many of the things that I wanted to say. He will not be surprised to learn that I have written to the newly appointed chief executive of the Scottish university for industry, Mr Frank Pignatelli, whom I know from a previous life, to offer him my congratulations and to outline the sterling qualities of that site for that purpose. The Scottish university for industry must be more than a telephone or e-mail helpline or a database account provision. I agree with what Mr Swinney said on that issue: it must be a vehicle for a change in attitudes to learning and a real opportunity for Scots, wherever they live and whatever they have or have not achieved in other learning environments, to access the education that they want and need. It must also be a mechanism for Scottish industries to access training for their employees to ensure that they benefit from a skilled and confident work force. Education is and will remain the powerhouse of the Scottish economy. I welcome the publication of the document, although, like some other members, I am slightly confused by its style, particularly the inclusion of a picture of a young gentleman's posterior on page 16. Perhaps I am a little old fashioned.

I, too, represent a largely rural constituency, and have been made well aware of the problems faced by local farmers. The public's perception is that farmers tend to exaggerate their woes. I have received a couple of letters complaining that I was supporting the farmers. There can be little doubt that farmers in the beef, dairy, sheep and pig sectors have experienced real and continuing problems this year. I was one of several MSPs who contacted the minister to request that the Executive should take action when it could to relieve the immediate problem. Before Mr Finnie's meeting with Nick Brown and the Welsh Agriculture and Rural Development Secretary, I lodged a member's motion to draw attention to farmers' difficulties. I was, therefore, pleased to hear Mr Finnie's announcement of 20 September, which set out a number of measures to support the farming industry. In addition, I congratulate the minister on applying to Brussels for a Scottish cull ewe scheme, although I am disappointed that the strict rules that the EU applies on state aid for agriculture have created significant difficulties in that area. Both Messrs Morgan and Johnstone made some interesting and valid points, but the amendments in their names seem to have been lodged principally for the sake of disagreement. They do not offer anything particularly different in terms of wording, apart from raking over the usual old coals  of fuel taxes and the strength of sterling—neither of which is within the remit of the Minister for Rural Affairs or, indeed, of the Scottish Executive.

No, I must press on as I do not have much time. I was encouraged by the statement that the chief medical officer made this week to the Rural Affairs Committee. The development of new tests for the infective agent in BSE will allow us to determine cow-to-cow transmission of the disease more accurately. The tests will also enable speedier detection of the presence of the agent in animal tissue and improve the confidence that we can have in future that the disease has been eliminated from our cattle herds. They should also indicate whether BSE is present in the sheep population. A clean bill of health for both species must improve our export prospects. Confidence will need to be accompanied by an aggressive marketing strategy, both overseas and in this country. The Executive has recognised that by appointing a sheep study group and by supporting the Scottish Enterprise food strategy. The minister mentioned the general consensus about the need for medium and longer-term strategies, but—as he says—those will not be quickly or easily implemented. Scottish farmers often articulate the complaint that the restrictions are much more strictly enforced here than in other European Union countries and that their European competitors have an advantage over them as a result. Where that is the case—and many of us believe it to be so—the aim must be to level up the standards in the rest of Europe to those in the UK. In the meantime, our higher standards should be used as a marketing tool, particularly at home in Scotland. We in Britain like to think of ourselves as a nation that places a lot of emphasis on animal welfare. A number of bills on animal welfare issues are currently being considered. Despite being a carnivore—I apologise to any vegetarian colleagues who happen to be present—I, too, regard animal welfare as important. I was, therefore, shocked to learn that many other European countries still use stall and tether methods. I have a photograph from the pig industry around somewhere; other members may also have received information. I found it shocking that pigs were being farmed in such atrocious conditions and being placed in small stalls for about three and a half months during pregnancy. I do not think that most Scottish consumers of pork have any idea that pork is being produced under such conditions in parts of Europe. We should make that point strongly—I see that Mr Johnstone  has the picture of the pigs. That is why initiatives such as the Scottish pig industry initiative quality mark for Scottish pork are important. Higher standards in production and animal welfare equate to higher-quality products. We must get that message over to our home markets. On the odd occasions that I do the shopping—and they are very odd occasions—I check that I am buying Scottish meat. We should encourage other people in Scotland, when they go to the supermarket and the butcher, to do what the NFUS has suggested and ask whether the meat is Scottish. If we believe in our products at home, we will have a better chance of selling them abroad.

I was encouraged by the minister's statements about examining rural transport. I have personal experience of the improvements in the Glasgow to Edinburgh service. That is great, but many parts of the country are not able even to tap into that service. I refer in particular to my constituency, in Dumfries and Galloway, where it is not possible to commute to Edinburgh in time to come to Parliament, for example, using the rail service. I ask the minister to examine ways in which the service to that part of the world can be improved. Only an increase in the number of trains that stop at Lockerbie would be needed to put that right. Can the Executive exert any influence on railway service providers to improve the service for people in the south-west of Scotland?

Will the member give way?

Will Ms Sturgeon inform the chamber whether the SNP councils represented on COSLA supported COSLA's proposed offer?

I represent a constituency that is highly dependent on tourism. In 1995, 4,400 jobs in Dumfries and Galloway, constituting 8.9 per cent of all employment, were related to tourism. Tourism brought in an average of £521 per head in 1996, although controversy has surrounded the regional tourist board in recent times—not that I want to dwell on that during the debate. I am pleased that the importance of the tourist trade is being debated today, and I hope that this is the beginning of a process that will stabilise and promote that important industry.  The minister identified as one of the problems the decline in spending by Scottish tourists in their own country. I am afraid that I am as guilty as anyone else of chasing the sun during the summer vacation, and I do not think that we will change the desire of many Scots for a couple of weeks of climatic reliability during the year. However, people no longer take only one holiday. We need to improve the way in which we market short breaks in Scotland to Scottish and UK residents. That impinges on three of the Scottish Tourist Board's corporate objectives: to increase visitor expenditure, to extend the tourist season and to develop tourism outwith the main tourist areas. That means recognising not only that leisure and tourism are inextricably linked, but that there are different leisure markets that need to be exploited effectively. On Monday this week, a major shopping development opened in Gretna. Gretna is better known for other tourist attractions, but it now also has a factory village outlet. It aims to attract shoppers from within two hours' driving distance—from Carlisle, Newcastle, Edinburgh, Glasgow and possibly further afield.

People might misunderstand that.

That is not the most off-putting thing, as Dumfries and Galloway are rather nearer other parts of the UK than other parts of Scotland are. I agree that petrol prices are a problem, but much of that is to do with the oil companies, not the Government. We need to persuade shoppers not just to drive to Gretna and back, but to make a weekend break of it. We need to persuade them to turn off down the A75, book a room for a night or two and enjoy some of the other leisure pursuits available—sporting and cultural pursuits, the Burns connection, the scenery, the wildlife and the natural heritage of the area. That would turn shoppers into tourists. Fergus referred to the STB's definition of tourism. It would not be difficult to make that connection for people. Those activities can also be promoted to business visitors—even businessmen do not work all the time. I do not want to anticipate the results of a  tourism strategy debate nor discussions that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee might have about the structure of the industry. It is inappropriate for the Parliament to decide those things when there will be ample opportunity for the committee to do so. I very much hope that time and effort will go into improving the way in which we sell what we have to offer to ourselves and to others. We are far too negative and apologetic about ourselves—Henry McLeish was right about that—and if we do not believe that this country has a lot to offer, how can we expect others to do so?

Will the member give way?

David mentioned Langholm. Surely he agrees that one of the problems there is the volume of traffic that flows through the town centre and the problems that that causes for public safety. He is stressing the needs of the car driver. His party has said that it is committed to public transport. What would he do to improve public transport and take some of those vehicles off the road?

I am very pleased to support the motion, because the creation of the food standards agency is part of a wider programme for improving public health. I was pleased to observe that Labour's manifesto for the Scottish Parliament elections reiterated our commitment to setting up a UK-wide food standards agency with an independent Scottish advisory committee. As members will know, the Food Standards Bill was brought before the House of Commons on 23 July. I welcome the Scottish Executive's document and the statement by the minister that commits the Government to establishing the agency's Scottish arm by the first half of next year. Food scare stories have become an unpleasant fact of life in recent years. We have had reports on salmonella in eggs, and related to that the downfall of a rather colourful Tory minister. We  have had listeria in dairy products and the worry over its effects on unborn babies. In conjunction with BSE and E coli 0157, they have reduced public confidence in food, and they have severely damaged the industries that are identified with a food risk. We need only consider the damage done to British agriculture by the BSE crisis; that damage has affected many sectors of the food industry, not just the beef industry. I am not going to hijack this debate into one about agriculture. Those of us who represent rural constituencies are well aware of the problems that have arisen from that crisis. Indeed, the damage is taking many years even to begin to rectify, because when the public lose confidence in a food product it takes a long time for that confidence to be restored. Not surprisingly, people have long memories when it comes to food poisoning. Like Annabel Goldie, I remember the typhoid food poisoning scare in Aberdeen. We recall those food threats to our own, and other people's, health because if adults are prepared to take risks with their own health, most will err on the side of safety when it comes to their children. I asked the Meat and Livestock Commission who was most affected by the fears over eating beef, and it said that still it was mothers of young children who have the greatest concerns about the health implications. I come from a local authority background, and similar concerns exist there over the provision of food to vulnerable sections of society, such as young children and the elderly. One of the reasons why it takes so long for public confidence to return is that people do not know who or what to believe. The media, which are justified in reporting the genuine public interest and concerns, do at times add to the sense of panic. For example, some of the headlines concerning the GM debate referred to Frankenstein foods. That type of reporting does nothing to help scientific, logical or rational debate on those issues.

I am afraid that I am not appropriately medically qualified to give an opinion on that. I would prefer to rely on the advice of the chief medical officer. On the issue of GM foods, which I thought Fergus Ewing was going to ask me about, I also believe that the matter is worthy of separate debate and I hope that this chamber gets the opportunity to do that at some point. Public suspicion is one of the reasons why the setting up of the food standards agency is so important. It will ensure that all future Government activity relating to food will be subject to public scrutiny through an independent arm's-length agency. It is important that it is independent and at  arm's length and that the public interest is its first priority. The agency will be responsible for co-ordinating food law enforcement and research into food safety and nutrition. As Alex Fergusson mentioned, it will take a strategic approach to those issues across the food chain. We are all familiar with the old maxim that we are what we eat. Implicit in that is that what we eat is also what was consumed. We have to be aware of the effects of bad practice on other trophic levels, which eventually surface in problems for us. The James report, on which the recommendations for the food standards agency are based, identified the need for the structure of the agency to reflect the constitutional arrangements in different parts of the UK. At the same time, it is necessary for policy and enforcement to be consistent across the UK and Europe. I would like European standards to be levelled up to the standards in the UK. Two members of the UK commission will have specific responsibility for representing Scottish interests at the UK food standards agency. We will have our own food standards agency to advise, amongst others, the Executive on food safety and standards. The Government will not tell the food standards agency what to do; it will be the other way round. Scotland has a tradition of scientific and medical excellence. We have not translated that into successful enterprise as well as we might. Nevertheless, the quality of our academic scientific work has always been respected.

That is exactly why the food standards agency must be there, to provide that scientific basis for advice that is given to Government. We must use the reputation of our academic work to rebuild trust in our food products and restore their reputation for quality. It is in the interests of Scottish consumers and producers that public confidence in food is restored. I welcome the actions taken by the Scottish Executive to commence that process.

I am a bit confused, because I am not sure whether I am attending the same debate as the SNP/Tory Opposition alliance. I am not even sure whether I am talking about the same document. Indeed, I wonder whether I inadvertently stumbled into a black hole on my way up here and slipped into an alternative universe.

David McLetchie, Alex Salmond, Nicola Sturgeon and Dorothy-Grace Elder do not like the photographs in the document. They spent a lot of time talking about the style, but not about the content. Alex does not like it because it is too big. Perhaps the Scottish Executive will take that on board and produce one that he can slip into his handbag.

It is relevant that the people of Scotland see the programme that their Government intends to put into practice, and the time scales and performance indicators that it sets for itself. I see that Mr MacAskill is here. I know that he and his colleagues like to comment on who is not here, so I will mention the fact that he is here. He said that there is nothing of substance in the document. Dorothy-Grace said that it is a triumph of spin. I will refute that by referring to the section entitled, "Working together for a successful and prosperous Scotland". It states on page 10: "Our priorities are: To create a culture of enterprise". Is that nothing of substance? I know that Mr Johnston has said that the Labour party does not  know how to do that. I have to hold up my hand and say that I was a scientist, an academic, and I have not created jobs. Perhaps a number of us have not been business people, but we know how to ask people who can give us that advice. That was the point of the partnership, to find out from those who know how we can improve the culture of enterprise in Scotland. The second priority is also on page 10: "To provide training for skills that match jobs for the future". I want my children to get the skills that match jobs of the future. I want that for my constituents and their children. That is hardly nothing of substance. The third priority is "To widen access to further and higher education". I will let members into a secret. Opposition members talk about how we all had the benefit of a free education, which we are now denying to everyone else. I went to university in 1972. I know that that reveals how old I am—some members might think that I am one of the cast ewes of the Scottish Parliament. In 1972, the vast majority of students at Edinburgh University were middle-class kids like me, products of the middle-class selective education system. There has been a widening of the education system since then. The Labour Government intends to widen it further. I want my constituents in north-west Dumfries to have the same access to higher and further education as I had all those years ago.

I prioritise the needs of working-class people over the needs of those who can afford to pay. That is the basis of socialism. The final priority is "To create a culture of lifelong learning, increasing adult participation in education and training". I speak as a former lecturer at the Open University. I taught many people from disadvantaged backgrounds who wished to retrain. The vast majority had to pay their own tuition fees and had to support themselves without a maintenance grant. I am pleased that the Government has promised to consider sorting out the anomalies between part-time and full-time students. The section at the bottom of page 10 states that a priority is also to "Support the progress of the University of the Highlands and Islands and investigate a South of Scotland University." In August, the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning went with me to Crichton College in  Dumfries. I wish that Opposition members had been there. It might have helped them to set aside their cynicism. It is a terrific facility. We spoke to people who had been on the first access course at that college. We spoke to one woman—who was not my constituent but one of Alasdair Morgan's—who explained that, had that course not existed, she would not have been able to get access to lifelong learning. The commitment to improve access to education in rural areas is extremely important. If the Parliament manages to deliver that for people in rural communities in the south of Scotland, I will be proud of it.

I too wish to congratulate Maureen on securing a debate on this important issue. I am glad that so many people are here; this is a large attendance for members' business and it shows the importance that we attach to the issue.  Like many other members, I ask the Executive to examine how women's aid groups are funded. There is a particular problem in my constituency with Dumfries and District Women's Aid. The group does a vital job, locally and nationally, and recently achieved a national profile for its "Breaking Point" video, which not only describes the experiences of women who have suffered domestic violence, but shows how they managed to get out of their relationships and began to rebuild their lives. It is important that women get the message that there are ways in which they can get through the abusive situation and that mechanisms are in place to support them.  I should say that Dumfries and District Women's Aid also provides support for male victims of domestic or sexual violence. The group is not affiliated to Scottish Women's Aid; that is true of about 15 per cent of rural women's aid groups throughout the country. Dumfries and District Women's Aid is affiliated over the border in Carlisle and therefore, last year, could not receive a portion of the £250,000 that was distributed to local groups through Scottish Women's Aid. We should ensure that there is a mechanism that allows all groups to get their share of funding, because irrespective of their affiliation the job that they do is extremely important.  As Maureen said, we must recognise that there are particular problems in rural areas such as the Highlands and the south and south-west of Scotland. Perhaps we should consider a more coherent way of addressing the problems of funding and giving some stability to the rural groups.

I should declare an interest. In the past, I was the spokesperson on cultural issues for the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. I am therefore delighted that a national cultural strategy is being proposed.  Some members of other parties have misunderstood the purpose of a national cultural strategy, which is to determine how the Parliament and the Government can support cultural activity in our country. It is not about how we can control culture; it is about how we can support culture.  In the months before the Scottish Parliament came into being, there was much discussion among interested parties such as COSLA, the Scottish Arts Council, the Scottish Museums Council, the Scottish Library Information Council and the voluntary sector, about the way in which Parliament should handle culture. Many people argued for the appointment of a minister for culture and for a national cultural strategy. I am pleased that the Parliament is making progress. It has delivered a minister for culture and is now undertaking a consultation exercise on a cultural strategy. I stress that we are still at the consultation stage, and have not yet defined the strategy.  Culture is much misunderstood. The word is frequently used as an alternative for the arts and it is often thought of as a minority interest of the urban middle classes. In fact, when she heard that there was to be a debate on culture, one member-who is not here now-said that she was not interested in culture. That is unfortunate.  The proposed nationwide consultation on a national cultural strategy gives us an opportunity to emphasise that culture is much more than a minority interest.  Everyone has some form of exposure to culture, at very least the culture of their own community and its history. Culture interprets and illuminates a community's experiences; at a national level, it expresses Scotland's history and environment. Indeed, it has often been asserted that the Scottish cultural identity played a major part in bringing about the conditions that created the Scottish Parliament. At the moment, some members of the press might think that that is a bad thing, but I think that culture played an important part in bringing our Parliament about.  Last week I went to see a play called "The Derners" at the festival-that is the Langholm arts  festival, not the Edinburgh international festival. The play is along the lines of "The Steamie" and is about the experiences of women working as darners in the town's textile industry in the 1950s. Apart from being a very funny and excellent performance by ordinary, local people-by talented people who sing and act as amateurs and who enjoy it-it demonstrated for me two important aspects of culture. First, it enabled members of the community to celebrate their own culture-their traditions and history. Secondly, it allowed me, as an outsider, to experience and understand better the experiences of that community. Those are two important facets of culture. That is why promoting and widening access to culture is so important.  Engaging in cultural activity helps us to understand each other and ourselves better. It improves our self-esteem and our tolerance and appreciation of the different cultures of others. That is why cultural activity must be part of the strategic objectives of the Parliament; the minister mentioned its connection with health, lifelong learning, social inclusion, tourism and enterprise.  The Executive is to be congratulated on starting the consultation process so early in the life of the Parliament. A few weeks ago I was very pleased to hear on the radio the minister for culture giving her commitment that the consultation process would be thorough and extensive and would stretch all the way from Ullapool to Dumfries. I know that people in Dumfries are already looking forward to engaging in that consultation process.  Scotland has many traditions, cultures and participants. The national agencies, local authorities-which are extremely important in the cultural scene-and the voluntary sector all play important roles in the provision of cultural opportunity. Scotland's culture is one of our greatest assets in attracting visitors, but it is much more than that: valuing and understanding our culture in all its diversity allows us to understand where we come from. Once we have done that, culture might also help us to determine where we wish to go.

In view of the earlier comments made by Mr Mundell, I wonder if Bill Aitken will outline how rural schools will be protected should education be centred in Edinburgh.

As a mere female I am humbled by being able to take part in the same debate as the redoubtable Mr Hamilton. After hearing Nicola Sturgeon's comments about her abilities this morning, I can say only that at least the younger members of the SNP do not seem to be reluctant to blow their own trumpets.  I am pleased to be able to speak in this debate on unemployment, and to note that in May this year the seasonally adjusted rate of claimant count unemployment has fallen to 5.5 per cent-although that is admittedly a small decrease over the year. I was also pleased to observe in a Scottish Parliament information centre publication on unemployment in Scotland in May 1999 that the figures for my constituency-which was referred to as Mr Mundell's region-bear out the statement I made last week on the economy of Dumfries and Galloway. I said that Dumfries is not an unemployment black spot. It has an unemployment rate of 5.4 per cent and is ranked 36 th out of 73 constituencies in terms of unemployment.  I was a wee bit confused about how Galloway  and Upper Nithsdale-Mr Morgan's constituency-has an unemployment rate of 5.7 per cent, but is ranked 40 th out of 73. As a former scientist, I thought that I understood numbers, but perhaps I do not. The unemployment rate in Dumfries has fallen by more than a quarter since 1996.  I am much more concerned-and this is a matter for concern-to observe that the unemployment rate in my constituency suffered the fourth worst change over the past couple of months due to a couple of high-profile manufacturing jobs losses. Unemployment in the constituency has increased in the past year. That is why I particularly welcome the wording of the motion: it does not congratulate the Government and it is not self-satisfied.

The training count and unemployment rates are ways of monitoring unemployment, but they do not always represent the entire situation. Female unemployment always appears to be less than the male rate because to many women who are seeking work there is no financial benefit in making a claim for benefits. Interpretation of unemployment figures must be done carefully, but the figures can represent a trend as long as the parameters remain the same. The trend at the moment is downwards.  The motion says that things must get better and that we must build on successes to make things better. There must be determination to build on economic success, to invest in jobs and skills and especially to provide a stable environment for enterprise and encourage the growth of new businesses. My colleagues and I can take that back to our constituents as a message of hope. We need to give that message of hope and we need to articulate the intention to not only bring jobs to our constituencies, but to ensure that employment is here to stay. Would you like me to wrap up, Mr Deputy Presiding Officer?

We must equip our people with the skills that they will need to compete in the job markets of the next century. We must, in other words, invest in education and training and ensure that the local and national economy is stable and that jobs will continue to be available for the existing work force and their children.

I agree with Mr Swinney: we need to require organisations that are funded for the purpose of, and charged with the creation of, training and employment to demonstrate that they are doing their job. Glossy brochures and strategy documents produced in attractive offices are all very well, but what matters to those of our constituents who are out of work or who fear that they may become unemployed is that real jobs that pay decent wages come to their areas. Employment must be here to stay. I am glad to welcome the fall in unemployment in Scotland and I hope to see it reflected in my constituency in the near future.

Will Mr Gibson give way?

The SNP candidate for Dumfries, Mr Stephen Norris, stated that he would be prepared to support the use of public-private partnerships for the building of the new maternity unit at Dumfries royal infirmary. If the SNP opposes PPPs, why did one of its candidates agree to support them?

I agree with virtually everything that has been said, but I do not see its relevance to the food standards agency.

rose  -

Would Mr Mundell remind us who actually won the election in Dumfries?

Unemployment is, of course, a personal tragedy for individuals and their families. Although political point scoring may create jobs for politicians, it does little to improve the employment prospects of their constituents. In that spirit, I am happy to concur with many of the remarks made by Mr Mundell and Mr Russell.  I thank the minister for his commitment, in response to my earlier correspondence, to visit Dumfries and to examine not only its problems but, I hope, its great potential.  The whole population of Dumfries must have  been shocked to learn that the Nestlé-formerly Carnation-factory, which has long been associated with the town, intends to cease operating in October next year. My discussions with Nestlé's representatives immediately after the announcement brought to light two particular problems that they felt had led to the decision.  The first was the difficulties that continue to exist as a result of the BSE crisis, particularly the loss of exports to the near east and Saudi Arabia, which has seriously reduced Nestlé's market for dried milk products. The second, which has also featured in my discussions with other local manufacturers-Dupont and Cochran's, for example, both of which have recently announced intentions to downsize as it is known-was the effect of the recession in Russia and the far east. As a consequence of the collapse of the markets there, companies trading in those areas have moved in to compete in a significantly smaller marketplace.  I am not quite sure what the Scottish Parliament can do to rectify either of those problems. The joint economic strategy launched by Dumfries and Galloway Enterprise and Dumfries and Galloway Council expressed the view that "the Parliament should offer opportunities for all agencies to work more closely together and with central government."  That sounds good, but somehow we must make it a reality.  Having said all that, I do not think that it helps to talk Dumfries and Galloway down. It is not some bleak unemployment black spot. Although jobs have been lost during the past couple of years, they have also been created. Indeed, the unemployment figures have fallen by approximately a quarter since 1996.  New employers will be attracted to the area because of its advantages and potential. That must be emphasised, but it is not to deny that there are problems that need to be tackled. Even if employment is growing in other sectors, the loss of manufacturing industry is worrying as it offers better paid jobs that help to sustain local economies.  Dumfries and Galloway has a reputation-an unfortunate one in my opinion-for having a low-wage economy. Wages are some 10 per cent less than in other areas. I do not believe that my constituents should be paid lower wages because they happen to live in Dumfries and Galloway and we can ill afford to lose employers who pay better wages.  There are a number of transport issues to consider, such as the poor quality of some of our trunk roads, such as the A76, parts of the A75 and the A7. Public transport, too, is often inadequate.  For example, Dumfries is only 79 miles from Edinburgh and Lockerbie is only 68 miles away. I am off there at 5.30-I think Mr Mundell is too-but I cannot travel by train from my constituency and get to Edinburgh before 10.30 in the morning. That is not just an inconvenience to me; it is a disincentive to business and commuters.  I do not want to concentrate exclusively on negative issues. I am extremely proud to represent such a beautiful area where so many positive developments are taking place and I want to advertise the area so that everyone in and outside Scotland knows how much Dumfries and Galloway has to offer.  Tourism is a major industry in the area. The industry is worth something like £75 million and employs about 9 per cent of the local work force.

There are plans to expand the tourism industry. We also have the food industry, the forestry industry and, despite the current problems, the agriculture industry. Dumfries is renowned for the quality of its products and will continue to have a future at the quality end of the market.  Positive efforts are being made to try to turn round some of the recent bad news. For example, Nestlé is working closely with the council and the enterprise company to do what it can to find another employer to take over the site. There have been a number of other issues, but I do not have time to go through them all at present.  I wish to draw members' attention to the world-class optical cable communications system that is being installed at the Crichton campus at Dumfries. It will offer business and education a good system and it is something I would like to show the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning because it is especially relevant and has many advantages.  I believe we must use our strengths to overcome our weaknesses. Neither Dumfriesshire nor Scotland should sell itself short. We should be shouting about what we do well, putting ourselves on the map and marketing ourselves.

I broadly support the Scotland Act 1998 (Border Rivers) Order 1999, although I take on board some of Mr Canavan's concerns. I am sure that we will be able to address those issues, as they affect not only the Borders but freshwater fishing throughout Scotland.  I hope that today's debate will be less ill-natured than those of yesterday afternoon. We seem to have imported many of the bad habits of  Westminster: butting in, shouting, waving our hands in the air and bobbing up and down like a river full of demented corks. We all said that we wanted the Scottish Parliament to display a new style of politics, so it is up to us to make that happen. I do not feel that we achieved it yesterday.  I must confess that, at first, I misread the order and understood that it concerned the Border reivers, which might have been a little more colourful. However, the order is necessary because it outlines the joint responsibilities of UK and Scottish ministers and Parliaments in respect of rivers and estuaries that flow across the border between Scotland and England. It modifies the Environment Act 1995, which relates to the conservation, management and exploitation of salmon, trout, eels and freshwater fish. It requires agreement to be reached between Scottish and UK ministers and gives the Environment Agency new powers to make byelaws in connection with such matters.  As Mr Canavan said, the order creates a new offence of unauthorised fishing in the Lower Esk that can be enforced by water bailiffs. Angling is a popular sport but it does not need to be managed for the sake of fish stocks. The order does not take away current legal rights to fish for salmon-I am sure that my constituents in the burgh of Annan, who were granted that right by royal charter by James V on 1 March 1538 will welcome that. The order refers to the burghers of Annan-however, those who make the excellent decision to visit that lovely and historic area should be aware that Annan is actually better known for the fine quality of its fish and chips than for its burgers.  The order also clarifies the rights of Scottish fishermen to fish in any part of the Lower Esk that lies on or to the north of a line in the main channel of the River Esk that represents what is called the medium filum-which I presume is the mid-point-at low water. I am not sure whether that line in the middle of the Esk also defines the boundaries of my constituency. If it does, I will not take up any challenge from my colleagues to walk around the perimeter of my constituency.  I commend the order to my colleagues in the hope that, in progressing these orders, we can press on with more exciting matters that pertain to the needs, desires and aspirations of our constituents.

I have no objection in principle to those who are seeking divine guidance being able to do so in the Parliament, but I agree with Mr McCabe that there is a little more to it than the motion suggests.  I was pleased to hear from Lord James Douglas-Hamilton that prayers were not to be compulsory; none of us wants to be taken back to school and forced to sit in assembly. We have to consider what form the prayers would take; a lot of good points have been made on the interfaith nature of Scottish religious belief. We have also to consider the frequency of prayers and when they would take place. I am not in favour of our having prayers immediately before meeting. I suspect that, if we did, members might attend because they wanted to get a good seat in the range of the television cameras rather than because they were seeking divine guidance. That would be regrettable.  We need to consider this matter more carefully and must not rush into a decision.