Hear, hear.

A view is starting to be heard that, rather than police forces, taxpayers and voluntary groups investigating the actions of people on the internet, internet service providers should have responsibility for that in law, that the cost attached to it should be taken off their bottom line rather than the taxpayers’ bottom line and that some companies should desist from taking action on sites that are openly available for young children to engage in.

I am pleased to speak in the debate. The Labour motion starts by saying: “That the Parliament believes that the NHS is the country’s most valued and loved public service”, yet, in 2011, the Labour leader at that time said that Labour would not ring fence the health budget, which could leave it open to being cut by the Labour Party. That is like saying to your child, “I really value you and I love you to bits but you’re getting no extra clothes for the winter.” In its motion, Labour goes on to call for a review of the Scottish health service when it knows to a person that the Scottish health service has been in constant review almost on a daily or monthly basis since the SNP came to office. Perhaps the review that Labour wants is a review that brings about what its London shadow health minister championed—a level of delivery and service that is UK-wide. God help us if we go down the road that England has gone down: the road of no return, of privatisation and of discontent on the part of the providers—the workforce—and the users, namely the public. Perhaps Labour is giving up the notion of free provision at the point of need. That might not be such a fanciful statement when we consider Labour in action. One example of Labour in action was just last week with Labour members turning their backs on preventative health spend when they voted against the policy of free school meals for primary 1 to 3 pupils: a policy that will have a positive impact on the long-term health of some of our most needy children. Because that free school meals measure is universal, it will remove the invariable stigma and bullying that goes on when we means test and shine an unwelcome light on the poor. Removing the stigma and the bullying will result in significant health changes for the children we want to make the difference for, because they will participate unhindered by their richer peer group. Because the measure is universal, it will be much more successful and significant. We know that, if we reach children at an early age, the health benefits are for life. Still, I find it hard to believe—even a week later—that a majority of members in the Labour benches actually believed in what they were being asked to do.

The record will show that every Labour member voted against a measure to provide food for children who are in need in Scotland—a measure that will help those children because that age is the crucial time to intervene as it will help their health chances for the whole of their lives. That is a fact; that is what Labour members did. I will be quite honest—if they say that they did not mean it, I will be grateful. However, if the majority of the Labour members did and do believe that they were right to vote against free school meals and the health benefits that go with them, my father—a staunch Labour man—will be birling in his grave because the legacy of the once proud Labour Party will have been trashed. I am pleased that the Scottish Government acknowledges that universal services are partners in preventative spend, and it has shown its dedication to that agenda through its actions. A universal free prescription service not only saves individuals money but means that people are now able to take their full course of prescribed medication. They therefore do not miss out on vital parts of their treatment, which saves the NHS millions of pounds that in the past it would have had to spend on treating complications that were caused when individuals had to pick and choose what medicine to take in order to save vital household money and thereby risk damaging their recovery. Free eye tests ensure that disease and infections are picked up at an early, inexpensive and treatable stage, rather than resulting in the complications, which can develop if people are not tested early and which are extremely expensive to deal with. Universal concessionary bus travel also contributes in a preventative way to the health of our nation, as it ensures that our older people are mobile and are out and about visiting family and friends, or even just going down the coast for a nostalgia trip. Getting out of their house to visit family or friends and being active ensures that they remain healthy in mind and body, which cuts down on the number of visits that they have to make to hospitals, thereby saving the NHS millions of pounds that can be reinvested. It is a win-win bargain.

If the Labour Party is serious about what it describes as its love for the health service, it should put its money where its heart is and withdraw its commitment to not—I repeat, not—ring fencing the health budget. I support the Government’s amendment and the cabinet secretary’s work in this area.

The point that I was making has nothing to do with the English health service; it was about the Labour Party and its calls for a unified system throughout the United Kingdom. That is what scares me to death.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what benefits the Commonwealth games will bring to West Scotland. (S4O-02746)

There has been some chatter in the press—in one paper, in fact—about legacy. Can the minister provide details on how the Government plans to measure the legacy of the Commonwealth games?

I am pleased to be speaking in the debate. Although it is primarily a justice debate, I will take a little of my time to raise issues to do with health inequalities by touching on what I have learned during my time on the Health and Sport Committee. I will come to that in a moment or two. When we debate the impact of drug use, we must acknowledge the devastating impact that it has on communities, families and individuals. That is just as important when we debate how best to treat people who have a history of drug abuse and are trying to get clean. Due to their past problems, some lose friends, become lepers in their community and find that they are shunned by family members, yet those groups of people are the resource that is needed to ensure that those who seek treatment are given encouragement to continue with it, and support when challenges emerge—as they surely will. It is at those times that local agencies must come to the fore to offer their support. Without them, there is a danger that people will not complete their treatment and will fall back into drug misuse. In my constituency, an organisation called Alternatives West Dunbartonshire Community Drug Services offers support to people who suffer from drug abuse. Since February 2000, it has been working in the Clydebank area to offer alternatives to drug use through a range of services to individuals and families who are, or who have been, affected by drugs. The organisation carries out a great deal of work and is proactive in its attempts to bring people out of drug abuse. Its outreach programme is an umbrella term for a style of work that means it literally reaches to where people are at. Alternatives WD does not wait for people to seek help once they see themselves as having a drug or health problem, but seeks them out with the aim of providing education and services directly in the community. Although the motion acknowledges that opioid replacement therapies have a strong evidence base, it is important to look at other avenues for treating people who suffer from drug misuse. The Alternatives WD group is one such avenue, and I commend it for the hard work that its members and volunteers carry out in the community. More important is that it should—given the impact of its work on individuals and families—be encouraged by all. I have contributed to a number of health debates in Parliament in which the main theme has been the need to move to person-centred treatment and recovery, and this afternoon’s debate is no different. I am pleased that the Scottish Government has accepted the expert group’s conclusions and that it is committed to delivering on the recommendations as part of a coherent person-centred recovery plan. All services, be they local or national, must be focused on the individual’s needs. I support the calls for better information systems to identify people who are on opioid replacement treatments and ensure that they are making progress with their recovery. There is little point in offering the treatment if it is not part of a plan with SMART—specific, measurable, achievable, realistic and timeous—goals. In order to ensure that there is progress in treatment and recovery, there must be constant monitoring to ensure that recovery is taking place to a satisfactory level. It is difficult to look at the different systems that are in place, or that should be strengthened or established, with the level of inequality that exists. Some people argue that inequality in access to health contributes to, and is the main cause of, drug abuse, but that misses the bigger picture. Health inequality, social inequality and inequality across the board can be summed up in one word: poverty. It will come as no surprise to anyone that people who live in poorer areas are more likely to suffer from the effects of drug abuse—either personally or in their family. Regardless of how much money is thrown at health inequality, it can be a waste if we do not bring people out of poverty. If someone grows up in a family or an area where they are written off or have been told time and again that they are useless or worthless, it will make no difference to them if resources are ploughed into their area. There are people in bad circumstances who, because of the stigma of poverty and perpetual messages of hopelessness, adopt a fatalistic attitude that for them amounts to, “This is as good as it gets for people like me. This is my lot.” Therefore, in order to tackle the cause we need to break the cycle of poverty. If we make people’s lives meaningful with well-paid employment, which would give them the confidence to believe in a better life, I promise that health inequalities will narrow as people are lifted out of poverty.

The Scottish Government has well and truly got that message. This Parliament needs full powers if it is to change the lives of people and make a difference in terms of both inequality and drug misuse. I commend the motion to Parliament.

I am pleased to speak in the debate as a member of the Health and Sport Committee. Scotland’s people are living longer and healthier lives, and all the evidence that has been gathered has brought about the realisation that it is better for people of all ages to recover and be treated in their home where appropriate. It is therefore imperative that all the relevant agencies are involved in the good work of ensuring that the recovery process works to a high degree and maintaining a high standard of health and social care for the individual. Those agencies should be not so much connected but intertwined to effect the best results. Although we can point to some good examples of integration working and working well, for the best part, I do not think that it is an exaggeration to say that the norm in past attempts has been failure. In the evidence that was presented to the committee, we did not find a single authoritative voice suggesting that integration between the sectors would be a bad thing. On the contrary, the opposite is the case—all the evidence said that joint working would be to the benefit of everybody, both provider and receiver. It is hard to disagree that, as we have a universal goal with a high score value at the end, legislation needs to be introduced to bring about that goal. Most of those who have questions on the lack of success so far have put that down to leadership. I must confess to a little scepticism about that view. To me, from the outside looking in, the issue is more about budget protection in each sector than anything else. If I am wrong, and the commentators who think that the lack of good leadership is the main reason are right, legislation clearly will not solve that, as it does not provide or manufacture such leadership. Having said that, I am confident that legislation will be the stimulus that will make the difference. I am more than confident that those who work in the health and social care professions and in the third sector have the required leadership—that is apparent day in, day out—and are more than capable of making the bill a success. In many debates in the Parliament, it has been acknowledged that the wellbeing of the patient is paramount and that the patient and their family are the first and most crucial aspect. From when someone is admitted to hospital with an illness to when they are released to recover fully at home, the patient’s needs are our top priority. We know that most people desire to stay in their home, albeit with vital care support and assistance when they have conditions or are infirm. It is also crucial that we provide an integrated service that gets it right first time for the individual and that recovery takes place with fewer relapses. Relapses are costly in terms of money and the impact on someone’s already fragile health. They may also add to the cost of care. Getting it right will allow the savings that are made to be deployed back into health and social care services to make the joint sectors even more beneficial, and so the progress will go on, moving forward at all times. I must offer some caution to temper my optimism. With the UK Government’s cuts agenda continuing to have an acute impact on Scotland’s finances, we might be expected to do the same—or even more—with less money. I hope that I am wrong in that regard and that the hard work that is being carried out by all sides will be rewarded and recognised by any savings being reinvested back into the sector to ensure that our people are kept healthy. Scotland has an ageing population, and the future challenges that we face will be huge and complex. I hope that the bill will go some way towards ensuring that we are ready to face those challenges and rise to meet them. I am pleased to commend the bill to the Parliament and support its progression from stage 1.

I much appreciate Johann Lamont giving me the opportunity to intervene. Does Johann Lamont think that democracy is an urgent issue for everyone in the world? Would she like to comment on the fact that the United Kingdom Parliament’s representative for Govan has threatened the workers there by saying that if they exercise their democratic right to vote for independence, they will lose their jobs and livelihoods?

But he works for you.

You are a disgrace to Scotland.

I am pleased to participate in the debate, as I am a member of the Health and Sport Committee. From listening to members and reading the motion and amendments, it is plain to see that, across the chamber, everyone supports the principle of person-centred healthcare. Malcolm Chisholm summed up matters extremely well when he described us as all travelling in the same direction. A positive aspect to the debate is that we are all striving to achieve an approach that will bring health and treatment benefits for the people of our country. The NHS is something that we all hold dear. At one point or another, we, or certainly a family member, will need to use it. Every one of us has a stake in the NHS, and it is paramount that we are all involved in making it work. The staff across the NHS should be commended for the work that they put into looking after others. That is especially so at this time of the year, when the cold weather puts extra strain on the system, as the Government has recognised. At times such as now, we truly appreciate the hard-working staff of the NHS, as I will come on to say later. For the NHS to continue to deliver top-quality care, it is imperative that patients and families are at the heart of delivery, but we must also acknowledge that treatment can take all sorts of forms, from within hospital to within the community. Therefore, there must be a dialogue with patients to ensure that the best possible care is provided that takes into consideration the individual’s needs. That is why I was pleased to speak in favour of the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Act 2013, which was passed by the Parliament last year. The main aim of that act is to ensure that those who require community care have the independence to make their own decisions about the care that is provided to them. That was an important move, as it gave people who are genuinely removed from society because of their illness or condition the opportunity to become actively involved and to respond to their own caring needs. Giving patients that independence is an important aspect of person-centred healthcare. I argue that the motion builds on the measures that are contained in the 2013 act. When we focus on delivering the best health outcomes, it is important not only that we involve individuals but that we speak to and engage with local communities as a whole. Recently, in my constituency, I carried out a survey on accident and emergency provision, which attracted a high return rate. That is not really a surprise—I will say more about that later. Although many of the responses focused on accident and emergency provision, which was the basis of the questionnaire, a number of respondents expressed their general feelings about other aspects of the NHS, including access to GPs and some of the other services that are provided, of which there is a wide range. It is therefore welcome that the number of GPs working in Scotland has risen by 262 since September 2006, which is a 5.7 per cent increase. In many cases, GPs are on the front line of healthcare, as most people first seek access through them rather than through any other part of the NHS. That is why I am pleased that the HEAT target that the Scottish Government introduced to ensure access within 48 hours to an appropriate member of the GP practice team has been met by nearly all health boards in Scotland. There is still work to be done, but that progress is a sign that the Scottish Government is not resting on its laurels. When dealing with illness, it must be acknowledged that illness does not take a break. We must have measures in place to ensure that patients and families have access to the NHS at all times. That is why I am pleased that the Scottish Government is investing £4 million to trial innovative ways to ensure that we have a genuine seven-day service in the NHS. Convenient access times were another priority item that a number of people highlighted in the returns to my survey. Yet another issue that constituents raised in my survey was the rigid nature of hospital visiting hours. People argued that those hours do not take individual needs, family pressures or financial constraints into consideration. In my constituency, the Golden Jubilee hospital will take part in a pilot user-friendly scheme that will involve extended visiting hours. I am sure that many members will have intimate knowledge of the impact on patients’ mental health of being in a hospital all day with very little contact with family members or friends. Therefore, that scheme is most welcome. I hope that, if successful, it will be rolled out across the country to the benefit of all patients in Scotland. To go back to my survey, it is surprising how many people in my constituency engaged at that one moment. In some regards, it is although I asked specific questions on a particular subject, it is gratifying that people took the opportunity to sit down and write fairly long letters to explain their recent experiences. Some of those letters are very personal ones in which people express gratitude for the things that were provided in the health service. To be frank, all members across the chamber should be proud of that. The motion represents progress, not as a means to an end but as a means of building on the important work that is carried out in the NHS. We never stop trying to perfect a system of healthcare that continues to deliver for our patients, families and staff. The next time, when I write out a survey, we will get even more nice letters back complimenting the way that not only the Government but the Parliament deals with health service matters. I commend the motion to the Parliament.

I will start by thanking the convener of the Health and Sport Committee, Duncan McNeil, who encapsulated the committee’s thinking in his opening speech. He certainly represented the views of the committee extremely well, so I thank him for that. I am pleased to speak in the debate as a member of the committee—that is an added bonus. The committee’s inquiry into access to new medicines presented me with the difficulties involved in providing individuals and families with comfort and in satisfying what, on the surface, might seem to be an expectation that every drug and treatment on offer should be made available on demand. During the inquiry, we heard stories from individuals who require a particular drug for themselves, from family members who wanted to extend the life of a loved one and from people who wanted their quality of life to be just that bit better. Much though I would like or prefer to agree that there should be no barriers to receiving help, no matter the cost or the perceived benefit to the individual, we must look at the broader picture. Unfortunately, as much as I might have empathy for those families and individuals, I am curtailed in my support by the realisation that tough choices need to be made. Even though the Scottish Government has protected the health budget from Westminster cuts, the prospect of being in a position to provide unlimited funds for every new drug, no matter the cost, is sadly not an option simply because of finite resources. When it comes to choices, I very much support the establishment of the £20 million rare conditions medicines fund, which was welcomed by the committee. The fund helps to improve access to orphan and ultra-orphan drugs—medicines for illnesses that affect fewer than 1 in 2,000 people—including those that deal with different categories of cancer. We recommended that approach rather than a specific fund for cancer. Indeed, in our deliberations we found little support for the establishment of a separate and exclusive cancer drugs fund in Scotland. Although cancer can be, and is, a devastating illness, singling out cancer from all other devastating conditions makes me uneasy. I suppose that my experience gathering evidence for my member’s bill on palliative care in the previous parliamentary session has coloured my views. I found that cancer sufferers have a 90 per cent chance of receiving high-quality palliative care, whereas those with other life-threatening conditions have a 90 per cent chance of not receiving the same quality of care. That is a situation that I thought was just wrong, so I am very much in favour of a fund or scheme that is of equal status and effect across illnesses, rather than a preferential or exclusive fund for one category of illness. Our service should never be partial. Choices also need to be made on where resources should be deployed. If we were to fund all available treatments and drugs, no matter their effectiveness or cost, the ability to provide early treatment that may lead to a cure could be diminished. My choice is to provide both early treatment and treatment later on in an illness. It should be recognised that that sentiment is at the heart of the Scottish Medicines Consortium, which has been world renowned for a considerable time and commands global support. The Scottish Government is striving to ensure that Scotland’s drug approval system both becomes even more transparent and increases access to medicines for end-of-life care and treatment of very rare conditions. The Scottish Government has therefore directed the SMC to apply different and more flexible approaches in the evaluation of medicines in that category. The SMC will have to conclude by the end of this year a review on how to establish that more flexible approach. Also, to replace individual patient treatment requests, a new peer-approval system will be introduced to allow clinicians to prescribe medicines that are not accepted for routine use by the SMC. That process will be led by local consultants. Further, NHS Scotland will be able to refer to the SMC for consideration new medicines that have not yet been submitted by a pharmaceutical company, where those are considered clinically important to the NHS in Scotland, a system that was recommended by the Routledge review. I believe that the additional measures on the SMC will do two things. First, they will enhance a system that is already highly regarded and build on its undoubted success. Secondly, and perhaps more important, they will give comfort to the families and individuals whom I mentioned at the start of my speech. Of course, the changes will increase transparency in the approval process, particularly for patients, as the meetings of the SMC will be held in public and patients will be invited to attend peer review decision-making meetings. I welcome the additional investment of £1 million to ensure that the work of the SMC becomes more transparent. I am pleased to have been part of the committee’s inquiry and to have had the opportunity to make recommendations to the Scottish Government on how to move forward. It is pleasing that, although our system is envied the world over, the Parliament and our Government are big enough not to rest on their laurels and brave enough to inquire into our delivery system for new medicines with a view to making it even better. I believe that we have achieved our goals, but at the same time we must always strive for improvement.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to combat poverty. (S4O-02424)

I thank the minister for that comprehensive answer. Scottish families are only beginning to feel the harmful effects of the benefit cuts and welfare reforms that are being imposed by the UK Government. Will the minister outline the effects that Westminster’s welfare reforms are having on the Scottish Government’s policy to tackle poverty in Scotland?

The Parliament should record its thanks to the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee for how it has gone about its business and for the recommendations that it has provided us with, which are plans that will allow public understanding of the bill. No matter what side of the independence argument committee members are on, their work has shown the highest levels of legislative and democratic standards. It is a credit to both sides of the argument that the bill has been shaped and informed in Scotland for the people of Scotland and that differences have been set aside for the benefit of the Scottish commonweal. That is a lesson of how those with shared interests can come together and present to the Parliament measures that bring credit to the Parliament. It is something that we should keep fresh in our minds, no matter what the result of the referendum, because the day after the result each of us will need to be prepared to engage for the wellbeing of our people. The example of our colleagues on the committee and that of members in this debate, for the best part, shows us the way. I was never in any doubt from the way in which the committee worked that the outcome of the work would be in any way different from what has been presented to us. I was confident that the made in Scotland stamp on the bill meant that it had received the highest standard of scrutiny. Of course, the ability to do that for all matters that affect Scotland and its people is something that I dearly wish to see. I am also confident that if the members of the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee were requested to sit on a committee that was charged with dealing with a bill on Scottish defence or Scottish social security, they would be more than up to the task and that the made in Scotland stamp would be applied with the same level of confidence. It is safe to say that the Scottish public have a higher regard for the Scottish Parliaments’ ability to look after Scotland’s interests than that of the Westminster Parliament to do so. Poll results suggest that there is a massive difference between the levels of trust with regard to the Westminster Parliament and the Scottish Parliament: 60 per cent of our people trust the Scottish Parliament to make important decisions that affect them, compared with only 16 per cent who trust Westminster to look after Scotland’s interests. We should therefore trust ourselves more and celebrate the fact that the majority of our people have faith in us to do the right things for them. Being a tail-end Charlie in the debate, I have deliberately steered away from the bill’s content, which has been more than adequately covered. However, it is worth repeating the words of the Electoral Commission, which stated: “this is a strong piece of legislation that ... will provide us with the necessary foundation and the time to deliver a referendum that ... puts the voter first and puts the voter at the centre of the planning.”—[Official Report, Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, 23 May 2013; c 421.] That is a fairly comprehensive statement to make. It should be remembered that the Electoral Commission comes under the jurisdiction of Westminster, which makes the statement even stronger. One area that needs further clarification is the issue of purdah. The bill spells out rules for the Scottish Government on purdah. When it passes into law, those rules will be imposed on it. It is inconceivable that the Westminster Government would be other than limited to purdah to the exact same extent as the Scottish Government. I would expect all members of the Parliament, without exception, to agree that democratic standards be observed UK-wide with regard to purdah. I am pleased that, across the political divide within the committee, that view was held with regard to the call to both the Scottish Government and the UK Government to issue guidance to the public bodies for which they are responsible with regard to the application of purdah. It is fairly certain that it is a case of rights under democracy; the two Governments should be equal. I pay tribute to the committee, which has produced a great piece of work. That should be recorded in the Parliament in this very important debate.

I thank Graeme Pearson for bringing the debate to the chamber and for the sentiments that he expressed in his speech. I have been interested in China and the Chinese people since I was a child. Strangely enough, my interest began when my granny gave my mother a pair of Chinese blue and white porcelain plates. As a young person, I was hooked on art. The blue and white art of China fascinated me and that fascination—it is almost an illness—continues today. I really am keen on Chinese porcelain. I never thought that, as a Scottish businessman, I would find myself doing business with and in China. Some 18 years ago, I travelled to China for the first time, to attend a massive commodities fair and establish links with Chinese companies in my line of business. I was taken aback by the range of finished products and the machinery to manufacture them that were on show. It was fascinating to see the products and the machines to manufacture them. When attempting to make contacts, I was pleasantly surprised by how well informed many of the Chinese company representatives were about Scotland. That turned out to be no accident. When communications broke down between China and nearly every western country, the relationship between China and this tiny country of Scotland was maintained. China was never closed to Scotland. Scotland is a nation that was and is to this day trusted by China. That gives Scotland an enormous advantage over other countries. Scotland, with its population of 5.2 million, is working with China, which has a population of 1.34 billion—what a partner for Scotland to work with. With a population of 1.34 billion, China has been in a hyperdrive of development in the past 20 years. It is cramming into a mere decade the industrial effort that took western countries 200 years. That is a miracle in our lifetimes. In fact, there are two miracles: the fact that that massive country is physically and materially able to have such development and the managing of it on a human scale. With all the endeavour in China to better the country and its people, what can we do to assist China and ourselves? China encourages partnership with external players. We can offer tried-and-trusted systems that can augment and give sustainability to processes in China, whether in health, industry, electronics or education. On a less positive note, China has encouraged much of its student population to learn abroad and Scotland is more than able to oblige, but the obstacle of visa availability is having a detrimental impact on Chinese students attending Scottish universities and on commerce in general. In fact, it is embarrassing that Chinese people from across sectors, including diplomats and politicians, are hindered by the UK Government from entering Scotland for legitimate business. Fixing that problem would be of significant importance. I endorse Graeme Pearson’s motion, which graphically highlights in a few lines why it is in our interest to work positively with China. Few people in Scotland know just how highly regarded our country is in China. It respects our views and actions, which is important. Let us see how we can put that to good use for both our countries’ futures.

Will Neil Findlay take an intervention?

Is this a Labour pamphlet that we are hearing?

It is just my luck to follow a Frenchman who speaks English better than I do. I declare that I am a board member of Central Scotland Rape Crisis & Sexual Abuse Centre. The issue of men’s violence against women and children is always dealt with seriously by the Parliament. Although the focus of this debate and the stage 1 report is not exclusively on victims of men’s violence against women and children, most of my speech will consider how the debate relates to that issue and how the bill might offer some support to victims. After all, much of what is in the report will go some way towards assisting those who fall into that category. It is crucial that when a woman or a child is raped, services are available in an instant. I know that Rape Crisis is at the sharp end of such matters and although it can and does deliver vital early assistance, it also knows the importance of good reliable evidence in rape cases and will signpost victims towards medical examinations as soon as possible. Rape Crisis, Scottish Women’s Aid and many other third sector organisations that deal with women and children are well aware that the trauma of the medical examination is that bit more difficult to deal with if it is carried out by a male doctor, particularly if the crime has been of a sexually violent nature. The last thing I want to do is to call into question the professional capabilities of male doctors. I have the highest regard for the men who work in this very difficult field, but I believe that even they, when they begin work in the area, are reluctant participants. Of course, they find things much easier as they gather experience. On the other hand, for victims, no matter whether they are women or children, the presence of a female doctor makes an important experience less traumatic, is just that little bit more reassuring and is one less thing to worry about. As I have said, although the experience will be traumatic for the female or child victim, it is vital for the purposes of getting good, safe forensic evidence purposes. Therefore, I encourage the Scottish Government to consider the matter carefully and to seriously consider finding ways to provide more female doctors for the service at what is a vital and traumatic time for victims. There is then the issue of victims and relatives attending court only to be confronted by the accused—worse still, by an abuser—when the court sits for sentencing. I know that some of our courts do not easily lend themselves to separation of the accused and the accuser, but that is one of the most negative experiences that victims and their loved ones complain about. Such a scenario has a massive psychological impact on the victim, their family and friends. For that reason, I ask the Scottish Government again to look carefully at that sensitive subject with a view to finding ways to keep the parties apart as much as is humanly possible. I am sure that keeping them apart from the accused before the court sits would be of great assistance to victims and would offer them protection from any possible further intimidation. Children are the most difficult to accommodate at trials. By its very nature, a court is a grown-up establishment, and it is difficult—if not impossible—to soften its edges to accommodate children, let alone having courts that are entirely suited to children. At best, vulnerable children see courts as unwelcoming places; at worst, they see them as somewhat frightening places. We need to build on the good work that is already in place to make courts and the system more sympathetic to children. Fully training those who deal with children and their needs, and who navigate for them a pathway through court proceedings, is therefore of practical benefit to children. I would be pleased if all those who deal with children were trained to the highest level—particularly those involved in the interview stages both before and during court hearings. If things are made as normal as possible for vulnerable children, they can give good evidence. That is a must—it must be a top priority for the end result. It would benefit not only the child and their family but those who are engaged at that high level. It would benefit the court process in both the short term and the long term because the safest possible conclusions on guilt or innocence would be reached. I hope that the Government can take positive steps on the matters that I have raised to ensure that victims are protected not only in the justice system but in their daily lives. Many thanks, Presiding Officer, for allowing me to make a contribution on this very important matter.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what impact family nurse partnerships have on people’s wellbeing. (S4O-02232)

What progress has the Government made in rolling out the family nurse partnership programme and what benefits has it had so far?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate from both a personal and a general perspective. I speak from a personal perspective in that, having suffered from chronic pain, I can fully appreciate the background to, and experience of, the issue and the impact that the implementation of the Scottish service model on chronic pain will have on sufferers across Scotland. I speak from a general perspective in that, as a former member of the cross-party group on chronic pain—a group that does sterling work on the issue—and in my daily constituency duties as an MSP, I have met a large number of people from many different backgrounds who have been afflicted with chronic pain at some point in their lives and who have helped to shape policies that can support sufferers and their families. For me, there are two aspects to chronic pain. The first is the debilitating effect that severe acute continuing pain has not only on the body but on the mind. The physical inability to function to do some simple tasks is difficult to explain to those who have not suffered the impacts and effects of chronic pain. The second aspect relates to what people think. In my own situation, I looked okay on the outside, but I suffered embarrassment when I had to ask a workmate—in my case, it was an employee—to lift a package that was no heavier than a pint of milk into my car. That left me with a deep feeling of guilt, and I think that my employee thought, “He’s at it.” I put up with the situation for years until my good friend Alex Neil, who funnily enough is now the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, accidentally found out about my situation and advised me on how to seek a solution. That was a fair number of years ago, and it was his good advice that started my recovery. It is difficult to calculate how many people have been in a similar situation to mine but were not as fortunate as I was in receiving that valuable information.

I believe that the stigma that is attached to chronic pain and the lack of understanding of it have been reduced drastically over the past years. However, I am pleased that the Scottish Government continues to attach such importance to the issue, because almost 18 per cent of the Scottish population might have been affected at some point in their lives. I am sure that members will agree that that amounts to a large proportion of our people and makes it more than likely that nearly every family in Scotland has a member or friend who has at one time or another suffered from chronic pain. In recent years, there has been a marked improvement in tackling pain—not only in attitude, but in action. The establishment of a national lead clinician in 2009 was an important step, as it acknowledged the impact that chronic pain has on the lives of so many people and led to today’s debate. The Scottish Government should be praised for funding that position, as we are now seeing its hard work come to fruition. The national chronic pain steering group, which was established by the lead clinician, has played a fundamental role in developing a model that will help all sufferers. Over a number of years, the steering group has developed the Scottish service model for chronic pain, which offers a valuable approach to dealing with the varying and complex levels of the condition. To ensure the best outcomes for the care and support of people living with chronic pain, there must be a complete understanding of what chronic pain is and how best to treat it. The challenge for the service model is to ensure that that is the case. I believe that we are on the right road to improving the understanding of chronic pain as well as its prevention and management. A recent concern regarding care for those with chronic pain is the disparity in the range of services and resources in different health boards. I believe that, with the implementation of the service model across NHS Scotland, that variation will be addressed, which will have a positive impact on sufferers across Scotland. I am pleased that the Scottish Government is fully committed to implementing the service model, but that will happen only through close co-operation between the Government, the national lead clinician, the steering group, Healthcare Improvement Scotland and the health boards. At present, a number of people have to travel outwith our country to the Bath centre for pain services. I make it clear that I would have travelled to the ends of the earth to relieve the pain that I suffered from, but it is good that the Government is taking action on that. I welcome the Government’s commitment to consult interested parties to ensure that specialist facilities are available here in Scotland. To be honest, I am not sure what the best model is. I like the idea of consulting and talking to all interested parties, as we should engage with people, rather than do it ourselves. Since 2007, there has been a huge improvement in the provision of chronic pain services, but we must never rest on our laurels. We must continue to build on that improvement and, if members support the motion, I believe that positive progress will be made.

That has already been said.

I have carefully read Gavin Brown’s motion on voluntary sector funding and I cannot find a single word that I disagree with, which is probably a first in my parliamentary career. John Swinney’s amendment certainly finishes it off properly. I have great respect for the third sector’s ability, often with limited financial resources, to connect, reach and empower communities to help to address important social, cultural and economic needs, and for its ability to multiply the impact of those resources, which often gain a social return that other agencies would be proud of—or might be embarrassed about. I am keenly aware of the critical role that the third sector plays in the community planning agenda and in meeting the outcomes of community planning single outcome agreements. I therefore very much support the call in the Conservative motion for multiyear funding that affords the sector the opportunity to plan effectively to deliver sustainable services. In my experience, the sector can and will go the extra mile. That is for one reason: it can see the need for action in society. The sector brings expertise, capacity and connectivity to communities and enables the neighbourhood approaches that we know provide the most benefit, to achieve success beyond statutory engagement alone. We should note that, just a few months ago, the Scottish Government’s budget was cut by the Conservative Administration in London. So much for the forward planning that is implicit in the motion. That suggests to me that the Conservatives do not have the same level of commitment to stability as the rest of us have. I have no doubt that, in the coming weeks and months, the third sector across Scotland—indeed, the third sector across the whole United Kingdom—will come under severe pressure not only financially but from capacity issues. That is as sure as night follows day. When the benefit cuts take hold and the impact is felt at all levels, some of the fallout will be picked up by an already overstretched third sector—by, for example, advice services, child and family support services, homelessness agencies and, increasingly, food banks. I know that that will happen and that the third sector will do what it can to alleviate potentially devastating effects on our communities and to help those who are least able to help themselves and who are experiencing the blunt end of the Westminster-led reform of social welfare. We are only at the start of the impact of the Westminster reform agenda, and we are already seeing a profound need for our communities to come together to help one another in the Scottish tradition of community action and support. How can we expect the third sector to maintain its critical role without the ability to plan over a minimum three-year term? The more all the agencies—from the national Government to local authorities to the third sector—combine to ensure that every person works to their capacity and that every pound is properly targeted with little or no wastage, the more we will have a chance to use and direct our resources to address the challenges that lie in store for our country.

The minister will be aware of the significant investment in and great work on the Clyde and Forth canal in recent years, especially in the section that passes through Clydebank in my constituency. I would be grateful if he could inform the Parliament about what is being done to attract more volunteers into becoming more involved with the canal to ensure that we maximise its potential and that it continues to go from strength to strength.

This certainly is a momentous occasion, and I have waited an awful long time for it. No matter the result in the referendum, I do not think that I need to apologise either to my children or to my grandchildren. Can the First Minister confirm that the timetable will allow for proper public and parliamentary consideration of the proposals of the referendum on independence, so that the people of Scotland are able to make a fully informed decision about the future of our country?

On responsibilities, Tony Blair is in the member’s party. Is it not time that the member took responsibility and got him out of his party?

This week has been a health week in the Parliament—there was another health debate yesterday. That is good, because health is an important matter. I would like to see this happening more frequently—perhaps we could put it in the calendar annually. As a member of the Health and Sport Committee, I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. It is taken as read that both health and social care are of immense importance to the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament and that, in their own ways, they both provide vital services for communities across the country. As regards the present operational delivery of services to the community, we cannot say either that health and social care are working completely separately from each other or that they are working completely together. It would be wrong to say either, so the Government’s attempt to bring together health and social care to deliver even better outcomes for our people is to be welcomed. With budgets under pressure, there is an added incentive to find ways to do a better job for more people with the same resources. It is a goal worth striving for. To achieve that goal, we need everyone to pull together and, in my view, third sector involvement is key to bringing about that success. There is a high level of experience in the third and private sectors when dealing with health and social care and we must do everything we can to learn from that experience and put it to good use. As well as experience, the third sector brings a different perspective on health and social care. It is able to look at those services from a user’s viewpoint, which is of fundamental importance when mapping out how best to offer best practice for patients and families alike. Without third sector participation, integration will not work as we want it to, at the highest level, so I commend the Scottish Government for its continued dialogue with the organisations that are at the coalface. The integration of health and social care is of the utmost importance and I am pleased that the Scottish Government is showing the leadership that is required to achieve it. That leadership is shown when we look at the policy of single budgets. It is the norm for any organisation, private or otherwise, no matter the size, to be precious about its budget and to spend it only in areas over which it has direct influence or responsibility. A unified budget means that there are no artificial barriers either practically or in people’s minds. That is the single biggest initiative in the proposal that leads to me to believe that this integration will be a success, as it gives each sector equal responsibility. As our people live longer, the services that they require will become more complex; having two separate systems will not meet their expectations or provide the services that they require. A larger, combined budget—in contrast to two smaller budgets—will allow clinicians, care professionals and health managers to rise to those challenges with the necessary funding. It will also lead to achieving agreed health and social care outcomes while putting an end to the practice of cost shunting between the NHS and local government. Away from the financial aspects, it makes sense for health and social care to be integrated. I am pleased that this is about integration of services and that the Government is clear that it is not about structural changes—staff in both sectors will be able to continue to use their expertise. I am also pleased that a massive transfer of staff between employers is neither sought nor desired, which will be of great comfort to those involved and ensure a smooth transition. Where there is an overlap between health and social care, integration is the most practical way to deliver a service that has people at its centre. Individuals, their carers and family members will benefit most from that integration, which is the basis for the change. Ensuring a successful integration will be hugely challenging but greatly rewarding. I feel that we have the right leadership and that we will carry out the changes. Those who use the services will benefit the most. I am also sure that there will be tough decisions to be made in future, for health and for social care. I look forward to the Government introducing the proposed bill for Parliament’s consideration, as a way of making the number of tough decisions that bit smaller. I commend the motion in the name of Alex Neil to the Parliament.

As a member of the Health and Sport Committee, I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. The issue of waiting times for treatment in the national health service affects many of my constituents and those of other members. As Jamie Hepburn and John Mason highlighted, in 2003, 6,494 patients were waiting longer than nine months for in-patient treatment. Progress has certainly been made since then, and currently only 395 patients across Scotland have been on waiting lists for longer than 18 weeks. However, there is still a lot of work to be done, and I recognise the Scottish Government’s commitment to bringing down the figures even more. It is worth repeating that, when the Labour Party was in power prior to the 2007 Scottish parliamentary elections, the threat of closure was hanging over a number of hospitals. The Labour Administration targeted accident and emergency departments at Monklands and Ayr hospitals. One must ponder what would have happened to waiting times and general patient care if the Labour Party had been elected to government. Fortunately for the local population, many of whom had campaigned to protect the services, the SNP was elected to government and kept its promise to prevent their closure and the potential catastrophic effect on local healthcare provision. Added to that, the Vale of Leven hospital, on which some of my constituents rely, suffered salami slicing of its services under Labour in a bid to run down the facility and open the way to closure. The SNP Government again stepped up and reversed proposals to close the hospital, providing some comfort to local people. Since July 2007, a total of 82,386 patients have attended the Vale of Leven hospital, which should raise concerns about where they would have gone if the hospital had been closed under Labour.

The Christie ward burned down—that is another story. I notice that you did not come to the rescue of your Labour Government, Jackie. You know as well as I do that you put more paint on your nails than went on the wall of the Vale of Leven hospital in 10 years.

Sorry, Presiding Officer.

Okay. Nice nails. The Labour Party would do well to remember its own actions on waiting lists before lecturing others. The shame of the hidden waiting lists that it operated through its availability status codes, which effectively stripped patients of their treatment guarantee, will long be remembered by those who were affected by the system. The SNP Government again stepped up to the challenge and introduced a system that has the best interests of patients at its heart. The new ways system was designed to be more transparent than the failed Labour Party system. That is why the statistics are available to the Parliament and can be audited. When we look across the border to our neighbours in England, we see how the United Kingdom Government is intent on dismantling the national health service. I am pleased that the Scottish Government has a different approach. I am pleased that it is committed to the founding principles of the NHS, which continues to be a universal public health service. Care for patients is the highest priority for the Government. That can be seen in the decision not to cut the health budget despite the overall cut to the Scottish budget being made by Labour’s better together partners. However, without the support and dedication of the hard-working NHS staff, patient care would suffer. For that, they should be commended. Our NHS staff deliver a top-class service to patients and families. I am concerned that their morale might be damaged by the constant negative scare stories that emanate from Labour. Continued public confidence in our NHS must be of the highest priority. When the public begin to mistrust doctors and nurses, we are in a serious situation. That is why I welcome Audit Scotland’s findings that, after an extensive investigation, there was no evidence—I stress that—of deliberate manipulation of waiting times. Further to that, I am pleased that 91 per cent of the 105 internal audit recommendations have already been enacted. The health service faces a large number of challenges over the next three years. The UK Government’s welfare reforms will have a negative impact on the health of the people in Scotland and many will require assistance. That is why the Scottish Government has protected the NHS budget and why there will be a real-terms increase in the front-line NHS budget over the next three years. The Labour Party’s refusal to ring fence the health budget is just one reason why it failed in 2011.

I recommend that members support the amendment in the name of Alex Neil, the cabinet secretary.

2. To ask the Scottish Government how it will deal with the impact of the so-called bedroom tax on housing associations. (S4O-01850)

The minister is fully aware that the UK Government proposals are causing a great deal of confusion among tenants or councils and housing associations. Some people believe that the Scottish Government has the resources to stop the effects of the proposals in Scotland, despite the cuts that have been made to the Scottish budget. My question is straightforward: has the Scottish Government got the powers or resources to stop this happening in Scotland?

Most people would agree that a whistleblowers hotline would be an important thing to have in order to give the public confidence in relation to this issue. What steps will be taken to introduce a whistleblowing system, and when is that likely to happen?

Can the member name a single solitary person who she knows has escaped due process with regard to trafficking? Can she name one?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and highlight our country’s role in the world in defending human rights. In Scotland, we have a proud tradition and history of protecting and promoting human rights, not only for our citizens but internationally. The principle of human rights is taken for granted in Scotland, which is why we have an obligation to ensure that our human rights are not infringed upon while doing our utmost to take the message across the world. Scotland is an inclusive country and takes pride in its diversity. That is the Scotland that we envisage and for which we strive on all points along the political spectrum. I am pleased that the Scottish Government and Parliament are building upon that with the development of a national action plan over the coming year. We may not be pioneers in creating such a plan, but we have the benefit of learning from the countries that have already developed their own plans and I hope that we can offer something distinctive to meet the challenges that we face in Scotland. As a current member of the United Kingdom, Scotland is a signed-up member of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. When we become independent—as surely we will—that will still be the case, but Scotland will play an even greater role. There are occasions when people complain about the impact of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on individual rights. Although those criticisms can sometimes be valid, we must look at the bigger picture. The overriding duty of the declaration at a multinational level is to defend the most vulnerable and marginalised in society and to protect the individual whom those in authority might persecute simply to silence them. I share the Scottish Human Rights Commission’s concerns about the United Kingdom Government’s response to the global economic crisis—in particular, the welfare reforms that it is introducing—and believe that the concept of human rights should be at the core of the decision-making process. The most vulnerable in our society will be affected the most, and I fully endorse the actions of the Scottish Human Rights Commission and the many other organisations that have raised the issue with the UK Government. For the sake of those in need, I hope that the UK Government takes those concerns on board. The Scottish Government and Parliament have done a great deal to promote human rights on an international level—from working with other Governments to combat human trafficking, to highlighting the importance of climate change, which is increasingly becoming a human rights issue. It is imperative that, in the run-up to the referendum, those who are in favour of independence and those who are against it express their visions of how Scotland can best help to promote human rights, whether as an independent country or otherwise. An independent Scotland has much to offer on the international stage and will be able to build on the actions that the Scottish Government has taken. I commend the Scottish Government’s approach and the Parliament’s long-running approach to human rights. I fully support the motion.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to encourage supermarkets to stock quality Scotch lamb. (S4O-01741)

As the cabinet secretary is well aware, the Scotch lamb label is a protected geographical indication that represents superior character, 100 per cent traceability and a quality guarantee of stricter production methods and controls required by law. What steps can the cabinet secretary take to highlight that important and impressive status for our lamb to food retailers, especially supermarkets at home and abroad?

I welcome this debate on what is an important and challenging issue, and I am pleased to speak in it. This is a debate that affects every household in Scotland and it is only right that, as parliamentarians, we challenge the issues surrounding it. Most colleagues will be aware of the challenges that their constituents face with rising fuel costs and increasing prices across all walks of daily life. I know only too well, through surgeries and through letters, emails and phone calls that I have received at my office, the desperate situations in which many of my constituents have found themselves. I am sure that I speak for most members in that regard. As we all know, winter is when most people use the greatest amount of fuel to heat their homes. With rising prices and the threat of cuts hanging over many people’s heads, decisions have to be made when it comes to how people look after their families. Too often in the Parliament and beyond it, the example is given of old-age pensioners sitting in their homes having to decide whether to put the fire on to warm themselves against the freezing conditions of winter or to buy food to avoid starvation. John Wilson highlighted that situation. I know that it sounds like an exaggeration, but it is a fact that older people sometimes starve themselves to death. That is an everyday choice for many people. It is a choice about the best way in which to least damage their health. That situation continues to be played out across our country, in homes and kitchens, among both families and single occupants. In a modern, developed, energy-rich country such as Scotland, it is a disgrace that that story is becoming even more commonplace rather than being a rarity. Despite the confines of the current devolved settlement, I applaud the Scottish Government for the measures that it has adopted in an attempt to counter the worst effects of the current situation with the limited powers that are available to it. Of course, its efforts are undermined not only by the fact that it does not have all the powers that it needs but by the detrimental impact of the Westminster Government’s kamikaze approach to welfare reform, which will only put more households into fuel poverty. Figures released by the Scottish Government in December 2012 showed that, in 2011, 684,000 households—or 28.9 per cent of our people—were classed as fuel poor. Energy Action Scotland estimates that, over the course of 2012, that figure will increase to more than 900,000 households or 40 per cent because of fuel prices and other financial pressures on household budgets. Those staggering figures will put more pressure on the national health service, local government services and the whole economy. Given that the whole of society will be affected by the rising number of people living in fuel poverty, we have an obligation to do as much as we can to alleviate the problem. In addition to the rise in fuel costs, there is another burden on people who live in houses with poor energy efficiency. After all, it does not matter how much heating a house might have; if it has poor insulation or an outdated boiler, most of the warmth will be lost. That is why I am pleased that the Scottish Government is working with energy companies to identify £200 million a year for the development of the national retrofit programme, as outlined in the draft budget. However, that is not enough. More pressure must be put on energy companies to provide a better deal for consumers. The quest for profits at the expense of pushing people into fuel poverty is nothing short of a disgrace and I join the Scottish Government’s call for the UK Government to intervene and ensure that the market provides better for people. We on this side believe that independence and the choices that it will bring can make the difference on these matters, and it will be a strong part of the offer that we intend to make to the Scottish people in the referendum. Given that this is all happening under the union, the challenge for unionists—indeed, their duty—is to explain how they intend to change these matters and end the misery. In my view, we will be able to truly tackle this kind of poverty only when the Scottish Government has full powers over our natural resources. Given my age, I was disturbed to hear the member from the northern isles talking about the worst aspects of fuel poverty and saying that, as far as he was concerned, the impacts were felt worst in his area. I thought about the oil that sloshes about the northern isles and was reminded of the potato famine and the fact that food was being sent away from Ireland while tens of thousands of people—indeed, a million of them—were starving to death. Despite having all this energy, we have this member telling us exactly what is happening on his patch. I find it disgraceful that that sort of rhetoric is being heard in this chamber; we need to change these things and the responsibility to do so is on all of us, unionist or otherwise. We live in a very rich country and it is time that we took action to change this situation. Mr McArthur should not be coming to the chamber and explaining these things to us; he should be explaining them to his constituents. It is just not good enough.

Thank you, Presiding Officer.

I thank Malcolm Chisholm for bringing the debate to Parliament and pay homage to the words and sentiments that he used, for which I am very grateful. I declare an interest as a board member of the Central Scotland Rape Crisis and Sexual Abuse Centre. In December, I spoke in a members’ debate—led by my colleague Jamie Hepburn—on the white ribbon campaign, which aims to involve men in tackling the scourge of men’s violence against women and children. The campaign was started a short while ago, and is supported by a number of organisations including Women’s Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland and Amnesty International. Zero Tolerance is also significantly involved in that campaign. I believe that, if it was not for the groundbreaking work of Zero Tolerance over 20 years ago, campaigns such as white ribbon would not have even been thought of, never mind put into full operation. It is only right that we praise those organisations and bring attention to the important work that they carry out to prevent violence towards women. I have been involved with this serious issue for a good number of years, and I have seen at first hand the vital work that has been carried out. From raising awareness of the issue across society as a whole in order to prevent violence, to dealing with the aftermath of that violence and comforting the victims, the work of those organisations should be commended. Prior to the start of the zero tolerance campaign in 1992, there seemed almost to be reluctant acceptance of violence against women. Few men in Scotland were involved in any of the campaigns to prevent that violence, and it was left to a small number of committed women to fight for a woman’s right to be protected from abusive men. Since then, there has been a marked change in society towards the crime, although—as the motion rightly points out—we have still not eradicated it. Although I am of the opinion that incidents of violence against women and children are not on the increase, I believe that the hard work that organisations such as Zero Tolerance carry out has given many women the confidence to act and come forward to report attacks, and has brought the issue into the public domain and to the public’s attention. That has been achieved through the provision of secure advice along with meaningful support, which has been a hallmark of Zero Tolerance since its inception. I believe that the fact that the debate—in which I am pleased to speak—has been led by a man, Malcolm Chisholm, sends out a strong message, and I praise the number of male colleagues who have contributed to such debates over the years. There is, however, still a lot of work to be done to bring about a zero tolerance culture in this country. As a man, I have a moral obligation to do that, and I can try to raise awareness among male-dominated forums and institutions. Although the Scottish Government and its predecessors have taken a number of steps to tackle the scourge, it should not be left to the Government or to Zero Tolerance alone. We all have a responsibility, not only as parliamentarians but as human beings, to tackle the problem. Organisations such as Zero Tolerance have an important role to play in that regard, and I commit to supporting fully their actions and future campaigns.

I thank the minister for his statement. I welcome the news that the DWP and Remploy have indicated that they are now more open to partnership work with the Scottish Government and its agencies. Can the minister outline how he expects that engagement to progress and what benefits he feels that it will have for the workers, including those in Clydebank in my constituency?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the Law Society of Scotland about reform of the time bar. (S4O-01597)

One of the anomalies in cases in which a person has inadvertently caused himself or herself to be affected by the time bar is the result of their being of a young age at the time of the crime. They might lay charges when they are mature but then, if they find that they are not yet strong enough to relive the trauma, they withdraw those charges. What steps is the Scottish Government considering to ensure that justice can be found for such people—particularly for those who have at a young age been victims of sex crime?

Is that the same Electoral Commission that the unionist parties ignored seven times, or is it a different one?

I, too, thank Jamie Hepburn for bringing the debate to the Parliament. I declare an interest on the issue, as I am a board member of Rape Crisis in central Scotland. One of my tasks over a good number of years has been to attempt, when possible, to send the message that violence or abuse by men against women and children is unacceptable. I have endeavoured to target male-dominated forums and institutions and to highlight the fact that, although the issue is typically defined as a women’s issue, that is a mile off the mark. The reason why I believe that is that 80 per cent of such crimes are committed by men on women, so, in my book, it is very much a man’s problem and the only ones who can remedy it are men, by their actions. That is not to fail to recognise or in any way minimise the important work that women have done on the issue over generations. When I was growing up, matters such as men beating or abusing their wives were dealt with almost exclusively by women, who would, for the most part, have to do the vital support work quietly and in most cases on their own, separately from men. It took the work of women in families or small extended groups, which at that time were not supported by the public purse, to fight for women’s right to be protected from abusive men. Things have moved on since then and there has been a substantial increase in the number of organisations that campaign in the interests of women. I believe that progress has been made in that regard. However, work still needs to be done to highlight the issue further among the male population because, by and large, the issue remains outside the mainstream consciousness of men. That said, we are making progress. I am pleased that so many male members of the Parliament are speaking in the debate. The issue crosses party-political lines. As parliamentarians, we all have a duty to do what we can to counter the issue as often as possible and to highlight the immorality that is violence against women and children. I am pleased that, since the inception of the Scottish Parliament, each Administration has adopted a strong approach to tackling the issue. My message to men is simply that they should influence their male friends and spread the word across society that violence against women is not a women’s issue and that it is men’s responsibility to stop what is going on.

As the minister knows, there is a very productive Remploy factory in Clydebank, in my constituency. Its work involves the production of innards for car seats that the car industry manufactures. Will the Government engage to ensure that that very profitable work continues? I should declare an interest: the business that I own supplies to the motor industry.

It has been just over two months since we debated the bill at stage 1. I am pleased that, over that period, the Scottish Government has taken on board a number of the issues that were raised during that debate and the subsequent stage 2 proceedings. The bill’s main aim is to give more of those who need to be cared for the independence that able-bodied persons take for granted. By ensuring that that principle is adhered to, it is hoped that those with disabilities can be better included in society and that they can have greater responsibility for securing the care that they require to function. Giving them control over the financial side of the equation allows them such responsibility. There are currently two options for receiving support that are available to people with disabilities. Direct payment involves the local authority paying the supported person directly, who then spends the money on the support that they require. We also have the more traditional method, in which local authorities are given the responsibility for selecting the required support and make payment without the direct involvement of the supported person. The bill aims to strengthen both those methods while offering further options. In some cases, people would generally feel more confident if they could choose the support that they receive, without being burdened with having to deal with the financial side of the equation. The bill offers that possibility to people while recognising that individuals have different support needs, which is why I am pleased that the fourth option is a mixture of the three options that have already been set out. My main concern during stage 1 was that a situation could arise in which those in receipt of support could face the prospect of having undue pressure put on them to employ a family member. That could, of course, result in the removal of a better qualified individual who already offers support in place of an unqualified family member. A further concern was the emotional stress that someone may come under were they to feel that they needed to replace a family member with someone who is qualified, which is something that could cause a great deal of stress to the individual. I particularly thank the Government for taking those concerns into consideration and for producing legislation that has the right balance. The bill offers support to unpaid carers across Scotland. Those unsung heroes in our country must be praised for the work that they put in. The Government is approaching the matter in the right way. There has been some concern about the charges for carers that local authorities would be able to levy under section 16 of the bill. The Government’s proposals will be clear about restricting charges that can be levied on carers. I am pleased that the Government will issue regulations that will make it clear that all charges for support to carers should be waived in full. Crucially, that recognises carers as providers of services to those they care for. If the Government did not retain section 16, there would be no legal basis on which to make such regulations, and carers would be left in the same position as they are in right now. I beg members to support the bill.

3. To ask the Scottish Government how it promotes telehealth across the country. (S4O-01461)

Can the cabinet secretary clarify what is being done to ensure that national health service boards adopt e-health and telehealth systems for both cost and clinical benefits?

I am very pleased to take part in this debate on permanence and adoption. It is particularly pleasing to be involved during national adoption week. I am interested in all matters that relate to adoption. I listened to a phone-in programme on the issue on Monday. Many callers were concerned, in one way or another, about the time that the adoption process takes. I say at the outset that when bureaucracy is in place for no good reason and leads to frustration, everything that can be done should be done to minimise and cut the red tape. However, we need to appreciate that every child who is available for adoption, without exception—it is a strong claim to make, so I repeat it; without exception—has experienced some kind of traumatic event that led to their being available for adoption in the first place. Therefore, the red tape that I am talking about is in no way the vital and necessary time that is spent in assessing prospective parents and their circumstances to ensure that they can properly look after a child who needs to be adopted. A child might have been abandoned as a baby. That is not unheard of, particularly in the context of overseas adoption. A child might have been abused by a birth parent and taken into care by the relevant authorities. In one way or another, the child is in a fragile state and is very much in need of the protection that is afforded by a loving parent who can offer the long-term stability that is essential to all children, whether they are adopted or not. The worst thing that can happen to a baby or child who is to be adopted is the system being rushed. The system must ensure that proper in-depth knowledge is gathered, so that when a placement is made, the first and last principle is the wellbeing of the child. Even though the process requires the patience of Solomon, the child must come first at all times. My wife and I went through the patience mill; it is a hard mill to get through. From the start to the end of the process, we waited three and a half years to adopt our daughter, Lucy. The time and processes that were involved in checking that we were suitable parents, for the long-term wellbeing of our daughter, were vital in many ways. There are home visits, background reports and police reports. All are done with one intention: to ensure that babies and older children who have had at least one bad experience in their short lives—and perhaps a few—do not have another. Our daughter was only two when we adopted her. Until then, she had lived in an orphanage, but I have to say that she was an extremely well-behaved and happy baby, and still is—she is coming up for 12, but she is still my baby. My wife and I agree that people who put themselves forward to adopt an older child, who perhaps has what is commonly referred to as “baggage” and has had a traumatic experience at a young age, and who make such a child part of their family—what a goal; what an achievement!—are living saints. It is clear from all the studies that the earlier a child is permanently placed with a family, the sooner the child begins the process of secure attachment and integration, and family belonging takes effect. Again, my focus is on the child in that regard, so I suggest that everything possible be done to build up a bank of prospective parents who have been approved so that as soon as it is practically possible to do so, a child can be placed when they have been recognised in law as being available for adoption. The wasteful delay in dealing with cases has the potential to turn prospective parents away from adopting, and it is in the child’s interests to ensure that the process is as speedy as possible. That delay also has an impact on the prospective parents and their existing families. While we seek to create a positive and fresh new life for each adopted child, we must not forget the positive effects on their new family and parents. Those parents take great pride in their adopted child’s achievements—as if, in fact, he or she is their own child—from their first step or first words to the passing of school exams; so much so that it would be impossible for anyone to realise that the child was adopted. That is the ultimate accolade for any family, in my view. I am pleased to help to raise awareness of adoption and I am sure that the debate can only bring positive outcomes for all the individuals who benefit from adoption—the child, the parent and the extended family. A caring and loving home is what every parent wants for their child and for adoptive parents to offer that chance is something to be recognised. This Parliament is at its best when it discusses matters such as these—when we all come together. I commend the motion to Parliament while offering thanks to all those who put themselves in the position to adopt.

As someone who is involved in the motor trade, doing deliveries, I declare an interest. One of the biggest challenges that we face with regard to winter resilience is the highly unpredictable nature of the weather in Scotland, which presents a particular problem for weather forecasters. Most other countries that have to deal with snow and ice are at an advantage, as they have historically had patterns of weather that are predictable and they have a more consistent experience, so that, even when weather is described as being severe, they are able to counter the problems by being better prepared. In other words, in the Alps, say, when snow falls for a given period of time, forecasters are able to state fairly accurately in advance the duration of the snowfall, the depth of the snow and roughly how long the snow will remain on the ground. Also, historically, whatever the amount of snowfall, the same conditions are likely to be around for a substantial time. Therefore, on the continent, whatever the treatment that might have been used, there is a good chance that it will be successful for a substantial number of days or, more probably, weeks. That is in stark contrast to what our resilience teams have to deal with, which might involve spreading grit on roads and paths only to find that a thaw happens soon after and is quickly followed by a drop in temperature or, worse, by rain. That cycle can often take place within half a day. The unpredictability of our weather brings a great deal of obstacles and challenges to our workforce. Indeed, if we brought over the workforce from the continent, who are highly skilled in their own backyard, and put them to work in Scotland, even with their own equipment, I am sure that they would give up in a week. In fairness, the same might happen with our teams—who are, in my opinion, just as competent and highly skilled—if we sent them over to those countries. The differing conditions between our countries, as well as the different form of training and experiences of the workers, demonstrates the unique situation that Scotland is in during the winter months. However, what is done extremely well on the continent—something that we need to learn from and get better at—is ensuring that the driving public, both private and professional, are ready and better prepared for any eventuality. There is no doubt that, across the board, there is a cavalier attitude and a state of unreadiness on the part of drivers when it comes to bad weather. As I already stated, I have been involved with the motor industry through my business, which my son now runs. The majority of our drivers are women. Contrary to the opinion of some, my opinion is that women, when given the chance, make some of the best and most careful drivers whilst, at the same time, getting the job done quickly. Members: Hear, hear. They get well paid, by the way—the same as the men. They know when to call a halt and when to alert our head office in the event of bad weather. We have a no-drive policy that is based on up-to-date information, and we take our vehicles off the road for the duration of any extreme weather conditions. I cannot remember any of our motors or vans being marooned in bad weather. We have normally taken affirmative action sufficiently far in advance. I encourage the Scottish Government and local authorities, which have a significant role in these matters, to do all that they can to educate the public and advise them as forcibly as possible when not to travel, particularly on motorways. If someone becomes stuck on a motorway, it is well-nigh impossible to get them off the road without significant rescue operations. I appreciate the great difficulty in keeping the roads open and I appreciate even more the excellent work of the roads and clearing teams. If I could make a wish for them, it would be not for less snow or ice, but for the gift of informing them about where and when the weather will hit and for how long. If we give them the information, they will do the job well. Government can do many things but, when it comes to dealing with mother earth, all that we can do is prepare for the worst and hope for the best. I am pleased that the Scottish Government is preparing in advance to deal with the weather this winter, whatever it is. I fully support the initiatives that are being taken.

Or half a day.

There have been times in my political life when I did not know whether to laugh or cry. Last week’s announcement by new new Labour was one of those moments. Whoever would have imagined that new Labour could out-Tory the Tories? Even Margaret Thatcher had more sense than to say that “Scotland cannot be the only ‘something for nothing’ country in the world” Sadly, that was not the case for the new Labour Party. Let me tell Labour a few things. Whatever we decide to do with our money is for us to decide, particularly because the money that we are talking about is ours—not just some of it, but all of it. In fact, what we get to spend is less than what we contribute—Scotland subsidises others by paying in more than we receive—and the way that Labour articulated its “something for nothing” announcement smacks of the “subsidised Scotland” fear strategy that has persisted from the Labour Party and its fellow unionist parties for years.

I will not give way at the moment. All that is designed to undermine the self-confidence and self-belief of the people of Scotland. Then there are the specifics of what Labour promotes. For instance, identification of those who qualify for free prescriptions will result in the introduction of means testing—the wrecker of self-respect and self-confidence. I wonder whether any of the people who are responsible for the proposal have ever been on the receiving end of means testing. I will tell members about it first hand, having been forced to take handouts at school. As a young child, the humiliation that I experienced, and the jibes and bullying that went with it, were utterly soul destroying—so much so that often I preferred to go hungry rather than be hit with the stigma surrounding handouts. Of course, Labour suggests that the reason for the proposal is a shortage of cash and says that some people who are well off enough to pay benefit from free prescriptions, but is happy to put those who are genuinely in need through the misery of means testing. Its reasoning does not stand up to scrutiny; its proposal would cost more in bureaucracy than it costs to provide free prescriptions for all our people. Let us look more closely at the impact that charging for prescriptions would have on the general population. When I was taking evidence during the previous session of Parliament for my member’s bill, the Palliative Care (Scotland) Bill, I visited hospitals, hospices, care homes and many other institutions, and talked to doctors, nurses, patients, family members and friends. I sought views about the desirability of such a bill for people who are at the end of their lives. On one occasion, I spoke to a gentleman who described his personal journey and how life could have been made a bit easier for him and his family. He explained that he had been very unwell and off work. After a while, his condition improved enough for him to return to work. As he was earning money, he now had to pay for his prescriptions which—if my memory serves me well—consisted of five items. He informed me that he could afford only three or four items. His doctor had said that he needed to take the full prescription in order to advance his recovery, but because he could not afford it, he effectively made himself sicker. We do not know whether he would have lived longer had he been able to take the full prescription. If that gentleman had had access to free prescriptions, how much would it have cost the taxpayer in real terms? I suspect that the cost would have been a lot less because, instead, he had to go through sessions of acute care, which is—as we all know—far more expensive and more stressful for patients and their families. I am sure that all members of Parliament have had constituents who have been in similar situations. We should honour our commitment to ensuring that our people live and die with dignity. Free prescriptions for all, regardless of income, lives up to that commitment. In the manner in which they follow their leader—I do not mean Johann Lamont, but their real leader Ed Miliband, who is abandoning those who are least able to defend themselves in order to play to the south-east of England—Labour members should hang their heads in shame for that betrayal and should know that the rightward shift of the Labour Party is not yet complete. London institutions and policy makers are calling for public sector wages to be capped in the regions in order to subsidise further those in the south-east. Tory MPs are clamouring to outflank the Labour Party and are making the divided United Kingdom even more divided than it is now. What that means is that those who live in the leafy suburbs of London, who are in secure jobs that have been created by the Government, in an area that is already oversubsidised, will benefit more, while the rest suffer. Once they retire, many of them will cash in their subsidy bonuses and head for the poorer regions, where they will outbid the local inhabitants for housing. I support the Government’s amendment.

When taking evidence on support for community sport, the first and most vital factor that strikes us is that, without the army of volunteers, sport—and, for that matter, healthy activity—would grind to a halt. We are blessed with 150,000 registered sport volunteers in Scotland, but it was evident from what sporting agencies, sporting professionals and volunteers who are involved in sport told the committee that, over and above those 150,000, there are many mums, dads and others who provide significant assistance but do not consider themselves to be volunteers. One approach taken by those who seek to encourage more volunteering is to target parents who participate in sports in which their children are involved. Those parents have a number of skills that are invaluable but, sadly, once their children move on or give up on the sport, the parents also drop out. The aim is to find ways of encouraging them to continue to participate long after their children move on. One way to do that is to work across sports, drawing on the strengths in one organisation or sport and spreading them across a host of others. That cuts down on duplicated models and ensures that the small pot of dedicated volunteers with experience is not spread too thinly. Sport hubs provide an excellent opportunity to gather the best of volunteering talent from across the community so that the back-room staff—or, if I can use the term loosely, the voluntary administrations—are not duplicated sport by sport or club by club. Hubs also enable the use of facilities to the fullest capacity and ensure that they are as accessible as possible. For instance, if a school that is full of equipment, playing areas and gym halls is used only during school hours, that is a waste of scarce resources that could bring much benefit to the wider community. Of course, there are barriers to be overcome if we are to use such facilities fully. School buildings that were built through the public-private partnership are an obvious example. The cost of hiring out space and equipment in such buildings is vastly overinflated, which is a clear barrier to local clubs. Also, some local authorities can be too precious about the use of resources in a school and restrict the times when the facilities are available or who is permitted to use them in the first place. Sometimes, people in power take their eye off the ball and do not realise that schoolchildren need to be catered for not only during school hours, but outwith those hours. However, if schools truly become part of the community, behaviour in school and towards schools will be positive. An added benefit is the prospect that, if encouraged from an early age through school or local clubs, people will engage in long-term activity that will enhance their lives and lead to their volunteering in later years. I was extremely impressed by the genuine enthusiasm and commitment of those from across the sector—the professionals, individuals and volunteers—who gave evidence. Their enthusiasm was palpable. The Parliament should recognise the hard work and commitment of professionals and volunteers that keep Scotland active. I support the motion.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what support it gives to local authorities to ensure that recycling targets are met. (S4O-01302)

A number of residents of high-rise flats in my constituency have particular problems with the provision of recycling bins at home. Will the Government assist local authorities in sharing ideas about their best practice on providing recycling bins, so that the residents of high-rise flats can manage the number of bins that are required?

As someone who supports the principle of independence for Scotland—I am doing a bit of multitasking—I fully support the bill, as it will empower people with disabilities to have more control over their lives. That is the key message that drives the bill—giving disabled people the same freedom, dignity and choice as their fellow citizens in all walks of life. As a member of the Health and Sport Committee, I listened to a great deal of evidence during our meetings on the bill, from organisations with a stake in the issue to individuals who live with it on a daily basis. The evidence was wide ranging and informative, and it gave me more clarity about what is needed to ensure that everyone in Scotland is given every opportunity to achieve some level of choice and control in their lives. At present, two options for receiving support are available to people with disabilities. Direct payment involves the local authority paying the supported person directly. They then spend the money on the support that is required. There is also the more traditional method, whereby local authorities are given the responsibility of selecting the support that is required and paying for it without the direct involvement of the supported person. The bill aims to strengthen both those methods and to offer further options. In some cases, people would feel generally more confident if they could choose the support that they received without being burdened with having to deal with the financial side of the equation. The bill offers people that option while recognising that individuals have different levels of support needs, which is why I am pleased that the fourth option is a mixture of the three that I have already set out. The bill aims to consolidate, modernise and clarify existing laws on direct payments, which it is hoped will lead, in turn, to an increased uptake of direct funding, thus expanding the empowerment of disabled persons. The bill is invaluable not just in helping disabled persons to take more control of their lives. For most, if not all, members, a week will seldom go by without constituents contacting our offices to ask for help on carer issues. As the unsung heroes of Scottish society, carers need all the help that they can get, and I am pleased that the Scottish Government has announced a number of initiatives to alleviate their problems. The investment of £24 million in direct support over the next three years will be welcomed by carers across Scotland, as will the allocation, through the change fund, of £46 million to support carers of older people, which will be spread over the next three years. However, more can be done, and I am sure that the Scottish Government will look further into how it can support those who require further assistance. A major concern for some people who receive support is the prospect of a close family member using undue influence to become the employed provider of support to the disabled person. The fear is that, because money is involved, the family member’s need for additional income may be considered to be greater than the disabled person’s need for high-quality support. The family situation might mean that the strength of being an employer could be lost by people who are unable or unwilling, for whatever reason, to say no to employing a family member to look after them. That is a particular concern in situations in which the family member who would be employed is not equipped to provide the high levels of care that are demanded and expected. If a family member applies pressure to have a particular person appointed, a situation will arise in which the employer—in other words, the disabled person—will be forced, in effect, to fire someone who has been doing the job to a good standard, perhaps for a considerable period of time. Such family coercion would be completely counterproductive to the achievement of the goal of independent living and giving people with disabilities more control over their own lives. It would create issues that would restrict further measures to empower them to live more independently. Just how difficult would it be to fire a family member who is not up to the job, or to deal with someone who, part-way through a chore, decides that they have done enough for the moment? I listened carefully to the minister’s speech and I am pleased that the Government has taken the matter seriously, has looked at the possibility of failings in human nature and is consulting on instructions and guidance to ensure that assessments are regular and meaningful, so that the individual who is seeking support is protected.

I very much want to thank the Government for attempting to provide solutions to tackle the potential difficulties.

We all want people to have control of their choices—that is essential. I very much support the Government in its deliberations.

The debate comes at an important time and is welcome. When discussing energy matters, there tends to be a focus on how the energy is produced and distributed, rather than on how it impacts on ordinary persons. I will attempt to focus on the production of electricity and on how the general population is affected. Our production of electricity should be based on a model that is safe and that helps to deliver the climate targets that are set by the Scottish Government. With no country able to avoid the effects of climate change, the world as a whole has an interest in debating such matters—as we are. In the relatively short period of time of a devolved Scotland, we have taken a leading role in tackling climate change that has not gone unnoticed in other countries. We must continue to be an example, which is why I am delighted by the support that the Scottish Government has given to the renewable energy sector. It has been said before countless times, but it is important to continue to highlight that Scotland is in the unique situation of having an abundance of energy resources from tidal to wind to marine. We must ensure that we maximise those resources so that future generations can benefit. That is why the decisions that we make as a Parliament and as a country are fundamental. The next generation of Scots relies on us. The future is in renewables and investment should continue to be directed at supporting that industry, which ensures that jobs come to Scotland and is therefore a double priority. I share the Scottish Government’s concerns that nuclear power may be subsidised by the general public. That is the wrong approach to take, especially if the subsidy harms investment in the renewable energy sector in Scotland, which is growing and bringing with it local investment in jobs in hard-hit areas. We have a duty to ensure that the hard work and investment that has already been delivered by renewables is not harmed. A lot has been said about nuclear power, not just in the chamber but across Scotland and the rest of the world. The issues regarding nuclear waste are well documented, but my concerns are particularly about the danger of human error. Who would ever have imagined that Japan, arguably the world’s most technologically equipped nation, would simply forget to protect the generators and pumps from tsunamis? Even more alarming, it is a country with 2,000 years of written history and experience of dealing with tsunamis. The lesson is that the law of averages says that human error will happen, therefore nuclear should not be an option. I applaud the sentiments and the ambition of the electricity market reform proposals put forward by the British Government. Although I may be critical of some elements of the proposals, I believe that the issue is too important to allow party political allegiances to undermine the whole process. That said, further areas of concern need to be addressed by the British Government before we can move forward. The complexity of the reforms is one of the main concerns, with a fear among the industry that investment may decrease as investors are scared off by the proposals. Indeed, even the Westminster Select Committee on Energy and Climate Change has voiced concerns in its report on the proposals. It even went so far as to say that the consumer—in other words, ordinary people—will not benefit from the proposals. As the economic downturn continues to impact on people, we must do everything in our power to alleviate suffering. The rising cost of electricity has a detrimental impact on the budgets of families and individuals. I share the concerns of other members across the chamber that fuel poverty could impact even further. As we leave a summer in which there was little cheer on the economic front for families, we approach the time of the year when household bills will increase. Families and individuals, especially the elderly, will be forced into making choices about their welfare.

I welcome those developments, but I say that through gritted teeth because I do not really hold up Ofgem as a model of controlling the way in which energy impacts on people who really need Ofgem’s assistance. My view is that Ofgem has been mute and not very effective. I recommend that members support the motion and Labour’s amendment.

I am pleased to speak on the motion on the appointment of junior Scottish ministers. Each new minister brings a great deal of experience and skill to the Scottish Government. I have worked closely with Joe FitzPatrick, particularly in the past six years, as he is the SNP group secretary and I am the group convener. His ability to pay attention to detail and the boundless energy that he donates to any task will stand him in good stead for the challenges that are ahead. More important, the Parliament will benefit greatly from his way of working. I have known Margaret Burgess for many, many years and perhaps for too long—not in any way for me, but for her. When she was elected, my first thought was that, given her knowledge of social matters and how she expresses points, she leaves people in no doubt that she not only knows her subject but feels for it. In her time in the Parliament, she has already proved that she will be a fitting minister for the welfare and housing portfolio. Well done, Margaret. [Applause.] Paul Wheelhouse is another energetic addition to the Government. He has the ability to articulate complex issues in easily understood words, which is an attribute that fits well with the environment and climate change portfolio. There is agreement across the chamber that Humza Yousaf has carried himself extremely well since being elected. I have enjoyed his thoughtful speeches in the chamber, which are delivered with great care and attention. Some matters that members raise can cause their opponents discomfort, but he never does that with malice. He is extremely gifted and will enhance Scotland’s reputation across the world as the minister for external affairs and international development. [Applause.] My notes say: “say something about the ‘big beasts’.” I engage with a lot of women’s organisations and I am not prepared to call Nicola Sturgeon a big beast, but if she stands up straight I will call her nearly big. No one can doubt her ability and her work as the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. I predict that she will carry out her new role in Government with the same level of commitment and determination. On the other hand, I have no qualms whatever about calling Alex Neil a big beast. The baton has been handed from an extremely effective and courageous health secretary to someone who will easily carry it forward. Knowing Alex as well as I do, I am more than confident that the baton and the health service are safe in that highly motivated and caring big beast’s hands. It is a big job, but it is a big man who has got the job. I will say a few words about those who are demitting office, beginning with Stewart Stevenson, who is sitting on my right. Even under the most difficult circumstances, he has behaved in a polite and courageous manner to all—not only to those in our party group, but to members across the chamber. Well done, Stewart. I have sought counsel and personal assistance from Brian Adam many times. As a whip, he worked effectively without breaking bones or hearts—some attribute for a chief whip. Bruce Crawford is a man of the utmost integrity. He is someone who makes the deals and sticks to them. He knows all that there is to know about the Parliament—procedure, process and even the building—but Bruce is never a know-all. To all three, I offer my personal thanks as the convener of the Parliamentary Bureau. I could not put on record the assistance that they have all given to me. I really do wish them all the best in the years to come. [Applause.]

I declare an interest, because I intend to speak about the auto industry. I come from an auto business background. When I contemplated employing a young person, my prerequisite for a candidate was that they should be willing to learn. I never sought people who had already been trained, but much preferred to provide training that would benefit the individual and produce the skill set that was required for the job. No doubt other employers have a preference for ready-trained people, but in my experience the other approach is far better. However, training is vital if we want the best from the workforce. That view is supported by a recent survey of employers by the UK Commission for Employment and Skills. The commission found that employers in Scotland are more likely to invest in building the skills of their staff than are employers anywhere else in the UK. My business, which my son now runs, is involved in supplying the motor repair industry. In general, the motor trade has a fine record in recruiting and training young people, whether we are talking about mechanical engineers, coach painters, panel beaters or a host of technical professions which, I am sure, many members do not know about. However, because of the massive financial pressure on the sector that the credit crunch has caused, the auto industry as a whole, and the auto repair industry in particular, have had to guard and spend every penny wisely. I note that the modern apprenticeships scheme has been of significant assistance to the sector. I find it difficult to understand Labour’s rhetoric on modern apprenticeships. First, it wrecks the economy and then it cuts the Scottish budget while continually demanding that the Scottish Government spend even more money than it did when it was in administration. Whether it is for health, local government or education, Labour politicians demand more. Labour negotiated with the Scottish Government the number of modern apprenticeships that it believed were required. The Government provided funding for even more, but Labour still voted against modern apprenticeships. What is even worse is that despite voting against that increased number the Labour Party is still demanding more—not so much like Oliver Twist, more like Stan and Oliver.

Of course the cost of not acting is greater, but Kezia Dugdale can see what this Government is actually doing: it is acting to the best of its ability. The modern apprenticeships scheme is welcome. It is welcomed by young people in particular—mostly because they know that it is not a kiddie-on scheme, but one that comes with a job attached, offering them some security for the future. I well remember the dreaded yoppers scheme, in which young people who were looking for jobs or careers were simply used and abused in a scheme that led to nowhere and offered no security. This Government has a different priority for young people across our country and for our industry. However, it is constrained in terms of what it would like to do and what it can do. If only it had the levers of power over the economy, the difference that could be made would be far greater. That said, the evidence speaks for itself and the Government’s commitment to young people can be measured in spades. Last year, the Scottish Government invested about £72 million to support more than 26,400 modern apprenticeships—which exceeded the target of 25,000. Based on those figures, the Scottish Government is on track to deliver the 125,000 modern apprenticeships that it promised to the people of Scotland over this parliamentary session. Compared to other countries in Europe, where youth unemployment is rising and their Governments are struggling to tackle the problem, Scotland is faring comparatively well. It would be naive to say that we have solved the problem, but I am proud that this Government is committed to tackling it and to ensuring that young Scots are able to advance themselves, be it through further education or through the workplace. I fully endorse the Government’s position and I urge everyone to support the motion.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what preparations are being made to mark St Andrew’s day 2012. (S4O-01058)

What discussions have taken place with local authorities in order for the day to be marked across the country?

In paragraphs (3)(a) and (3)(b) and subsection (4) of the new section that amendment 5 seeks to insert in the bill, the principal word is “estimate”. My question is: who will estimate the profits? Will it be the VAT man, the Inland Revenue or the business owner? If the business owner is to do it, how would he or she manage the process? How would they quantify costs against profit? What kind of quagmire would a business get into if it had to separate on the basis of profit hundreds of lines of drinks, all of different prices, from thousands of other lines? They would need to attach all costs to make the sums work, estimate or not. Items such as delivery, personnel, discounts, quantities, business rates, rents, wages and many other costs would need to be split to come up with the estimate that amendment 5 calls for. Richard Simpson’s proposed new section defines the perceived profits to be those that exist at the final point of sale, but what would happen if the producer retained the profit but, because of the price increase from the manufacturer, the retailer doubled the price? Would the estimate be based on what was charged by the retailer prior to the producer’s increase? What authority could go to court to challenge an estimate? Labour’s television language is about supermarkets making big profits, but its amendments would affect all licence holders. Labour has consistently rubbished minimum pricing on the basis that the drinks industry would make huge profits from it, but the drinks industry has threatened court action to stop minimum pricing. I can just see the next meeting of Diageo shareholders, with the chairman announcing that the dastardly Government had tried to push big profits the company’s way, but that the board was magnificent in stopping it. The profits question that Labour has posed—which is about playing to the gallery—does not add up, nor do Labour’s amendments. No wonder Labour members do not want to say how it would work.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to tackle obesity among schoolchildren. (S4O-01016)

Will the minister consider additional initiatives, which could be rolled out across Scotland, to remove vending machines that contain unhealthy food and drink from schools?

Obesity is a highly complex matter and a difficult subject to tackle, due to the number of factors that are involved. If we had a simple cause, we would have a simple solution. Two of the main causes of obesity are the type of food that is eaten and the overconsumption of food. It is difficult to define the facts in relation to that simple statement, however. For instance, those who exert themselves in physical exercise or sport can eat more, but they must pay close attention to what they digest and when. That is because there must be a balance between eating and exercise, as well as the need to eat at regular intervals. If that does not happen, the balance of weight can go hopelessly wrong, even for top athletes. One of the major challenges is the eating habits and exercise of children today. Again, that is not just about what they eat and when, although that is vital. The food must also be healthy. Another important aspect of today’s eating habits is the manner in which children and adults consume their food. How many of us have our meals sitting in front of the television at irregular intervals, rather than eating at the table in an organised manner at roughly the same time every day? That sounds easy to achieve, but working parents find that time is not on their side with regard to organising such regular meals. We must also contend with the modern entertainment that is so readily available to children. There is wall to wall children’s television, most of which is highly entertaining and highly successful in attracting audiences, from very young children to young adults. Children can also sit on the sofa with their hand-held consoles, game choices for which run into the tens of thousands and cater for practically everyone from cradle to grave. My daughter, who attends gymnastics three days a week, still has her eye firmly fixed on her Nintendo DS. She can master that at the same time as playing the part of Hannah Montana as she recites songs sung on TV by the US star. It takes her mum or me to encourage other pursuits to prevent overindulgence, so I know that such matters are difficult for many families. However, if we can take steps to make a difference and tackle long-term obesity, perhaps we can have some success with our children, as they are more likely to react positively if the message is consistent and the messenger is a person to be trusted. The starting point must therefore be with parents, guardians and schools. When it comes to schools, without a doubt a great passport to avoiding obesity is sport and exercise. It is good to know that 55 per cent of primary schools get two hours of PE per week, which compares with only 5 per cent of primary schools in 2005. Meanwhile, 60 per cent of secondary school pupils get at least two periods of PE a week. As has been highlighted, we must go further and do much better than we do now. I therefore welcome the assistance and support from sportscotland, which will add £3.4 million. That is bound to help to reach 100 per cent of pupils, a target that members certainly all want to achieve. We must explain the consequences of obesity to the responsible persons in a child’s life. There is the real prospect of very serious health conditions, such as diabetes, which can cause blindness and loss of limbs. I am fairly certain that many parents are completely unaware of the dangers involved in obesity in children and that they have no idea that they are literally feeding their children to death and, at the same time, not encouraging them to do at least the minimum amount of sport or exercise. Unfortunately, the statistics show that unhealthy parents who are overweight or obese are likely to have overweight or obese children, so we also need the parents to participate in sport and exercise. However, it should not be only doom and gloom stories that are portrayed. The benefits gained from tackling obesity and winning over it should be the overriding goal and target. It should not be about just how children look, but how they feel about themselves. Losing their extra weight will breed confidence and will benefit not only their health, but their outlook in life and their future prospects. I believe that girls, who may be mothers, will respond positively to the message that they can look forward to being an adult, to a healthy life and to bringing children of their own into the world. It is just possible that the children can lead the way. If we can get it right with our children, perhaps they will lead their parents to a better, healthier life.

What makes you think that?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to increase the usage of local libraries and museums. (S4O-00851)

The cabinet secretary might be aware that visits to libraries in West Dunbartonshire have increased by 20 per cent as a result of a variety of measures that centre on linking with community groups and learners and which allow libraries to be the one-stop shop for information. Can I encourage the Government to look at the West Dunbartonshire model to see whether there is scope for similar plans that will lead to libraries across Scotland becoming once again nationally recognised as the first place for people to go for a variety of information?

4. To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government has had with the United Kingdom Government on alcohol pricing. (S4F-00594)

I welcome the Scottish Government’s leadership on the issue. As the First Minister will be aware, Scots drink nearly a quarter more than their counterparts in England and Wales, and that fuels the much higher levels of alcohol-related harm here. Indeed, it has been estimated that the total cost of alcohol misuse to Scotland averages £3.6 billion every year. Does he agree that it is important to find consensus on such an important cause? Does he, as I do, find it difficult to understand and, frankly, pathetic that the only party that continues to oppose minimum pricing is the Scottish Labour Party?

Will the member take an intervention? We are quite close so the member will hear me.

Thanks very much for that, Presiding Officer. What impact does the member think the increase in postage will have and who will that affect?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what the financial impact is on its 2012-13 budget of PPP/PFI repayments. (S4O-00808)

Recently, there have been calls to buy back PFI and PPP contracts. Is it feasible to buy them back? I very much doubt that it is. What would the overall cost of doing so be to the Scottish Government?

I come to the debate as a lifelong non-drinker. However, I have no hang-ups about alcohol consumption; in fact, I like going into pubs because I enjoy the atmosphere and the chat. While I am there, I drink the other national drink: Irn-Bru. As they say in Paisley, alcohol is not my cup of tea. During the recent parliamentary elections, I was asked, from time to time, about my views on minimum pricing. Of course, my answer was that I support it, based on my experience in business, which is that when the price of a commodity is increased, the result is a decrease in the amount of it that is sold. Although I was aware of the Sheffield study and the projected outcomes, I was already convinced by how markets work. My stock answer to people was that we had to give minimum pricing a go in any case, because of the serious effects of overconsumption of alcohol on people’s health and because of alcohol’s direct and indirect involvement in violent assaults and high levels of antisocial behaviour. Supermarkets’ strategy is to identify products that they can pile high and sell cheap in order to entice more people into the store. Alcohol has been a dominant loss leader in that context, and when minimum pricing kicks in, the supermarkets will simply swap to another commodity to draw in the crowds. The only product that I know of that defies the laws of gravity—in the business sense—is shares. The more expensive they are, the more that are sold—particularly to financial institutions, which queue up to buy them. Now that I have had the benefit of following the Health and Sport Committee’s work, my views have been reinforced. The vast weight of opinion that the committee heard was in favour of minimum pricing, and the best argument from people who are opposed to the approach has been that it will not work as well as we think it will. We have been told that the introduction of minimum pricing will create a bonus for retailers—the alcohol windfall, as it is commonly known. That is a totally bogus claim that is without foundation; submissions to the committee never actually said that there will be such a bonus, but only that there might be such a bonus. I will explain why I think the claim is bogus. When minimum pricing is introduced, consumption will fall. That means that production will fall and costs per unit will increase. Does any member who has a basic knowledge of market forces really think that manufacturers will be generous enough not to put up costs at the factory to compensate for lost revenues on sales? I do not think so. What will happen is that as margins are calculated they will be shared relative to costs. I predict a profit-neutral situation, within reason, for all concerned, whatever sector we are talking about. No one will get particularly rich as a result of the policy. I find it extraordinary that Labour members who heard the high-quality evidence that came from Canada are still not in favour of minimum pricing. I acknowledge that there is a massive difference between the Scottish plan and the Canadian plan; the Canadians put the price up for financial gain and to increase revenue, whereas our policy is for the benefit of public health. At any rate, differences to do with who and where do not matter; the research into what happens when the price of alcohol goes up is the defining evidence. Professor Stockwell has shown without a shadow of doubt that when price goes up consumption goes down and that, ultimately, harm goes down, too. In his evidence to the committee he said: “Theoretically, you are in a much better position. Yours is the purest approach because you are starting from the public health aspect. Usually, minimum prices are introduced to protect Government revenue while health considerations, if they were ever there, are not at the forefront of people’s minds.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 10 January 2012; c 792.] He also said: “Many people object to pricing strategies, but minimum pricing is perhaps one of the least objectionable strategies. I am sure that that is why you are considering it in Scotland. All pricing strategies have the most impact on heavy drinkers, but minimum pricing especially targets heavier and younger drinkers, because they mostly prefer cheaper drinks. Minimum prices can be adjusted so that they are higher for more hazardous products, which the Scottish Government proposes to do.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 10 January 2012; c 785.] Labour has produced a fig leaf to cover up the fact that it has ignored extremely high-quality evidence on minimum pricing, in particular from Professor Stockwell. However, I am sure that as the debate in England crystallises around the need for minimum pricing and Ed Miliband follows—as he is bound to do—David Cameron on the matter, Labour will do what it always does and follow orders.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I conclude by saying to the cabinet secretary, in the Gaelic, slàinte mhath, which sums up her great intentions on the issue: good health for the people.

I agree with Jackson Carlaw because, just last week, I got my front teeth knocked out. He was not being clairvoyant. No one in the committee was definitive: the words used were “may” and “could”, not “will”. The committee did not say that there was evidence on what exactly would happen. My argument may have been the opposite of someone else’s; I was offering a different perspective, that was all.

It is worth noting that, when the inquiry was first proposed, the intention was to hold a one-day evidence session. Because of the serious nature of the incidents that led to the inquiry, I felt strongly that a one-day inquiry would not be adequate to investigate fully the issues surrounding care for the elderly or to do justice to those who were affected by the tragic events at the Elsie Inglis nursing home last year. The decision not to hold a one-day inquiry was criticised in the press. I leave it to the readers of our report to draw their own conclusions as to whether one day would have been enough. I will highlight a number of issues that relate to the report. First, the prospect of having oversight of the financial viability of the multimillion pound corporations that are involved in the care home sector presents us with serious challenges. It is certainly simple that, before a licence is issued, a full and in-depth financial disclosure should be provided. However, in the world of private business—big or small—difficulties can and do arise in a short space of time. For obvious reasons, that is normally kept top secret by private companies, whether in the care home sector or in other sectors, at least in the short term. Nevertheless, the fact that the issue presents us with challenges is not a good reason not to explore how we can be better informed so that intervention can be orderly rather than alarming. Secondly, it is clear from the evidence that we require not only a dedicated staff for the care sector but a well-trained and well-rewarded professional workforce. However, training and higher wages come at a price. It is difficult for me to imagine how both aims can be achieved without additional new moneys. In my view, those goals can be realised only by reducing the profits that the companies that own care homes enjoy, or by raising the charges to those who use the services, which means individuals or local authorities. An indication of the urgency that is needed can be seen from all the predictions from informed commentators, including the Scottish Government, that the number of people who will be in need of such care will continue to grow, if not explode, in the next few years. The issues that are raised in the report highlight significant challenges for us to tackle in the not-too-distant future. I can say without overstating the situation that, given the cuts to our budget from Westminster, we will need to be inventive to make the difference. Not to put too fine a point on it, sooner or later, some of us will be in need of such care. Our decisions will affect the whole lot of us. Given the Parliament’s record on these matters, I am confident that we can get it right. I commend the report to the Parliament.

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether there are constitutional issues on which it will not compromise in negotiations. (S4O-00729)

This week, another organisation was established to campaign for additional powers for the Parliament as a substitute for independence. Others said that there are lines in the sand that they would not cross, only to find them blown away with wind from the south. Is the Government open-minded about including such proposals in the forthcoming referendum should further detail on them be provided?

I, too, am pleased that the Parliament has taken time to discuss this important issue, as that in itself will raise awareness among the general population and help to combat this scourge in our society. In March 2008, I led a debate in the Parliament to mark the anniversary of the United Kingdom signing the Council of Europe Convention on Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings. I was delighted that the convention was finally ratified by the UK Government in December of that year, which brought about the rights of victims of trafficking in domestic law. Since that time, action has been undertaken by the Scottish Government and the UK Government, for which they should both be commended. The Scottish Government has increased funding for the trafficking awareness-raising alliance and the Migrant Helpline, both of which support suspected victims of trafficking. In 2006-07, funding for those agencies was £39,469. In the financial year 2010-11, they received funding to the tune of £750,000, which allowed them to support nearly 130 individuals. John Finnie mentioned that. I am sure that all the parties in the Parliament welcome that funding increase, as the issue is too important to be used for political gain. The support that those agencies offer is fundamental, because victims require a great deal of support and understanding, especially as many of them do not speak English, are scared and sometimes ashamed and need immediate care. Non-governmental organisations play an important and vital role. Victims of trafficking are unlikely to disclose information to police officers or immigration officials for a number of reasons, including threats from traffickers; shame and guilt at having been involved in commercial sexual exploitation; concern about their insecure immigration status; fear of the corruption of home-state officials; and suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder. I encourage the Scottish Government, the police and international and transnational agencies to work closely together. That is equally important, as the approach to the problem must be unified, or our efforts might be wasted and many more young lives might be ruined. We all know that more must be done not only in Scotland, but internationally. Preventing human trafficking must be seen as a priority for the international community. Only when we have achieved that will we be in a better situation to move forward. Human trafficking has a worldwide, well-connected criminal network and is a professional and formidable force. It is often connected with other criminal activities, so we must pursue a joint approach. That is why I welcome the additional funding of £4 million over 2009 to 2011 that was allocated to the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency from the Scottish Government in a bid to tackle organised crime and to set up Scotland’s first dedicated expert resource to build the necessary intelligence to support and improve human trafficking investigation. Human trafficking—or should I say slavery, as other members have—comes in many different forms. It involves women who are trafficked for the sex trade, manual workers, farm workers, child pickpockets and children who are trafficked for sexual abuse. According to evidence that was given to the House of Commons, a person was even trafficked for the fishing industry in Scotland. In a modern society, we must stand together to combat those who seek to undermine our values and beliefs by treating fellow human beings as disposable objects. That is why I very much welcome the Scottish Government’s announcement that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice will host a summit with key delivery partners to refresh the strategic direction for policy and delivery. Following that, I am sure that consensus will be found across the Parliament and the country on how best to combat the despicable and evil practice that is known as human trafficking. We all have a part to play—politicians, non-governmental organisations, international agencies and ordinary people alike. If we all work together, I am sure that we will take another step forward in preserving our society and at the same time protecting some of the most vulnerable people in the world. I commend the motion to the Parliament.

13. I apologise to you, Presiding Officer, and to everybody in the chamber for being a bit late for questions, as I was attending an event in the education centre. To ask the Scottish Government what funding it provides to local organisations seeking to get people in Clydebank and Milngavie into work. (S4O-00651)

The minister is no doubt aware that, in its recent budget, West Dunbartonshire Council allocated funding to create more than 250 jobs for young people through help for small businesses and the voluntary sector. Will the Scottish Government work with the council to ensure that that scheme succeeds and to enable all local authorities to use it as a template for assisting young people into work?

Life is full of contradictions and ironies. The first Scottish claim of right was the declaration of Arbroath in 1320, which was signed not by the people, but on their behalf. That document was the basis of the American declaration of independence. Things have moved on, but the principles of the declaration live on. In all democracies it is accepted that the rights of the people rest with the people and not with a few unelected lords. The claim of right in the 1980s arose from the hopelessness in Scotland that was the result of the ineffectiveness of our elected representatives in preventing the ravages of Margaret Thatcher’s Tory Government as it dismantled Scotland’s industrial base. It is good to put on record what we believe, whether we are talking about the declaration of Arbroath in 1320 or the claim or right in 1989, but it seems from Lord Wallace’s recent actions that he did not believe what he signed. Is it not ironic that one Wallace went to London and was hung, drawn and quartered because he believed in the principle of a claim of right, but another Wallace goes to London and threatens Scotland and its people with the law if we try to implement the principles of the claim of right that he signed? The first Wallace had the full backing of the Scottish people; the second Wallace has the backing of the London establishment, which appointed him to the Lords with no democratic accountability to the Scottish people. London is certainly full of contradictions and ironies. When the people of Libya expressed their claim of right in the Arab spring rising, London went to war with the Gaddafi regime to enforce their demands, with David Cameron leading the charge. More recently, the London Government declared its utmost support for the right of the people of the Falkland Islands—and those people alone—to decide their future. Sovereignty lies with a handful of people in those islands, but when it comes to Scotland, which is allegedly an equal partner in the United Kingdom, London has a very different stance. We, the people of Scotland, have no rights of our own; we have only those rights that the London Government grants us. The prevailing belief in London is that it should have a say on the question that is asked and on when the vote is taken. During the 1980s it was widely acknowledged that there was a democratic deficit. The Tory Government that was in power had little support in Scotland and the feeble 50 Labour members of Parliament were powerless to oppose the Government—indeed, they endorsed its right to rule through their continued support for the union. Today, a Tory-Lib Dem Government that has little support in Scotland is given legitimacy to govern us by the unionist Labour Party. The continuing democratic deficit is illustrated by the presence on Scottish soil of the biggest arsenal of nuclear weapons in Europe. What is London going to do with Scottish weapons of mass destruction that we want nothing to do with? It says that it will charge us for the privilege of disposal and clean-up. We really could not make it up, could we? I am disappointed that the unionists in the Scottish Parliament—there are plenty of them—who so often declare that they are proud to be Scots and British at the same time, have been prepared to sit quietly through the outrageous attacks of the past couple of weeks. I am not asking them to give up their belief in the union and I am not asking them not to argue forcefully for the union, but I expect the legitimate claim of right of all Scottish people, whether they are for or against the union, to be treated with much more respect. Much more important to me even than independence is the freedom of our people to decide their future without outside interference.

I am not even going to answer that. I will sit back down and the member can come back in with something meaningful.

I am proud of the principles in the declaration of Arbroath. I commend the motion, which has my full support, to the Parliament.

Will the member take an intervention?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what analysis it has made of the latest recycling figures published by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. (S4O-00519)

Although some councils such as West Dunbartonshire Council are now recycling more than 52 per cent of household waste and are therefore recycling more than they send to landfill, others are still not over the 50 per cent mark. How can the Scottish Government, while taking into account any mitigating local circumstances, ensure that best practice is being shared among councils so that others can learn from good examples and achieve similar success?

What Mr McLetchie is pointing out is crystal clear, but with regard to rape cases, one effect of the requirement for corroboration is that many people who are raped end up not bringing complaints because of the court process. The removal of the requirement would mean that women—and men, for that matter—who have been raped would be more likely to come forward and make a serious complaint.

My intervention also gives me an opportunity to say that it was remiss of me not to have declared earlier an interest as a board member of Rape Crisis Scotland. We would all agree that, throughout the world, conviction rates for rape are very low. That is a phenomenon, and it is a problem that we need to grasp. Whether it is due to the requirement for corroboration or otherwise, we have a lot of problems in that regard. I agree with what Mr McLetchie said; he was right on the money. However, it is significant that the number of people who come forward to report is so low, even before we get to the stage of charges and then conviction. Does Mr Kelly agree that we start from very low point??

I know that the minister is aware that I adopted a daughter, so I have some knowledge of this issue. Does she agree that time still requires to be taken in particular to carry out home assessments to check the suitability of those who want to adopt a child? That time should not be cut in any way. We must be very careful about how we deal with those who will benefit from having a child who is not their birth child. We should take a scythe to the bureaucracy that is involved thereafter, but we should not cut the time for the former part.

Thank you for that, Presiding Officer. I have to make a declaration of interest. I own a company—my son runs it now—that deals with the motor trade, and my contribution will be about transport matters. The only predictable thing about the Scottish weather is the fact that it is unpredictable, unlike in other countries where the weather has seasons and patterns that can generally be anticipated and planned for. Such countries can put in place a strategy along with the necessary resources to implement it. Scotland and the other countries in these islands face an almost impossible task in anticipating the weather conditions, because of the gulf stream. With my passion for skiing and snowboarding, I have first-hand experience of the ways in which other countries deal with adverse weather conditions. Travelling in and around Lake Tahoe on the border between California and Nevada on a good number of visits, I have driven on roads where the snow has been at least 10ft deep on each side of the road. I do not mean snow drifts; I am talking about snow that goes on for miles and miles. Depending on the severity of the conditions, the measures taken by the authorities include restricting access to roads to vehicles that have snow tyres or insisting on snow chains, or simply deciding to close the road. However, the road is closed before the hostile weather sets in, so that vehicles seldom become stranded. The authorities can take such measures only because the weather pattern is predictable, and they can make weather forecasts that are accurate, almost to the hour and within a 10-mile radius. They also have long-term weather patterns that repeat themselves year after year, and their weather conditions can stay the same for periods of three months or more. That allows the authorities to gear up and enables them to invest in equipment that has been made for the job and which can be used year after year. The scenario is the same in the Alps and Scandinavia, as well as in other places across the world in which the weather patterns are predictable and can be forecast. The authorities have a great deal of certainty about the equipment that they need to invest in so that they can tackle the weather conditions. Such predictable weather patterns also allow the general public to gear up for bad weather by using snow chains and snow tyres. The picture is very different in Scotland. Members might not be aware of it but my business, which my son now runs, started selling tyres in 1974. To date we have sold and fitted almost half a million tyres, but we have not sold a single solitary set of snow chains. In other countries, the public certainly take their responsibilities seriously. Our problem in Scotland is that we can and do get weather similar to that in Lake Tahoe, the Alps and Scandinavia, but it can all come and go within a 24-hour period. Last year’s extended period of bad weather will not be the last, but our forecasters cannot tell us definitively when it is likely to return. Being a snowboarding buff, I well remember 10 years ago when all the pundits told us that we had seen the last of winter ski resorts in Scotland because of global warming. That was some forecast, eh? I very much agree with how the Scottish Government is dealing with our very unpredictable weather, particularly in using the winter week initiative to alert and inform the public in advance of winter itself, and I certainly hope that the public respond accordingly. Unless we are prepared to spend even more millions of pounds, over and above the millions that are already being spent on the current strategy, on equipment that is used in countries such as America—

I was about to make that very point. I do not think that the public or anyone else, particularly the Opposition, would want us to spend millions of pounds on equipment that might be used for the kind of three-week period of weather that we had last year, which was a record for Scotland. We could have dealt with that weather if we had brought in the equipment that they use in America. However, my challenge to members is for them to stand up and tell me whether that equipment will be used this coming year, when it will be used, how long it will be used for and when it will be used again after that. That is the problem. I agree with the Government’s flexible approach. The people we should really speak to about the weather are those who drive the trucks that keep—

I conclude by agreeing with the minister. There is no point in looking at what happens elsewhere, because those people are geared up to deal with their weather patterns. Their strategies would not last a week in the face of our diverse weather. We should continue with the current strategy and use all the resources that we have in local government and Transport Scotland. Of course, the one thing that we cannot rely on is the public. The public expect someone else to do this job for them. That is a big issue that the minister and the Parliament need to work on. In America, people—not hundreds but millions of them—have snowplough attachments for their vehicles. We have all got to change and get back to the days when we took responsibility for, say, clearing our own pavements. I encourage the Government to keep going in this direction and hope that it can get the public to engage in its strategy.

Did Richard Lyle buy chains?

11. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government on the future of public sector pensions. (S4O-00194)

I have been approached by a high number of constituents who have expressed concerns about this issue. Will the cabinet secretary assure those constituents that the Scottish Government will do all that it can, within its very limited powers, to fight their corner and lobby the British Government to scrap these proposals altogether?

2. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports local businesses to recruit apprentices as part of its modern apprenticeship programme. (S4O-00155)

I thank the minister for that full answer. How will the Scottish Government ensure that opportunities for modern apprenticeships will support the recruitment of young people and help to address the high levels of youth unemployment in my constituency?

I add my voice in support of my good friend, Hugh Henry, and thank him for bringing the debate to the chamber. It was with a great sense of honour and pride that I attended the funeral of the late Jimmy Reid on behalf of the SNP parliamentary group. I was ushered to my seat along with the provost of West Dunbartonshire, Denis Agnew, who is a Clydebank councillor. Just a row or so in front were some of the stalwarts of the shop stewards committee of the UCS work-in. Around the church were the great and good of Scottish public life, and all were there to honour a hero. I had the privilege of talking with Jimmy Reid, particularly at SNP conferences. With hindsight, I would have benefited from having many more discussions with him. Each and every one of those who spoke at Jimmy’s funeral did so with enormous talent and skill. Each interlinked their personal contributions and it seemed as if it was choreographed. Each speaker highlighted Jimmy’s central role, along with Jimmy Airlie, in the work-in that defined a generation. A few weeks ago, I attended a launch of and a reading of excerpts from a book written by David Betteridge. It brings together verses, happenings and sentiments from those who participated directly in the action or who were personally affected by it, such as the families of the strikers who were doing without by necessity, all for the greater good and common weal. The location for the book launch was very fitting as it was held in Clydebank College, which now stands on part of the site of the famous John Brown’s shipyard. Like most people in Clydebank, I am sure that Jimmy Reid would have preferred that the shipyard was still onsite and up and running, but if anything was to replace it, I am sure that Jimmy, with his thirst for learning, would have thought that a college was an adequate and fitting substitute. Adjacent to the college lies the vast wasteland of the former John Brown’s shipyard, but it will not be there for long. One of the pleasing things that brings me hope for the future of the community and the town of Clydebank, where the pendulum of opportunity has swung in the wrong direction for too long, is that those who know best the value of that great and mighty site have made ambitious plans for its regeneration. The fact that there are a number of competing plans, which are indeed ambitious, can only be good for Clydebank’s future. Jimmy Cloughley, a former shop steward and notable speaker at Jimmy Reid’s funeral, was good enough to show me a photograph of the shop stewards committee, shoulder to shoulder, at the head of the march of the giants of the UCS as it passed down Union Street. The giants were on the march to fight for their men and women, their families and a greater idea. They were taking on the powerful, for the right reasons. The giants are still marching. Men such as Bob Dickie and Jimmy Cloughley, who were key to the UCS work-in, are still fighting the all-powerful. They are still looking after their men and women, families and communities, and taking on the multinational insurance companies that are doing everything they can to abdicate their duty and responsibility to those suffering from pleural plaques and other asbestos-related illnesses. The giants are still marching with the resolve of Clyde-built steel, but they do so with a heart forged in gold.

I am very much a supporter of the European Court of Human Rights. The history of Europe tells us that individuals and communities have been persecuted, and that has not stopped—it continues. I firmly believe that the individual should be protected from the state, so that they can get on with their lives without being picked on. However, my support is not unqualified. I have grave reservations regarding some aspects of how human rights legislation is implemented. Voices have been raised in that regard, and I point in particular to the Tories, who are consistent in their approach to some of the issues that have arisen. I call this the European straight-banana syndrome, whereby measures are so bizarre when they are implemented that they bring into question the whole system of human rights. Having said that, I am still very much a supporter. I am confident that the areas of concern will be examined, and that things will be changed. The establishment of the Supreme Court has created a rights issue in Scottish terms. Some members have mentioned the treaty of union. In effect, the United Kingdom has an unwritten constitution, but the nearest thing that we have to a written constitution is the treaty of union and the act of union that followed. The treaty itself discusses the parity between Scots and English law, and with good reason. That is not there, as some members might think, as some gift to the Scots—as some protection from which only the Scots would benefit. It is the United Kingdom, and the two legal systems are entirely distinct from each other. It would be farcical if the law in England was interfered with by Scots law. That has been the case for 300 years, and the arrangements have worked extremely satisfactorily. However, we now have what is in effect an English model and system interfering with Scots law. In English law, for instance, there is the House of Lords, which has no jurisdiction whatever in Scotland. I can prove as much because in a case that I eventually took to the European Court of Human Rights I was required first to exhaust all domestic legal remedies. I was not required to go to the House of Lords; after I took the case through the Scottish courts, I went straight to Europe, which demonstrates that Europe itself recognises the uniqueness of Scots law. No matter how many good, hard-working Scottish judges sit on it, the Supreme Court is still, in my view, an English court. I find it strange that, even though I am a firm believer that the only way that Scotland can move forward is through independence, I am, because of the treaty of union, standing here having to defend the union while the very folk who are supposed to be unionists are letting it disintegrate willy-nilly by allowing all this to happen. Given that there is no way the treaty of union can be amended in law, I believe that this court has been set up in a fundamentally unlawful way. I challenge my own ministers and the Law Society of Scotland to go back to first principles—or, in other words, the treaty of union. If English law, as I see it, is gazumping Scots law in this fashion, it should stop doing so immediately in order to protect the union.

The member misdirects the chamber. Members on this side of the chamber did not suggest that Scots law has never evolved. It has evolved from within and has taken some leads from other jurisdictions. The distinction here is that it is interference rather than evolution.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the increase in VAT has had on the health budget for 2011-12. (S4O-00096)

Given that that additional burden is being placed on a fixed budget, should the increase not be termed a cut? Will the Scottish Government be seeking dialogue with the United Kingdom Government to address the matter?

The speeches by new members from across the chamber have been excellent. To be honest, we would never know that they had just joined the Parliament, which augurs well for the future. The benefits of participating in sport are immeasurable. I am not sure what is more important—self-esteem, health, peer group interaction or team building—as all the benefits are vital in building people’s confidence. The benefits are not age related. No matter what sport someone plays or what their age is, all those features play a part. For some people, sport is about being the very best. For others, it is about participation, recreation, fitness or just having a bit of fun. On being the best, we know that we are looking for the best tomorrow from our own superstar, Andy Murray. What I will say is not peculiar to him; I am certain that the same applies to other people who play at his level—such as his opponents Federer, Nadal and Djokovic—and their families. It is about not just the individuals but the family commitment. Andy Murray’s mother, Judy, and his brother have given up much in their lives for participation at the highest level. We should consider that commitment when a player of such quality plays. He is my own superstar, but of course sportspeople at that level in all sports dedicate their lives to their activity. For other people, participating for recreation in activities such as golf, bowls, running and football is also competitive, although it is not at the same level as that of the Andy Murrays of the world. I used to climb, but I am afraid that I have given up because of my age. Now, I snowboard—I am commonly called the oldest snowboarder in town. Of course, when I have on my helmet, my goggles and my gear, nothing gives me away, except the creaky bones. I must tell members that I have been asked to join the Scottish snowboarding team—to drive the van. When I was young, I had fun playing rounders and five-a-side football and going in for a quick dip. I did not know that I was participating in sport; I was just doing what I really liked to do. However, what we are talking about has a serious side. For example, a bowling club in East Dunbartonshire pays £1,000 a week to rent a property from the council. For the Official Report, I repeat that the club pays £1,000 a week for that privilege. The bowlers are not all senior people—the age profile includes quite a lot of young people, but quite a lot of the bowlers are elderly. A question mark hangs over the sports centre involved. A decision might be taken to build a new centre, but the council does not have enough money to provide for that. If the sports centre closed and the elderly bowlers had no place to go, what would be the cost and who would pay it? The council certainly would not pay—the health service would pick up the tab, because if elderly people are not engaged or out and about doing what makes them happy, their health deteriorates and the health board has to pay money to keep people who deteriorate much earlier than normal. It is not all about investment and money; as I said earlier, it is about how families engage. It is about the encouragement that families give and about parents spending the necessary time with their children. I have a 10-year-old, so I know what it is like. She is involved in gymnastics at the sports centre that I mentioned. There is always a wobble—a time when she says that she wants to play on her Nintendo, to watch TV or to play computer games, and really does not want to go to gymnastics three nights a week and on Saturday to hone her skills. We must be strong and say, “No, that is what you have to do.” We must encourage her. Unfortunately, at present, families too often listen to children instead of guiding them. It is not the Parliament’s responsibility to ensure that children are always engaged, it is parents’ responsibility. Parents must not leave it to schools to ensure that that happens. It is a rounded equation. It is about our engaging with families and children and encouraging them to continue. That is vital for their wellbeing in the long run.

I pay tribute to Des McNulty for bringing this debate to the chamber and I congratulate him on a fine speech. I associate myself with every word in his excellent and heartfelt speech. I attended the funeral in Clydebank a few weeks ago of my uncle, Gilbert Martin. Someone spoke to me at the funeral about my grandfather, who was also called Gilbert Martin. I am named after him. However, I did not know that my grandfather, who lived in Byron Street in Partick, had travelled to Clydebank for a week—on foot most of the time—to help during and after the blitz. I did not know anything about that and I now know that none of my family knew about it either. I suppose that if my uncle had not died I would still know nothing about it. My grandfather was really intelligent and was the kind of person someone would go to if they had a problem or wanted to know something, because he was well read, highly intellectual and knew almost everything. He was one of the folk it was good to go and speak to. However, he never spoke about that incident in his life. Apparently, the scenes were too horrific and he wanted to forget about it. I attended the commemorative events in Clydebank that Des McNulty spoke about. There were many moving contributions; for example, the moderator of the Church of Scotland delivered an excellent and touching sermon that gave us an insight into some of the things that happened in Clydebank. Another thing that got to me was when four schoolchildren read a poem that illustrated that they understood not only what was happening but what actually did happen. I cannot remember where, from that weekend of different events, I picked up the story of the Germans knocking Clydebank down but never knocking the stuffing out of the people of Clydebank, as was shown by how they conducted themselves. For example, one of the first towns in the United Kingdom to twin with a German city was—believe it or not—Clydebank. Although the Germans knocked the houses down, they left the community of Clydebank standing. One of the strongest points that Des McNulty made was that the community in Clydebank feels that the blitz is still an untold story and that their message has not been properly told. In that context, I pay tribute to the events that have taken place and the magnificent way in which all in West Dunbartonshire Council have shed light on Clydebank. My grandfather had justifiable and good reasons not to talk about the Clydebank blitz. I support that type of sentiment, which was of its time. However, I take a different view from my grandfather because the circumstances are different. I have a good reason to speak in this debate, because I want to celebrate the spirit in the great town and community that is Clydebank. By doing that, and through Des McNulty bringing the subject to Parliament for debate, we will help to shed light on an event that should be highlighted and brought to the attention of not only Scotland but the whole world, to show the type of community that Clydebank is. I do not come from Clydebank; I come from Springburn, but Clydebank has the same sense of community and is the kind of background in which I was shaped. This is a wonderful opportunity to do more to bring the Clydebank blitz to wider attention. The Parliament will help in doing that and will tell the Clydebank story.

I thank and am grateful to my committee for its work over the past few years. I am also grateful for the back-up that the clerking team, the lawyers and the officials have provided. Their help has been exceptionally good. I will speak first about financial resolutions, before I briefly cover rule changes on financial memoranda. The committee’s inquiry stemmed from stage 2 scrutiny of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill. The limited ability of the existing procedures to accommodate scrutiny of cost-bearing amendments became apparent when such amendments were lodged at stage 2 of that bill, and the matter was highlighted to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee by the Finance Committee. The rules relating to financial resolutions and the changes that the committee has proposed are technical in nature, which is probably why the chamber virtually emptied when the previous debate ended. I will begin with the background. At present, the Presiding Officer considers whether a bill requires a financial resolution, in advance of its being formally introduced. That process is based on the criteria that are set out in rule 9.12.3 of standing orders. For example, if a bill would significantly increase expenditure from the Scottish consolidated fund for a new or existing purpose, it requires a financial resolution. When the Presiding Officer deems that a financial resolution is required, it must be passed by Parliament to allow a bill to progress to the amendment stages. If it is disagreed to, the bill falls. Regardless of who introduces a bill, it is for the Government to decide whether to produce a financial resolution. The committee began its inquiry by considering the basis for the existing rules on financial resolutions. That included questioning whether financial resolutions were necessary at all and, if so, whether the Government should retain its current role in relation to them. The balance of submissions that we received supported the underlying principle on which the financial resolutions rule is based, which is that it is for the Government to retain responsibility for, and therefore control of, overall levels of expenditure and income. The committee agrees with that and does not propose any change to the Government’s role in relation to financial resolutions. The committee does, however, consider that there is scope for change in relation to the procedures for considering cost-bearing amendments when a bill does not require a financial resolution. Rule 9.12.6 provides that no proceedings may be taken on such amendments, which prevents Parliament from formally debating and agreeing cost-bearing amendments that fall below the threshold for triggering the need for a financial resolution. The proposed rule changes would allow such amendments to be debated and voted on at stages 2 and 3. The changes would also allow for stage 2 debate on amendments that, on their own, are too expensive to be made to the bill. That should serve a number of purposes. First, it would allow the member who lodged the amendment to put on record the policy that they advocate should appear in the bill. Secondly, it could generate sufficient support that the Government is persuaded to propose a financial resolution. Thirdly, the discussion on the policy could generate an idea for a new stage 3 amendment that might be less expensive and could therefore be made to the bill. Throughout the inquiry, the committee was aware that proposed changes to procedures should be proportionate. We were also aware that, so far, Parliament has considered only one bill in which the rules on cost-bearing amendments have proved to be limiting. Fundamental changes to established procedures would not be appropriate, so the committee has tried to keep changes to stage 3 procedure to a minimum. However, the committee has also been guided by the principle that there should be an opportunity to consider all cumulative cost-bearing amendments alongside each other, in addition to the usual consideration of amendments that are grouped according to subject. That is because when only a limited number of cumulative cost-bearing amendments can be agreed, decisions must be taken on the merit of each amendment and on whether one amendment is of more merit than another. The committee recommends that, when cost-bearing amendments are lodged, an additional debate should be held at the end of stage 2. Such amendments and any related amendments should be voted on after that debate. When that procedure requires to be followed, it will disrupt marshalled-list order consideration at stage 2, so the proposed rules have been carefully worded to keep such disruption to a minimum. On financial memoranda, the proposed rule change is far more straightforward than those for financial resolutions. It will extend the period of time that will be available for scrutiny of revised financial memoranda that require to be produced to reflect changes that have been made to a bill at stage 2. That will allow the Finance Committee and individual members the same period of time to scrutinise a financial memorandum as the Subordinate Legislation Committee has to scrutinise a delegated powers memorandum. I thank the Finance Committee for highlighting the need for consideration of the rules on financial resolutions and financial memoranda to the attention of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. I consider that the committee has, through in-depth deliberations, developed sensible rule changes that are proportionate and conducive to ensuring open debate on all policy matters, including those that have financial implications. I move, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 1st Report 2011 (Session 3), Financial Resolutions and scrutiny of revised Financial Memoranda (SP Paper 565), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 1 April 2011.

The change that is recommended in the committee’s second report of 2011 stems from the work that was undertaken by the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee. In its 2009 report, that committee recommended that there should be more regular scrutiny of the various bodies that are supported by the corporate body. The convener of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee asked the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee to consider introducing a scrutiny requirement into the standing orders. The bodies concerned are important ones: the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman, the Scottish Information Commissioner, Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People, the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner, the Scottish Human Rights Commission and the new commission for ethical standards in public life in Scotland, which will include the Standards Commission for Scotland and the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland. Although the SPCB has a role in scrutinising the efficiency of those bodies—for example, in setting budgets—the SPCB is not the right body to examine the way in which those bodies carry out their functions. The proposal for specific rules does not indicate that there has been no scrutiny of those bodies. We are aware that the Local Government and Communities Committee has regularly taken evidence from the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman and that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee has scrutinised Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People. My committee has regular evidence sessions with the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner and the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland on their annual reports. The commissioners in question have welcomed the opportunity to develop a closer relationship with the Parliament’s committees. However, the committee considered that it would be useful to ensure that scrutiny of SPCB-supported bodies takes place in a regular and systematic way. The focus of the scrutiny is on the functions of the supported bodies. The committee therefore concluded that scrutiny should be based on the documents that those bodies are required to lay before the Parliament—specifically, annual reports and strategic plans. The proposed changes to standing orders seek to balance the importance of such scrutiny against the other demands and priorities that committees have. We concluded that the most appropriate way in which to achieve that balance was to refer the relevant documents to committees for consideration. That will enable systematic scrutiny to take place but will also allow a committee the flexibility to decide on the right level of scrutiny within the broader context of its current work programme. That might range from a short discussion at a meeting to an evidence session with the body concerned, or a brief inquiry or report to Parliament if more significant issues arose. Referral of documents would be done by the clerk. We felt that that was the simplest solution, similar to the mechanism for referring subordinate legislation. If there were any doubt about where a particular report should be referred, standing orders provide for that to be resolved by the Parliamentary Bureau, which would designate a lead committee. That mechanism would be able to accommodate any future changes to the titles and remits of the Parliament's committees. The bodies carry out significant functions for the Parliament and the people of Scotland. Their operational independence is important and continues to be protected. However, it is also important that Parliament is satisfied that they are carrying out their functions as effectively as possible. We believe that the proposed changes to standing orders will allow committees to undertake appropriate and regular scrutiny of the SPCB-supported bodies. Finally, I would like to refer to another motion that is before the Parliament today, motion S3M-8088, which seeks the Parliament’s agreement to a minor adjustment to the changes that are being made to chapter 3A. That adjustment is to remove the words “the 2010 Act” from that chapter. Of the recent changes to standing orders, a number arise from two acts that were passed in 2010. Removing those words from chapter 3A and replacing them with the full title of the relevant act will ensure that the standing orders are interpreted clearly with regard to people’s ability to know which act applies to which rules. I move, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 2nd Report 2011 (Session 3), Scrutiny of SPCB supported bodies (SP Paper 566), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 1 April 2011.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding the effects of minimum pricing for alcohol. (S3O-13173)

Following a dramatic shift in England on support for the minimum pricing of alcohol, including among other parties that are represented in this chamber, does the cabinet secretary believe that the introduction of minimum pricing will become a reality in Scotland in the near future, and that it will help to tackle Scotland’s drinking culture and its negative influence on our society?

Will the minister comment on the fact that Des McNulty claims locally in Milngavie that he wants to protect town centres and small businesses from the power of Tesco, but when offered just that he votes against it in the Parliament in Edinburgh?

The failure of the Blawarthill project should allow for a major rethink. St Margaret’s hospice has an exemplary record of delivering a service of the highest possible quality in its property. There is certainly an expectation that that record should be taken into account before there are any further deliberations on the hospice or changes made.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what the impact of the reduced Scottish settlement is on the prospects for new housing in the West of Scotland. (S3O-12945)

What impact will yesterday’s budget have in the West of Scotland region on organisations such as Clydebank Re-built and on resources for housing projects?

When a vital issue such as the future and wellbeing of an institution such as the St Margaret of Scotland Hospice has been rightly debated many times, it is difficult to find something new to say about it or a spark that might keep the audience and members further informed. Over the past week, I have reviewed the contributions on the issue that colleagues and I have made in previous debates and in many appearances in front of the Public Petitions Committee. In truth, I found nothing new on the merits of the case to bring to the chamber, then—bingo—we got the statement from Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board on the Blawarthill development, part of which I will read for the benefit of members who have not seen it. It says: “NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has been advised by the private contractor responsible for the development of the Blawarthill site that they are no longer in partnership with Southern Cross, the company contracted with Glasgow City Council to run the nursing home which was to be built on the site. The contractor therefore cannot fulfil the contract to deliver the development proposal that would have seen 60 nursing home beds and 60 NHS continuing care beds—along with social housing provision—built at Blawarthill Hospital. The Health Board meeting on 15th February will receive a recommendation that this contractual situation means that the proposals for the site developed over a period of many years with strong support from the local community, Glasgow City Council, Yoker Housing Association and the NHS Board cannot now be delivered as planned. We are committed to finding an alternative approach to ensure that the planned social housing with Yoker Housing Association goes ahead and we have also offered to negotiate with Glasgow City Council to accommodate the 120-bed care home they have committed to develop in West Glasgow on the Blawarthill site. The Health Board will now consider the options for continuing care beds in the West of Glasgow and this review should be concluded by late summer.” Let me help the health board by telling it about the St Margaret of Scotland Hospice, which will provide it with a ready-made solution. I will pose a number of pertinent questions and answers. Are the hospice buildings of an adequate standard? They are either new or newly refurbished to a very high standard, with integral high-quality resources for patients, their families and members of staff. Does the service that is provided meet the requirements of the board? The hospice has sailed through every audit that has ever been carried out, and the plaudits that it has been given by patients and their families are of the highest order, so the answer is, of course, that St Margaret’s is as good as anywhere else, if not better. Are the costs of the hospice out of kilter with the provision? No questions or concerns about the costs relative to the services that are provided have ever arisen. Is the hospice’s location a factor from the point of view of accessibility? Is it outwith the catchment area, which would adversely affect its usefulness to the board? The hospice is located in the council ward directly next to the intended location of the establishment that is favoured by the health board. The distance between them is less than the distance that a child must walk to qualify for a free bus service. I do not have time to go through all the reasons why St Margaret’s comes up to the spec that is required by the board. It deserves the Parliament’s full support to retain the continuing care beds—not for the sake of it, but because it has carried out the job with distinction and continues to offer a service that is second to none. We still have time—there is still an opportunity to do the right thing. I have no hesitation whatever in thanking Des McNulty for yet again bringing the issue to the Parliament for debate. I declare without reservation that I fully support the motion.

Nonsense.

I thank the whole Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee team of officers, clerking staff and members. They have got down to their task and done the job very well, and it has been a pleasure to work with them. I include our two retirees, Angela Constance and Robert Brown. I thank all the people who have been in that team for the way in which they have conducted themselves and the amount of work that they have put in on behalf of the committee and the Parliament. I am pleased to open this debate on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s third report in 2010, which proposes changes to the standing orders in connection with the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Act 2010. Members will no doubt remember debating the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill last year. The 2010 act provides for the replacement of three transitional orders made under the Scotland Act 1998 that deal with largely technical matters. The main focus of the report is on changes to reflect the provisions of the act relating to subordinate legislation procedures. The report makes recommendations of three types: it recommends changes as a result of the act; it recommends other minor changes to subordinate legislation rules; and it makes two recommendations that do not require changes to the standing orders. I will first address changes arising from the 2010 act. The act introduces new terms relating to subordinate legislation, and the committee recommends that those terms should be included in rule 17.6 of the standing orders, which sets out how certain terms will be interpreted in the standing orders. The committee also recommends a change to rule 10.4, to include the new term “negative procedure” and to ensure consistency with the act by using the wording “the instrument be annulled” in relation to lead committee recommendations. The 2010 act increases the period between an instrument being laid and its coming into force from 21 days to 28 days. If an instrument is to be brought into force less than 28 days after being laid, an explanation must be provided to the Presiding Officer. To ensure that such explanations form part of the consideration of instruments, the committee recommends a new rule that would require the lead committee to consider the explanation and, if appropriate, draw it to the attention of the Parliament. The power to change the procedure to which an instrument is subject—for example, from the negative to the affirmative procedure or from the affirmative to the negative procedure—is possibly the most significant change that is provided for in the 2010 act. To provide for that in the standing orders, the committee recommends a new rule, under which the initial proposal to change the procedure would be made by the relevant subject committee, which would then report to the Subordinate Legislation Committee that a change was desirable. The Subordinate Legislation Committee would scrutinise the proposal and either agree or disagree with it. If the Subordinate Legislation Committee did not agree with the proposal, no further action would be taken, but if it was agreed to, that committee would put forward a resolution that would invite the Parliament to agree to the change. As set out in the act, it would then be for ministers to decide whether to bring forward the necessary order to allow for the change of procedure. The committee also recommends a number of changes to the remit of the Subordinate Legislation Committee to link more closely with the terms of the 2010 act. Chapter 10 of the standing orders has not been reviewed properly since the first edition was published, so the committee took the opportunity to consider, with the Subordinate Legislation Committee, the general operation of the rules. As a result, we have proposed six other minor changes. The first of those is to make it clear that all instruments will be referred to the Subordinate Legislation Committee, even if an instrument is to be considered by Parliament rather than a lead committee. That will ensure consistent technical scrutiny of all instruments. Allied to that change, the committee proposes changes to rule 10.3.2 and a new rule—10.3.3—to clarify the reporting obligations of the Subordinate Legislation Committee for instruments referred to a lead committee and instruments considered by the Parliament. Under current procedures, the maximum time allowed for debate on motions to annul an instrument is three minutes for the person moving the motion and the Government speaker. The committee considered that that was too restrictive and would not be sufficient in all circumstances; it felt that such debates are unusual and are likely to need longer debate in most cases. The committee therefore proposes that rule 10.4 should be amended to allow the Parliamentary Bureau to allocate time for such a debate but that the bureau should ensure a minimum of three minutes each for the person moving the motion and the Government speaker. The final three such changes that the committee proposes are intended to clarify the application of the rules. The changes clarify that rules 10.6.4 and 10.6.5 apply not only to draft instruments but to other affirmative instruments that have been made but which are subject to the approval of the Parliament, and that, under rule 10.8, only draft instruments can be withdrawn. The final standing order change being recommended by the committee is to rule 10.11, which sets out the way in which the number of days, referred to throughout chapter 10, should be calculated. It is a previously overlooked consequential change related to the session 2 Procedures Committee’s 9th report in 2006, to provide that the Subordinate Legislation Committee has 22 days in which to report in certain circumstances. Finally, I will mention two areas that were considered by the committee but in relation to which we concluded that no changes to standing orders were required. Rule 10.4 provides that there is a 40-day period within which an instrument can be annulled and that a member can lodge a motion to annul up to that point. In practice, as such a motion is for the lead committee to consider and make a recommendation on, it needs to be considered and reported on before the 40-day deadline. To assist lead committees in timetabling consideration of an instrument, an administrative deadline is provided by the clerks to ensure sufficient time for a bureau motion to be lodged if a recommendation to annul is made. To ensure that members who may be considering seeking to annul an instrument are aware of the deadline, the committee recommends that the administrative deadline should be published in section J of the Business Bulletin. The committee also considered a possible conflict between rule 8.2, on motions without notice, and rule 10.4.2, which states that a minister in charge of an instrument is entitled to participate in proceedings on a motion to annul. A member may seek to lodge an annulment motion without notice for consideration by the lead committee. It would be for the convener to judge whether they wished to accept such a motion. However, the committee noted that accepting such a motion without notice might conflict with rule 10.4.2. The committee concluded that no rule change was required in relation to the possible conflict between those rules but recommends that additional guidance should be produced to highlight the issues that exist and to recommend best practice in relation to specific circumstances. On behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, I move, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 3rd Report 2010 (Session 3), The Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 and other subordinate legislation Standing Order rule changes (SP Paper 465), and agrees that changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 6 April 2011.

Members—although there are not many of them here—might be more interested in this debate, which is bit less technical. The central recommendations before Parliament today were born of the committee’s inquiry into registrable interests. Following the passing of the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act in 2006, a new regime came into force at the start of this parliamentary session. The purpose of the register of interests and of members’ declaring relevant interests during parliamentary proceedings is to ensure that the activities of members of Parliament that may impact, or could be perceived to impact, on the manner in which they undertake their duties as parliamentarians are open to scrutiny by the public. Over the course of this session, the SPPA Committee has considered a number of complaints under the code and members have lodged several hundred register entries. In the light of that experience, some questions arose about the new interests framework, and the committee decided to carry out an inquiry into its operation. In undertaking the inquiry, the committee was guided by the following principles. First, the register of members’ interests should capture significant financial interests. Secondly, that should be done in the simplest possible way to make it as straightforward as possible for members to comply with the registration requirements. Last, but certainly not least, any proposed changes should be in the public interest and ensure that transparency and accountability are maintained. We believe that the inquiry recommendations clarify and simplify the register of members’ interests in line with those principles. The committee proposes the following main changes to the categories of interest in the schedule to the 2006 act, and corresponding changes to the code. The remuneration category will be merged with the related undertakings category and members will no longer be required to register certain minor interests in that category. The election expenses category will be removed, given that those interests are already captured in members’ returns to the Electoral Commission. The information held by the Electoral Commission will be easily accessible on the Parliament’s website next session to ensure that anyone seeking the full picture of a member’s expenses will be able to view them easily. The sponsorship category will be removed, as its terms overlap significantly with the gifts category. In practice, a limited number of registrations fall under that category, and the majority of those will fall under the gifts category in future. The gifts category will fix the registration threshold for gifts at the start of a session instead of increasing the threshold as and when members’ salaries increase. The same change will apply to the heritable property and interest in shares categories. The gifts category will also exempt from registration donations towards election expenses, again because those are captured by the Electoral Commission. The overseas visits category remains unchanged. The Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 determination 2011, which is set out in annex E of the committee’s report, “MSPs’ Registrable Interests: Proposed Changes to the Code of Conduct”, sets out the form and content of the written statements that members of the Parliament are required to submit to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee clerks at the start of the next session. That determination, which will replace the 2007 determination, reflects the changes to the categories proposed by the committee. The determination will take effect from the date after the date of the first dissolution of the Parliament following the date on which this resolution is passed. Once that date is definite, the determination will be amended to reflect it. Once the sums of money equal to 1 per cent and 50 per cent of a member’s salary are set out, the determination will be updated to reflect those figures where indicated. That will inform members of the financial thresholds for registering certain categories of interest. The committee is required to consult Parliament on its recommendations, and so it issued a consultation to all members in June. We offer our thanks to those who responded, including those who responded to confirm that they supported the proposals in full. I also thank the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner for his response, which included his clear support for the recommendations on election expenses. The committee has made changes to its proposals in response to comments from members, including the removal of a proposal to exempt the requirement to register remuneration by virtue of a member’s being a member of a cross-party group. The committee did not consider it necessary to change its position in response to consultation on points to which it had given close consideration when developing its proposals. The proposals that are set out in the report will come into force in the next session of Parliament. The changes to the code are mainly a result of the committee’s inquiry, but a number of other minor changes are proposed and are set out in the full report. The committee is very aware of the wider context, and we appreciate that provisions in the Scotland Bill, which is being considered by the United Kingdom Parliament and the Scottish Parliament, may fundamentally change the nature of the members’ interests regime. Assuming that the resulting act contains provisions on members’ interests, transitional provisions will need to be put in place to allow the Scottish Parliament time to consider whether it wishes to make any fundamental changes to the existing regime. The 2006 act would then need to be amended or possibly even replaced to reflect those changes. As a result, it is likely to take the majority of the next Scottish parliamentary session to implement any significant changes. The committee’s proposed revised categories are therefore likely to be in place for the next parliamentary session. If the interests regime is revised following the implementation of the Scotland Bill, I sincerely hope that the underpinning principles that the committee has used as a basis for making the changes informs the development of any future regime. I move, That the Parliament, considering that it is expedient to make certain modifications to the Schedule to the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 (asp 12), in exercise of the powers conferred by paragraph 10(1) of that Schedule— makes the modifications to that Schedule that are contained in the Annexe to this resolution; and provides that those modifications shall come into force on the date after the date of the first dissolution of the Parliament following the date on which this resolution is passed. ANNEXE MODIFICATIONS TO THE SCHEDULE TO THE INTERESTS OF MEMBERS OF THE SCOTTISH PARLIAMENT ACT 2006 Remuneration 1 (1) In the heading to paragraph 2 (Remuneration) of the Schedule, after “Remuneration” insert “and Related undertaking”. (2) Paragraph 2 is amended as follows. (3) At the beginning of that paragraph, insert— “(A1) Where the circumstances are as described in sub-paragraph (1) or (1A).” (4) In sub-paragraph (1)(f), delete the words “or any other work”. (5) After sub-paragraph (1), insert “(1A) Where a member is, or was— (a) a director in a related undertaking; or (b) a partner in a firm, but does, or did, not receive remuneration by virtue of being such a director or partner.” (6) In sub-paragraph (2), insert after “corporation” the words “or of Convener, deputy Convener or member of a Committee of the Parliament”. (7) After sub-paragraph (2), insert— “(3) Sub-paragraph (1) does not apply where the remuneration received from a person on a single, or on more than one, occasion during the current parliamentary session consists solely of expenses unless those expenses amount, or amount in aggregate, to more than the specified limit. (4) The exception in sub-paragraph (3) applies even although the remuneration received from that person on another occasion, or on other occasions, during that session does not consist solely of expenses. (5) In this paragraph— “current parliamentary session” means the parliamentary session which begins immediately after, or in which, the member is returned; “a related undertaking” is a parent or subsidiary undertaking of an undertaking of which the member is a director and receives remuneration as a director as mentioned in sub-paragraph (1)(d); and “specified limit” means 1% of a member’s salary (rounded down to the nearest £10) at the beginning of the current parliamentary session.” Related undertaking, Election Expenses and Sponsorship 2 Paragraphs 3 (Related Undertaking), 4 (Election expenses) and 5 (Sponsorship) of the Schedule are deleted. Gifts 3 (1) Paragraph 6 (Gifts) of the Schedule is amended as follows. (2) In sub-paragraph (1), delete sub-paragraph (a) and the words “(b) that gift meets” and insert— “(a) in the case where the gift was received from a person on a single occasion, the value of that gift, at the date on which it was received, exceeds the specified limit; or (b) in the case where gifts were received from that person on more than one occasion during the current parliamentary session, the aggregate value of those gifts, at the dates on which they were received, exceeds the specified limit and, in either case, (c) that gift or those gifts meet” (3) In sub-paragraph (2), (a) after “to” insert “(a)”; (b) delete “(a)” (where it occurs for the second time) and insert “(i)”; (c) delete “(b)” and insert “(ii)”; and (d) after “the case may be” delete the full stop and insert— “; (b) any support (of any kind) provided by the services of a volunteer which are provided in that volunteer’s own time and free of charge; or (c) a donation (of any kind) which is intended by the donor to be used for the purpose of meeting (i) any campaign expenditure incurred in connection with the member’s campaign for election to a party office; (ii) the election expenses of the member in relation to the election at which that member was returned as a member of the Scottish Parliament; or (iii) the election expenses of the member in relation to any UK parliamentary election at which that member stands as a candidate, but this exemption ceases to apply if the donation is not used for its intended purpose by the expiry of the 35th day after the election result is declared.” (4) In sub-paragraph (3), (a) delete “sub-paragraph (1)” and insert “this paragraph— “candidate” has the same meaning as in section 118A, as read with section 90ZA(5) of the Representation of the People Act 1983;1 “campaign expenditure” includes expenditure incurred, whether before or after the member’s candidacy for election to the party office is announced or after the date on which the result of that election is declared, which can reasonably be described as being for the purposes of that campaign;” and (b) in the end of the definition of “controlling interest” delete the fullstop and insert— “; “current parliamentary session” means the parliamentary session which begins immediately after, or in which, the member is returned; “election expenses”, in relation to a member, has the same meaning for the purposes of (i) sub-paragraph (2)(c) (ii) as “election expenses” has in relation to a candidate in the order under section 12 of the 1998 Act which is in force for the purposes of the election at which the member was returned; and (ii) sub-paragraph (2)(c)(iii) as “election expenses” has in section 90ZA of the Representation of the People Act 1983;2 “party office” means an office in a registered political party with which that member is connected; “registered political party” means a political party registered under Part II of the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 20006 and a member is “connected with” a registered political party if the member was returned at the election after contesting it as a candidate (whether for return as a constituency member or as a regional member) of that party; and “specified limit” means 1% of a member’s salary (rounded down to the nearest £10) at the beginning of the current parliamentary session.“ Heritable Property 4 (1) Paragraph 8 (Heritable property) of the Schedule is amended as follows. (2) In sub-paragraph (2)(a), delete the words “50 per cent of a member’s salary on that date (rounded down to the nearest £10)” and insert “the specified limit”. (3) Delete sub-paragraph (2)(b) and insert— “(b) any income is received from the heritable property during the twelve months prior to the relevant date.” (4) In sub-paragraph (3)(a), delete “his or her own” and insert “ the member’s”. (5) After sub-paragraph (7) insert— “ (8) In this paragraph— “current parliamentary session” means the parliamentary session which begins immediately after, or in which, the member is returned; and “specified limit” means 50% of a member’s salary (rounded down to the nearest £10) at the beginning of the current parliamentary session.” Interest in shares 5 (1) Paragraph 9 (Interest in shares) of the Schedule is amended as follows. (2) In sub-paragraph (2)(b), delete the words “50 per cent of a member’s salary on that date (rounded down to the nearest £10)” and insert “the specified limit”. (3) In sub-paragraph (3), delete “apply”. (4) In sub-paragraph (3)(a), delete “his or her own name” and insert “ the name of the member (or relevant person)”. (5) In sub-paragraph (8), (a) insert after “paragraph”— ““current parliamentary session” means the parliamentary session which begins immediately after, or in which, the member is returned;” (b) delete the words “(a)” and “and (b)”; and (c) at the end of that sub-paragraph, delete the full stop and insert— “ ; “specified limit” means 50% of a member’s salary (rounded down to the nearest £10) at the beginning of the current parliamentary session.” 1 1983 c 1 2 1983 c. 1 That the Parliament, in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 4(1) and 4(2) of the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 (asp 12)— makes the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 (Form and Content of Written Statement) Determination 2011 as set out in Annexe E of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 9th Report 2010 (Session 3), MSPs’ Registrable Interests: Proposed Changes to the Code of Conduct with effect from the date after the date of the first dissolution of the Parliament following the date on which this resolution is passed; revokes the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 (Form and Content of Written Statement) Determination 2007 with effect from the date after the date of the first dissolution of the Parliament following the date on which this resolution is passed; and revokes the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 (Gross Income from Heritable Property) Determination 2007 with effect from the date after the date of the first dissolution of the Parliament following the date on which this resolution is passed. That the Parliament agrees to amend the Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament by replacing Volumes 1 and 2 with Volumes 1 and 2 as set out in Annexe D of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 9th Report 2010 (Session 3), MSPs’ Registrable Interests: Proposed Changes to the Code of Conduct, with effect from the date after the date of the first dissolution of the Parliament following the date on which this resolution is passed.

The previous debate highlights how I feel about the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee—there is a good sense of harmony, and members work hard together. It has been a pleasure to convene the committee; I do not say that lightly. The purpose of this debate is to seek the Parliament's agreement to some minor rule changes that the committee is recommending. The changes that the committee proposes are to clarify existing procedures, to make changes as a consequence of legislation to which the Parliament has agreed and to bring standing orders up to date with current drafting practices. The first proposed amendment relates to hybrid bills. Although such bills are a form of public bill, chapter 9C of standing orders provides a set of rules for hybrid bills that are separate from the rules for public bills in chapter 9. To clarify the relationship between the rules in those two chapters, the committee recommends an amendment to rule 9.1, to provide that, where the rules on hybrid bills in chapter 9C apply in relation to a bill, those rules supersede the rules on public bills in chapter 9. The second change that is recommended in the committee’s report is to clarify an anomaly in standing orders. Rule 13.7.11 currently allows the Presiding Officer discretion to decide whether to call a question if the member who lodged it is not in the chamber. However, rule 13.7.4 does not allow that question to be taken if the member is not in the chamber. The committee proposes to rectify that anomaly by removing the discretionary power of the Presiding Officer, so as to make it quite clear that a question can be called only if the member who lodged the question is present. The Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc Act 2010 made a number of changes to the composition and titles of the bodies that are supported by the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. The committee is proposing amendments to standing orders to reflect the 2010 act, mainly in relation to the new titles of Public Standards Commissioner for Scotland and Public Appointments Commissioner for Scotland. A further new provision is proposed to reflect that members of the Standards Commission for Scotland will be appointed by the SPCB rather than by Scottish ministers. The final change that the committee recommends is to update standing orders to meet current best practice in drafting by replacing terms such as “he or she” with gender-neutral alternatives. Let me explain that. Although using “he or she” is clearly preferable to the previous practice of using “he” to mean both sexes, it has been considered that, as “he” always precedes “she”, there is still a gender bias. The committee is therefore proposing that standing orders should adopt the same recommended practice as is followed in legislation. On behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, I move, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 10th Report 2010 (Session 3), Minor changes to Standing Orders (SP Paper 552), and agrees that changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 1 April 2011.

What steps can the Scottish Government take to encourage the lottery and other agencies to provide the funding that would allow the vessel to be reboilered?

To ask the Scottish Government what support it gives to businesses in the West Dunbartonshire area. (S3O-12482)

Will the minister provide reasons why the small business bonus scheme is not being made mandatory, as is being done with the equivalent scheme in England?

To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on local authorities refusing additional alcohol licences in areas deemed to be oversubscribed in licensed premises. (S3O-12031)

The cabinet secretary will know that West Dunbartonshire Council decided recently to refuse to issue new alcohol licences in areas of overprovision. Will he encourage other councils in Scotland to consider taking that positive step to combat problems of alcohol abuse and easy access to the purchase of alcohol?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, some of the voting consoles are not working.

I am pleased to open this debate on the draft revised code of practice for ministerial appointments to public bodies in Scotland on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. On 10 June, the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland laid before the Parliament a consultation document on a proposed revision to the code of practice for ministerial appointments. The consultation is on the first revision to the code of practice that has been proposed since 2005. Public bodies play an important role in delivering services to a wide range of communities and parts of Scottish life. The boards of such bodies are required to ensure that those services are provided efficiently and effectively. The code of practice plays a key role in ensuring that there is transparency and fairness in the way in which ministers make appointments to the boards of public bodies and ensures that those individuals who are appointed have the necessary skills and experience to maintain and develop the services that are provided by public bodies. The revised code that we are debating today is intended to support that process by setting out clearly what should be expected at each stage of the appointments process for applicants, members of public bodies, Scottish Government ministers and officials, as well as the commissioner and her team. In considering the code of practice, the committee heard evidence from the commissioner on the various aspects of the code. I put on record the committee's thanks for that evidence and for the commissioner's engagement with the committee in developing the revised code. The committee also notes that issues that were raised by the commissioner in previous reports to the Parliament, such as the requirement that ministers should always have a choice of candidates from which to make an appointment, have been addressed in the proposed revision. The committee welcomes that.  The committee report makes specific comments on four areas of the revised code: ministers being provided with a choice of candidates from which to make an appointment; the use of alternative application methods; the requirement for ministers to keep a written record of appointment decisions; and the fit-and-proper-person test that will be introduced in the revised code. Ministerial choice in appointment decisions was considered by the committee in 2009. The draft revised code moves away from requiring that ministers be given a choice of candidates in relation to every appointment. That reflects the nature of some appointments for which potential appointees are required to meet certain specific criteria, such as holding a professional qualification or having held a particular office. However, the committee noted that in circumstances where a choice of candidates cannot be provided, it is important to ensure that any individuals who are recommended to ministers have been assessed to confirm that they have the necessary skills and experience for the role. The committee noted the potential benefits of using a range of alternative application methods to encourage and enable a wider range of applicants to become involved in the public appointments process. Although it recognises that potential benefit, the committee believes that some form of written application, adapted to suit the particular position, continues to provide a reliable way of assessing a candidate's suitability. I turn to the requirements for ministers to keep a written record of appointments decisions. The committee had some concerns about the potential for the appointments process to become subject to politicisation.

Okay. An element of subjectivity in appointments decisions would be necessary where a minister was presented with a choice of equally qualified candidates from whom to make an appointment. Having said all that—and given that you are looking at me, Presiding Officer—I will conclude. Subject to my comments, the committee is content to endorse the draft revised code of practice. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 6th Report, 2010 (Session 3): Draft Revised Code of Practice for Ministerial Appointments to Public Bodies in Scotland (SP Paper 491), together with the Official Report of the Parliament's debate on the report, should form the Parliament's response to the consultation by the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland.

In the very informative debate on the Scottish Government's drugs strategy, the minister outlined the vital role that naloxone plays in saving the lives of heroin addicts. What role does he believe that naloxone can play for prisoners both inside prison and on their release?

I welcome the opportunity to open this debate on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's fifth report in 2010. The report covers the recommendations of the Commission on Scottish Devolution that relate to Scottish Parliament procedures. At the start of the year, the Parliamentary Bureau asked the committee to consider 16 of the commission's 60 recommendations. All the recommendations relate to proposed changes to the Scottish Parliament's procedures, how the Parliament interacts with the United Kingdom Parliament and how the Scottish Government interacts with the UK Government. The committee had no remit to consider the larger policy issues that the Calman commission covered, so my remarks will be limited to the procedural issues that we were asked to consider. When the recommendations were referred to the committee, it was not clear how and when the work of the commission would be taken forward, so the committee was asked to look only at what would need to be done if the recommendations were implemented. Following the UK election, the Scotland Office moved very quickly to instruct a bill, which is to be introduced in the autumn. Because of that, the committee had to change its approach. Instead of producing an initial report and carrying out further consideration if the Parliament so wished, we have reached specific conclusions on what should be taken forward, especially when amendments to the Scotland Act 1998 would be needed. The accelerated timetable also meant that some recommendations could not be given the careful consideration and consultation that might have been desirable. In particular, the committee had to set aside its intention to review in depth all the  provisions of the Scotland Act 1998 that constrain the Parliament's procedures or working arrangements. Such a review would be desirable and may happen at a future date, but it could not have been completed in time for the introduction of the UK Government's bill. In any case, our conclusion is that many of the recommendations that were referred to us can better and more easily be progressed through informal mechanisms, without the need for formal procedural change. I will take members through the committee's recommendations, beginning with intergovernmental and interparliamentary relations, which a number of Calman's recommendations addressed. In general, the committee supports those recommendations. Two of them concerned the Secretary of State for Scotland: one said that he should appear annually before a Scottish Parliament committee and the other said that he should appear before the Scottish Parliament to discuss the legislative programme. We concluded that there was no need for the minister's appearances to be formal parliamentary proceedings. In that way, the arrangements could be kept flexible. We noted that that was how Michael Moore's successful appearance at the Parliament earlier this year was managed. We also considered the recommendation that the Scottish and UK Parliaments should be able, when appropriate, to agree to a motion that sought a response from the other jurisdiction's Government. We concluded that a formal procedure of that sort was unnecessary and that the Scottish Parliament was already well able to make its views known to the UK Parliament when required, whether through debates, correspondence, evidence sessions or Scottish Government ministers. A number of Calman's recommendations concerned relations between parliamentary committees. They included proposals on a standing joint liaison committee and subject-specific ad hoc committees, on arrangements whereby members of one Parliament could join a committee meeting of the other Parliament, and on the sharing of information between committees. The committee noted that formal joint committee working would require an amendment to the Scotland Act 1998, that issues of parliamentary privilege and other differing procedural rules would have to be addressed, and that issues around data protection and powers to call for documents would have to be resolved. Given those complexities, the committee concluded that it made sense to develop more informal joint working arrangements in the first instance. The commission recommended that Scottish MEPs should be invited to attend meetings of the  European and External Relations Committee, but we noted that that could be difficult, given the different sitting patterns of the European and Scottish Parliaments. We prefer the model that the European and External Relations Committee suggested for increasing links with MEPs; I will not run through all the detail, which is set out in our report. The commission made a number of proposals on legislative consent memorandums. First, it called for the establishment of direct channels of communication between the Scottish and UK Parliaments. The Parliament may wish to consider agreeing a protocol with the UK Parliament. The commission also recommended a procedure whereby the Scottish Parliament could seek permission to legislate in reserved areas in which there was a close connection with the exercise of devolved powers. We noted the example given by the commission in relation to the Somerville case, in which existing Scotland Act 1998 provisions were used to give the Scottish Government power to legislate, with political agreement, and, once the immediate problem had been resolved, to remove the power to legislate. The committee felt that that demonstrated that flexibility already exists in the current powers, and that a specific additional procedure might not be needed. I turn to the Parliament's procedures. Eight of the recommendations referred to the committee are about the Parliament's procedures. On committees, the commission recommended that the level of turnover of committee membership should be minimised. We agreed that that would be valuable but that it is a matter for the political parties and not something than can be set out in standing orders. The commission also proposed that committees should have more freedom to establish sub-committees, but as little use has been made of sub-committees, we saw no evidence of committee demand for sub-committees not being met. On the Scottish Parliament's legislative process, the commission made three recommendations. First, it recommended that the three-stage bill process should be changed to a four-stage process. The Parliament can already separate stage 3 amendment proceedings from the stage 3 debate, and there is adequate flexibility in the current rules for a four-stage process to be used if required. Secondly, the commission recommended that any MSP should be able to propose that parts of a bill be referred back to committee for further consideration. That power is currently restricted to the member in charge of the bill. We felt that the recommendation is too broad but suggest that further consideration be given to extending the  power to lead committee members in view of their expertise and interest in a bill. Thirdly, the commission proposed that the Presiding Officer should identify amendments at stage 3 that raise new issues and should be given further committee scrutiny. There could be a pitfall with that recommendation and we do not recommend pursuing it. I move to the general review of the Scotland Act 1998. The commission recommended a review of all the provisions in the act that constrain the Parliament's procedures or working arrangements. First, in relation to the statement on legislative competence that ministers must make when a bill is introduced, it recommended that that should extend to any person who introduces a bill. The second recommendation is to give Parliament the option of providing flexibility over the number of members of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. The third recommendation is to allow greater flexibility about the timing of the Presiding Officer's appointment at the start of a session and to allow temporary additional deputies to be appointed if necessary. The commission also saw a case for amendment of the provisions that govern members' interests. As the committee with lead responsibility for the code of conduct, we agree that some greater discretion over the interests regime is desirable. The committee believes that, after 10 years in existence, the Scottish Parliament could take more responsibility for establishing its own interests regime. Current provisions do not make any distinction between a minor or excusable breach and a serious, intentional breach of a criminal nature. In contrast, parliamentary sanctions can be adjusted more flexibly, but there is no scope under the current regime for the Parliament to consider whether there is a reasonable excuse for a breach. We would like the current provisions to be replaced with a more general power that would allow the Parliament to adapt its interests regime more comprehensively in response to changing circumstances. Such a power would still offer safeguards to ensure that a comprehensive members' interests regime was in place. However, the first step is to move the governance of members' interests to the Parliament. Consideration of any changes to the regime would have to take place in the next parliamentary session. Finally, I thank all the officials and all the members of the committee for their considerable work and effort in compiling the report. I move, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 5th Report 2010 (Session 3), Report on the recommendations of the   Commission on Scottish Devolution regarding Scottish Parliament procedures (SP Paper 490) and agrees to its recommendations and conclusions.

Can you comment on generating capacity in Scotland, for Scotland? We should not be having this debate, because any new capacity in Scotland would be for export.

Will the minister take an intervention on that point?

The minister will be aware that BAA's London airports are regulated by the Department for Transport, whereas its operations in Scotland are self-regulated. Does the minister agree that, unless the DFT allowed it, BAA would not get away with introducing such a measure in London because the relevant act would not permit it? Will the Scottish Government consider designating airports, such as Edinburgh airport, which would give the Scottish authorities the right to regulate BAA's operations instead of their being self-regulated? I think that that is the key to the way in which BAA operates on drop-off charges and on many other issues—it fills its pockets instead of filling aeroplanes.

Ian McKee will probably remember that the City of Edinburgh Council proposed a road-pricing mechanism, and it had to consult the public to do so. BAA is a private company and, because it is self-regulated, it can take such a step itself. Does Ian McKee agree with the point that I made earlier, that if self-regulation was taken away from Edinburgh airport, that would stop it in its plan? The only body that could impose road tolling otherwise would be the city council, and it would need to ask the people first.

The charge is a travel tax. Does the member think that if BAA lost the right to self-regulate that would put an end to such behaviour?

Scottish Enterprise has secured 60 highly paid jobs in Scotland at Barclays Bank. Has the Government made any evaluation of the downstream benefit to the Scottish economy that those jobs will bring?

Some six months ago, a neighbour asked whether I would meet members of the Scottish Cot Death Trust who were seeking assistance. Although I agreed, I took it for granted that the trust, like so many other organisations, would be looking for additional resources. I was, therefore, taken by surprise that my assistance was being sought only to explore ways in which the work of the trust could be exposed to the wider public in order to make the public more aware of the unnecessary early deaths of babies and young children through cot death. The trust particularly wanted to use the date of its 25th anniversary to raise awareness of the wide range of services that it provides, hence my seeking support for the motion to be debated tonight. I put on record my thanks to those members who shifted their debates in order that that could happen. I am very grateful for that. I can imagine nothing more devastating than the loss of a child. I remember cases in the past in which the loss of a baby or child was unexplained and the stories that were written in the press insinuated—or, even worse, accused parents of—foul play. Most of us will be aware of high-profile cases, one of which was reported not that long ago, with the media pointing the finger at a celebrity. What dire, horrific cruelty for that person to experience being accused of responsibility for the death having just lost their child and not knowing why. Even after their name has been cleared, parents in that position are left with a feeling of guilt, wondering what could have been done to prevent the tragedy. That is why the work of the trust is vital.  The trust's aims are to fund research into possible causes of cot death, to support families that have been bereaved as a result of cot death and to educate parents and professionals in how to reduce the risks of cot death. The work that is done by the Scottish Cot Death Trust has brought about a different approach from the authorities and the press, who now have some sympathy for the bereaved families and a much better understanding of the truth than they had before. When the trust was formed, in 1985, there were 153 cot deaths a year. In the 25 years since the trust began, there has been a significant reduction in the annual number of cot deaths—it is currently 40 a year. However, that still means that we lose one healthy baby every nine days to cot death in Scotland. Cot death occurs in every part of Scotland and affects every sector of society. Although it occurs more frequently in deprived areas, more affluent areas are not safe from the heartache. Most cot deaths occur within the first year of life, but cot death can also occur in older children; therefore, sadly, it can occur wherever children are sleeping. In the early 1990s, the back to sleep campaign was the most significant awareness campaign ever implemented, and the Scottish Cot Death Trust was instrumental in ensuring its implementation throughout Scotland. The campaign aimed to educate all parents and carers about the need to place babies on their backs for sleeping rather than on their fronts, as they had previously been advised. It resulted in an immediate decline in the number of cases of cot death and continues to be one of the most important pieces of advice for parents. However, the campaign did not eradicate cot death completely—a common misconception that is held today. It is estimated that approximately 2,000 children are alive today who might have suffered cot death had it not been for the research and education provided by the Scottish Cot Death Trust. Over the years since its formation, the trust has provided vital support for hundreds of families throughout Scotland. The support services on offer have been further developed, and the trust today offers an impressive range of support for families that are affected by the loss of a baby or young child to cot death. The trust's community services nurse will visit families at home, regardless of where they live in Scotland, to provide information about cot death and the services that are available from the trust. Time will be spent listening to the family and discussing the support that is available to help them to cope with their loss. A professional counselling service is available to everyone who is affected by the loss of a baby or child through cot  death. The service is available across Scotland and is provided free of charge to bereaved families. When a parent has lost a baby or child to cot death, the arrival of a new baby can bring huge anxiety that it might happen again. The Scottish Cot Death Trust's next infant support programme aims to support parents during subsequent pregnancies, after the birth, and for as long as the support is needed. As part of the next infant support programme, the trust can provide bereaved parents with a breathing monitor, on loan for up to 12 months, to offer them peace of mind with the new baby. The monitor will sound an alarm if the baby stops breathing. All parents will receive resuscitation training before receiving the monitor so that they know what to do if the baby stops breathing. The Scottish Cot Death Trust provides that service to many hospitals across Scotland. The Scottish Cot Death Trust is involved at every level, from counselling bereaved parents to funding national and international research, all in the attempt to eradicate cot death. Members of the trust are in the public gallery tonight listening to the debate. They want the Parliament to support their campaign this year to raise awareness of the services that they provide to end cot death. They ask of us so little, and we owe them so much.

Do you know anyone who voted Tory?

I join others in congratulating Pauline McNeill on securing tonight's debate. Being a Glaswegian, I love our subway. For those who have not had the privilege of being born in Glasgow, I should explain that "subway" is the Glasgow name for the underground. I still remember and like the aroma that the traveller catches on alighting down the stairs on the central platform of the Glasgow subway. The smell is hard to describe, but it would be unmistakable even if a person was blindfolded and led into the subway without knowing. Therefore, my speech on the motion is delivered with my passion for, and fond memories of, the Glasgow subway. Although the subway is, at 130 years old, the third-oldest such system in the world, one might have expected that the basic routes—or, more accurately, the route—would have been extended. Sadly, that is not the case—not a single metre has been added over the long time in which the subway has been in existence. Although no expansion has taken place, the population that the original system was designed to cater for has changed significantly. Many of those in the communities that benefited from being served by a station were moved into the schemes on the outskirts of Glasgow or into the new towns and villages outside Glasgow such as—to name but a few—Bearsden, Milngavie and Bishopbriggs. They were moved even as far away as Cumbernauld. In my view, we have an underground system that did not travel with its customers or extend to where people now live. By contrast, other countries not only extended their 20th century infrastructure but, starting from scratch in the 21st century, have built what can only be described as magnificent underground systems that travel hundreds of miles, rather than just the few miles that the Glasgow underground covers. I am genuinely interested in underground systems and have boarded underground trains in countries ranging from Chile to China. Over many years, we have heard hundreds of excuses as to why we cannot, or should not, expand the Glasgow underground. One lame excuse is that the solid-rock formations prevent any expansion. Apparently, solid-rock seems to stop expansion only in Scotland, whereas in other countries it is seen as a benefit to the stability of the engineering project, which seems to be kind of strange. I wish our subway—my subway—well, but I fear for its long-term future if we do not bite the bullet and meaningfully grow the system to reach out to  the customer base that was lost so many years ago. We might lose forever that wonderful smell of the Glasgow subway.

I declare an interest. I am a board member of Rape Crisis Scotland and a member of the cross-party group on men's violence against women and children. I make it clear that I am speaking for myself and not on behalf of either of those organisations. Any violence, whether in the home or in the street, must be tackled. Those who cause violence must be dealt with by the authorities and the courts. Equally, all those who are at the wrong end of abuse need our support. It is therefore easy for me to back plans to provide a helpline to support men who are the victims of domestic abuse. I want to inform members why I am very much involved in highlighting the plight of women and children at the hands of men. I cannot recall when I last heard that a woman had been raped by another woman or sexually assaulted by a female partner. No doubt that happens—I am sure about that—but it is rare. On the other hand, tens of thousands of women do not even report offences by men, whether they are rapes or serious assaults, because they believe that if they do they will be seen at best as not credible and at worst as the cause of the attack. They believe that because of bad information that they have received about cases that failed because of issues that were irrelevant to the merits of the case, such as sexual  history, what the woman was wearing and whether she had been drinking. The ratio of men to women who abuse—particularly sexually abuse—children is massively geared towards men being the abusers. Paedophilia is almost exclusive to men, although I admit that, in some high-profile cases that have involved children who have been sexually abused, the sex rings that have carried out that abuse have included women. The point that I am trying to make is that there is still massive ignorance about the problems that women and children face from violent men, and that most violence against men is carried out by men. We still have not reached into the consciousness of male society to get men to be proactive in not accepting violence that is carried out by men. The levels of condemnation that are required to make the difference in attitudes to male violence have not been reached. I contrast that with the condemnation of drink driving and the stigma that is attached to it. The public have got the message on drink driving. The police and any accident and emergency department member of staff will tell us about the aftermath of Celtic versus Rangers football matches. People who have been injured by violent men are there for all to see in hospitals. The hidden part of that is that some supporters of the beaten team will be monsters who take out their frustrations and take revenge on their own families. That is why there is a spike in domestic abuse incidents at such times. Women and children wait for their turn to be abused just because the man's team has lost. I therefore welcome the initiative, but the message should also be given that we should not take our eyes off the ball of men's violence against women and children. Far more women and children are abused and assaulted by men. In June 2009, Professor Marianne Hester of the University of Bristol published a paper entitled "Who Does What to Whom? Gender and Domestic Violence Perpetrators", which demonstrated that there were significant differences between men and women as domestic violence perpetrators. Men are much more likely to be repeat offenders. She said: "the intensity and severity of violence and abusive behaviours from the men was much more extreme. This is also reflected in the nature of the violence used ... Men's violence tended to create a context of fear and related to that, control. This was not similarly the case where women were perpetrators." The fact that men also suffer from domestic abuse should not be a signal to those whom we have been working to convince over the years that we have a real problem with male violence against women and children that we can somehow take  our foot off the gas in expressing that, and that those in power who are dealing with the matter can take their foot off the gas. When the cross-party group on men's violence against women and children was set up, I was the convener. I was asked, not in a friendly manner but in a threatening manner, why the title did not also contain the words "violence against men by women". As far as I was concerned, at least 70 per cent of domestic abuse was caused by men and, if we could have a 10 per cent reduction in that, it would be significant progress. If others had wanted to set up a group to deal with the other forms of domestic abuse, they would have got my full and unreserved support and blessing, but my focus was on the 70 per cent, and it still is. Nevertheless, I fully support the Government's positive step to tackle violence against men. It is worth while and will assist the men who need our support, and I give that today.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in releasing the funds that have accumulated under the fossil fuel levy. (S3O-10909)

Has the cabinet secretary calculated the impact on the Scottish economy and the number of jobs that could be created if the fund was repatriated to Scotland?

To highlight where Scotland stands when it comes to  the prospect of benefiting from a high-speed rail link, I must first put into context the chance of our goals being met. Some 50 years ago, construction began on the M74. Today, that vital project remains incomplete. Promises from London Governments that the work would be completed were never fulfilled, in contrast to the massive road projects in England, where project after project was started and completed. It was left to this Scottish Government to put resources into the M74 and finish the job. There is the Channel tunnel, which was given the go-ahead with another promise that Scotland would have a direct connection to Europe. What a laugh, and what a lie. To make that journey is so convoluted for Scottish travellers that many do not bother. Let us not forget, when rolling stock for the new project is being discussed, that after building and buying the rolling stock for the Europe to Scotland journey, it was used for domestic English services. A direct European service is no longer on the agenda for Scotland. At least this time we have not even been promised a high-speed rail link for Scotland. London does not need to hoodwink us, because it knows that nothing will happen. On the previous two occasions on which it clawed the feet out from under us, nothing happened—no threats of resignation from a Tory or a Labour Secretary of State for Scotland. London knows where its personal bread is buttered, and it is not here. All the statistics show that the best place to start a high-speed rail link would be as far away from London as possible. It would make a significant and immediate contribution to the environment. Getting people off planes and using more environmentally friendly modes of transport is the priority if we are to tackle the problems of climate change.

We have to talk about it before we can develop it. Give us the commitment and the money, and I am sure that it will happen overnight. Despite the experts suggesting that the link should start in Scotland, the project will start in the south of England. Should history repeat itself, the rail line will also finish there. Unless we—as a people and a Parliament—stand up and say that there will be a penalty to pay should that happen, Scotland will be sold down the railway yet again. In the USA, a plan is unfolding that is a hybrid strategy between individual states and the federal authorities—a plan that looks well beyond a state boundary or even the borders of the USA, as from  day one it includes a connection and route well into Canada. The scale of the USA project and its physical and financial obstacles are enormous. A UK-wide project is chicken feed compared to those plans, yet the USA will deliver a high-speed rail network because it knows the strategic and economic importance of the project to the individual states and to the USA as a whole. Call me an old cynic but the "whole", when referring to the USA, is not the same as "whole" in the context of the UK. If we look at what is on the drawing board so far, vital is vital only for England, with any strategic economic importance stopping at the border. In Scotland, the chambers of commerce know just how a high-speed rail link will affect them and the damage that it would do to our economy if we were, yet again, left out. My challenge to the Parliament is simple: what will happen to ensure that the bit that has been forgotten by Westminster is not left out again? We need a high-speed rail link just as much as England does, and at the same time.

To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to tackle adult obesity. (S3O-10626)

Does the Government have any plans to establish parenting courses on healthy eating? If effective, such courses would benefit the individual and their families and reduce the enormous cost to the health service of obesity.

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding the high-speed rail link. (S3O-10246)

Minister, in your discussions with the UK Government, will you remind its officials that, as part of the campaign for the Eurotunnel, Scotland was promised a direct link to Europe, which we are still waiting for? Can we learn from that experience and, when it comes to the high- speed rail link, insist that Scotland not be cheated and forgotten by London once again?

I am grateful to Des McNulty for bringing this important  debate on St Margaret of Scotland Hospice to the Parliament. I congratulate him and I put on record that what he is doing is worth while. St Margaret's provides care that is second to none, as is evidenced by a petition that has been signed by 130,000 people. The hospice has the full support of East Dunbartonshire Council and West Dunbartonshire Council. Contrary to the claims of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, West Dunbartonshire Council has never supported the plans for St Margaret's, and I think that East Dunbartonshire Council is in the same category. No one has challenged the cost of the beds at St Margaret's compared with provision at other establishments, so it is not cost that has put the hospice under threat. We do not understand why the long-term future of St Margaret's is in jeopardy, as it will be if the plans to remove the 30 long-term care beds go ahead. Indeed, there is a complete lack of coherent reasons for the decision. If St Margaret's can do the job well, at the right price, why move the beds to Blawarthill? Could it be that the only way to get the numbers to stack up and make the private finance initiative project at Blawarthill work is by shifting the St Margaret's beds to the new PFI hospital? When I consider the concerns that John Bannon has expressed, that is the only logical conclusion that I can come to. All the vital decisions about the switch of beds were taken in Glasgow by a Glasgow-centric committee and have been adhered to by the current health board. Is it Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board in name only? Does the board exist only to consider Glasgow issues? Should it be renamed Glasgow NHS board? How else can we rationalise the shifting of provision that is successful both in quality and cost? Why move beds a mile and a half up the road—six minutes by car—from Clydebank to Glasgow, into the custody of a provider that has a poor track record? John Bannon's revelations give us hope and comfort. He has insisted that he was unaware of all the information on the Blawarthill-St Margaret's deal. We know that St Margaret's now has support from members of the health board who take a different view of the original plan. We must convince more people on the health board of the benefits of retaining the beds at the hospice. When board members have all the information, they might come up with a different solution. People who are arguing for provision to remain at St Margaret's know that it is not about a choice between Blawarthill and St Margaret's. I have always said—from day 1—that Blawarthill and St Margaret's can and should prosper. If there is a little more open dialogue and understanding of the entire proposition, the security of both  establishments can be achieved for the long term, to the benefit of the whole of the west of Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to promote its anti-drug policies in schools. (S3O-9852)

The minister will be aware that drug barons specifically target schoolchildren. Does the Scottish Government believe that we are informing children at the right age, or do we need to start teaching children a bit earlier than we do at present?

The Scottish Parliament has an excellent record of bringing fair trade issues to the public's attention. The topic of tonight's debate—Fairtrade fortnight—continues the fine record; Bill Butler should be congratulated on securing the debate, which gives the chamber the chance, once again, to highlight why fair trade is a goal that is worth pursuing. I draw attention to how difficult it is for people in the developing world to achieve a fair share of the marketplace and a fair price for what they have produced. When it comes to trade in Scotland or the UK as a whole, we can say that we live in a sophisticated, well-connected and organised society; but even here, farmers who are part of this society and who have unions and co-operatives of their own and are highly organised,  articulate and experienced in their approach to business find to their cost that vested big business interests by way of multinational supermarkets and large middle-men distributors are hard to bargain with. Farmers and producers have to bargain with those interests if they are to achieve a decent price for their produce. Farmers and producers in this country have an enormous fight on their hands just to break even, never mind achieve a fair price. We have to remind ourselves that that is happening even with the almost full support of politicians of every persuasion plus Governments, the public and the great support of the press. The battle that our farmers and producers wage has gone on for years. A producer in a developing country battles against the same powerful people as our farmers and producers, but they have to do it with little or no support from politicians or the media—with some notable exceptions. We can imagine how difficult it is for them to get a fair deal. When doing deals with the big guys, the fair trade producers will always come off second or third best unless interventions are made on their behalf. Giving time and support to champions such as my very good friend John McAllion to enable them to assist in informing the Scottish public of the need to buy fair trade goods is not only a pleasure but a social and economic obligation. Small countries such as Scotland are in the vanguard of promoting fair trade issues. If Scotland were to become a fair trade nation it would be a win-win situation; it would be a win for fair trade producers because more opportunities would be opened up for fair trade and more publicity would be generated for the cause of fair trade—Scotland becoming a fair trade nation is bound to be worth a few column inches and comment around the world—and it would be a win for Scotland because it would put us on the map for all the right reasons. I encourage members, the Parliament as a whole and the Government to push forward on this worthwhile project. It can deliver substantial benefit for people who are clearly helping themselves but need partners and friends to make the difference in overcoming powerful vested interests. I am delighted to support Bill Butler's motion.

It would be easy to give a quick speech that went something like, "Eat less; walk more." On the face of it, if that advice could be implemented, it would work well. However, listening to the minister, we can tell that she knows that the solution is not as simple as that, and I agree with her. She knows that dealing with obesity is a complex matter and that we need to understand the complexities much more than we currently do. We certainly do not need any evidence on the increasing number of people who are obese, or the impact not only on them but on society as a  whole. However, we need to understand why many parents appear to be unaware that they are literally feeding their children to death. We also need to find out more about the changes that have been taking place over the past 10 to 20 years, during which we have seen that steady climb in the number of overweight people in Scotland. Why is it that people who are defined as low income, lower class, disadvantaged or any other term we can think of to describe the poor are the ones who are most likely to be classed as obese? In the USA, the black community and the native American Indian populations have more than their fair share of obese people. Similarly, the less well-off group across the USA contains high numbers of overweight people. In fact, countries across most of the developed world have in common a large number of people among the poor who are obese, and Scotland is no different in that regard. On the other hand, in most of the underdeveloped countries, obesity among the poor is almost non-existent. What conditions cause the poor in developed countries to be fat, but the poor in developing countries to be thin? To understand how that works must be of interest to us all. It would be good to research that point, as I am sure that the answer would be extremely useful to this debate. Two areas in which we have some influence and are able to study and learn more about the background to obesity are our schools and our health service. If we had the right, in-depth research into this problem, we could make the difference, particularly in schools, and I think that the plan outlined by Shona Robison goes some distance towards achieving that goal. However, we must aim to go further, and those who work in the health service and in our schools have a vital contribution to make. Our teachers are seen as role models by their pupils, and patients look to health workers for support and inspiration. Let us hope, therefore, that the first places in which the plan is implemented are in the health service and in schools. I do not like using knocking copy, but I point out that, in West Dunbartonshire, Labour introduced plans to scrap free school milk, even though World Health Organization specialists urge that milk be given to children in their early years because of its long-term benefits, particularly for girls. Similarly, in East Dunbartonshire, Labour plans to close a good sports centre, with a planning gain of only £10 million, although the replacement centre will cost £16 million to £20 million. The Labour Party has an awfully bad track record in that regard. I remember well a school that was adjacent to my headquarters. It had running tracks, swimming pools and hockey pitches—you name it—but Labour closed it and  put in its place a school with none of those facilities. I find the Labour amendment cheap—I really mean it—because of the party's track record on such issues. To return to my original point, I would like to understand what the driver is for obesity. For me, there is still something missing in understanding why people—particularly adults, who should know all the dangers—refuse to take even fairly small measures that could reduce their weight and increase their life span along with their quality of life. One of the side effects of obesity is that people of all ages, young and old alike, have to put up with constant bullying and abuse because of their weight. That bullying can be mild to aggressive, but it hurts just the same no matter how mild it is. People never get used to the bullying or name calling, so I recommend taking a lead from Sir Jackie Stewart's school of thought: when someone subjects you to abuse because of your affliction or condition, it says much more about them than it does about you. Let us give people the added support that the strategy offers and make the difference not only to their health but to their state of mind.

Many people who are ill and cannot work face a financial penalty through having their wages docked by their employer. That means a treble whammy—people worry about their health, their job and the cost of getting better. Of course, people who are in  employment have already paid for their prescriptions through their wages. The amount that is deducted from pay cheques in national insurance contributions is going through the roof so, in essence, people will have been charged double for their prescriptions. The benefit from a universal service can be fundamental to many. When someone's income is on the margins, even a short illness can have a major impact on their ability to balance the books. If an illness attacks over a longish period, choices must be made. At a time of economic recession, that is an even more difficult situation for many families to be in. When someone is pressed financially, I bet that the medicine that is prescribed for them is what will be dropped. That makes the situation even worse not only for the individual who is unwell but for the health service, because instead of early intervention through prescriptions, more costs add up as a minor illness becomes major. My main reason for supporting universal free prescriptions is that no one who is ill should fall through the safety net of health care, no matter what their financial circumstances are or the length and intensity of their illness. I well remember that, when Jackson Carlaw of the Tories spoke in a members' business debate on car parking charges at NHS hospitals, I was mighty impressed. During his speech, I thought that the Tories were finally coming back into the light of mainstream Scottish public opinion and that they were returning to the position that they occupied before the reign of Margaret Thatcher—they were reoccupying the ground of the old Scottish Conservative party and talking about community. Jackson Carlaw's speech—which I am sure that he meant—was about concern for others and not for himself. However, with the Tories' stance on prescription charges, I am afraid that they are still in the shadows of Scottish public opinion. Most people in Scotland believe that there should be no barriers to getting better when someone is ill, particularly with a long-term condition. Most people in Scotland are totally against taxing the ill. They believe in a national health service that is free at the point of delivery, and that includes prescriptions.

I will address that in a few moments. Free prescriptions for all would cater for people who are reluctant to seek or who avoid seeking medical attention because of the sheer cost of prescriptions. They would no longer fear the financial burden that prescription charges bring and they would no longer be penalised for being on the margins. Dr Simpson's point was that cancer patients should qualify automatically for free prescriptions. I have great sympathy with that, but I would go much further. I believe that all people who have long-term illnesses should have free prescriptions and that we should not single out one illness—that would be entirely wrong. If, because of a long-term illness, prescriptions cost families or individuals a fortune, I want to help them all, no matter what the condition is. That is exactly what the Government proposes.

No—the manifesto was not wrong at all. The mere fact that the motion that we are debating tries to restrict the promise that we made proves that point. I am sure that that commitment will be met and the promise kept. That might take a bit longer, for which I make no apologies, but I am sure—I certainly hope—that it will happen. I travel to the United States of America regularly but, because of the health system there, I always have a worry at the back of my mind that members of my family might become ill. I much prefer and value the stronger Scottish system of care from a community-paid health service. Those are the principles on which the national health service was established. The Government will meet its commitment and will bring about exactly what the health service should provide—free health care for people who are in need, when they need it.

He caught you out.

To ask the Scottish Government how many businesses have applied to the adopt an apprentice scheme. (S3O-8628)

As our economy begins to progress out of the recession, how is the Government highlighting that important scheme within the business community, and is that having an impact?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is sending representatives to observe referenda on the constitutional future of Catalonia that will be carried out in towns across Catalonia on 13 December 2009. (S3O-8486)

It seems to be a normal part of the process of devolution in Catalonia to seek the views of the public on constitutional matters. Why is it that, according to the unionist parties, Scots should be denied the same opportunity to decide their constitutional fate? I certainly hope that the minister is not deflected from his purpose.

Like many other members, I start by expressing my condolences to those who have lost loved ones to C diff. Losing someone in those circumstances is a difficult and distressing event. We must acknowledge that the spread of C diff did not happen overnight. Dr Ian McKee has already highlighted the fact that there was a 145 per cent increase in the number of C diff-related deaths between 2001 and 2006. Thankfully, cases have decreased considerably over recent years, but the disease has still resulted in unfortunate loss of lives. We have to realise that it will take a long time to tackle the problem, although the disease will not be completely eradicated from our hospitals, as the cabinet secretary confirmed after her statement last week when she was asked questions on the matter.

Mary Scanlon makes a very good point that has enormous resonance, so I do not think that I need to answer it. What is important is minimising the spread of any infection that is found in our hospitals and prioritising a reduction in cases. I am glad that the Scottish Government is working towards those aims. Many members have spoken about actions that the Government has taken to tackle the problem of C diff head on, which must be welcomed. Actions speak louder than words. For instance, under the cabinet secretary's stewardship, the number of cases in Tayside has reduced by 25 per cent. Since this lady came to power, additional money has been provided for extra domestic staff; a zero-tolerance approach to non-compliance with hygiene policies has been introduced; and a national HAI action plan has been implemented to ensure that NHS boards have in place the necessary policies and practices to drive improvements in key aspects of governance,  leadership and surveillance throughout Scotland. All those actions combined appear to be working, but we must not rest on our laurels. More must and will be done to continue the battle against C diff and other infections that endanger our people. The Vale of Leven hospital has been one of the worst-hit hospitals for deaths from C diff. Why? What factors contributed to the Vale becoming vulnerable to the spread of infection? Could one factor have been the fact that, under the previous Labour Administration, services were cut—slice by salami slice—to the extent that the hospital was about to close, as we all know? Mary Scanlon was bang on—the effect on morale and the constant worry among staff about their hospital and their future must have made a major contribution to the Vale's appalling record and the tragic consequences for some of its patients. That is my view and that of many others.

I say with all due respect to Jackie Baillie that the circumstances are not comparable. The circumstances at the Vale of Leven hospital were without doubt a factor—the record speaks for itself. The place was practically ready to fall down, never mind be shut, as she well knows.

No—I will press on. If the member wants to intervene later, I might give way. The cabinet secretary has made the difference. Nicola Sturgeon saved the Vale of Leven and she is making the difference in the attack on C diff. Of course, another dimension to C diff and other illnesses that are caused by infections comes from the privatisation of cleaning services. The control of cleanliness is now managed outside hospitals. Oh, for the days of the ward sister, who knew her ward inside out, who had the staff under her control and who had at her disposal the power to ensure that cleanliness was not only a must but so basic in a day's work that it was almost taken for granted. The Government and the cabinet secretary have reversed trends and started to end the use of outside contractors—or should I say privateers?—in health service cleaning contracts. Further, the Government has deepened the cleaning specification and monitoring framework to ensure the highest possible standards of cleaning throughout NHS Scotland. Action to tackle C diff and other infections comes from all directions but, as we tackle one infection, we must be ready to tackle the next. The  Government has put in place measures to ensure that our NHS is ready to fight any new infections that occur at our hospitals. We owe it to the families who have lost loved ones to ensure that no other family goes through what they have gone through in the recent past.

To ask the Scottish Government what strategy it has in place to support local authorities in dealing with flood damage during the winter months. (S3O-8387)

With regard to the implementation of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009, can the minister say whether there has been an uptake of upstream management schemes, which allow flooding in places where little or no damage is done?

We all know that C diff is a worldwide scourge. The cabinet secretary has taken the matter extremely seriously—her record speaks for itself, as C diff rates have reduced by 25 per cent in Tayside since 2007, which is good news in some ways. Is there any prospect of further reducing rates? What methods can we use to achieve that? Can we knock the infection out of Scottish hospitals altogether?

Presiding Officer, I apologise to you and other members for the fact that I need to leave a bit early, unfortunately. I hope that members forgive me—I have a prior engagement. I am delighted to participate in this important debate about some of Scotland's greatest assets—our national parks. I will aim my speech at Loch Lomond and the Trossachs. It should be recognised that that area, like many areas in Scotland, is not just about nature, because it has a population of people and communities. The results of bad land-ownership decisions mean that the general area of the park has become almost empty of people, compared with the situation in the past. I therefore very much welcome and support the approach and strategy that is in place to protect the wild beauty of the area, while keeping and growing the enterprises in the park. It is possible that, over time, the legacy of the past can be overcome so that a vibrant and productive community will thrive within the park's borders. It should come as no surprise to learn that it was a Scotsman, John Muir, who first came up with the idea of protecting wild lands by declaring them national parks, for which he is acknowledged and celebrated in the United States of America and, to a lesser extent, in his homeland of Scotland. At present, Scotland has two national parks, with the Loch Lomond and Trossachs park being situated in the West of Scotland region, which I serve as an MSP. Since being elected, I have never stopped visiting the area not only for constituency business, but in a private capacity. I have been impressed by the advancements that have been made since the area became a national park in 2002. The park makes an important contribution to the local community. It is economically important to areas such as Balloch and Luss because of the influx of tourists who come from abroad and, in big numbers, from throughout Scotland. Local businesses rely heavily on those visitors, who are interested in seeing some of Scotland's most beautiful places. However, striking a balance between the need for economic development and the need to protect the park's natural beauty has been a constant challenge for the park authority, which it has so far been able to meet, I am glad to say. I know the park area extremely well. It is an area of great beauty, in which I have walked, climbed, fished, boated and camped, plus a few other things that I dare not mention.

I will tell you about them in private. They are not as naughty as members may think. Few cities have, as Glasgow does, a resource close to them like greater Loch Lomond and the Trossachs. We could say, with little exaggeration, that the area is on the outskirts of Glasgow. Most Glaswegians certainly think that that part of Scotland is their own. Like many others who host visitors to Scotland, I make a beeline to Loch Lomond when taking them around our country in an effort to impress them with it. I never fail to get a positive reaction from our guests, many of whom comment on how close the area is to the centre of the city and on the wildness of the places in the park to which I take them. It is an experience that I very much enjoy, but never take for granted. Under the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority is the full planning authority for the area. That is unlike the situation in the Cairngorms national park, where the relevant local authority makes planning decisions. The Loch Lomond situation has allowed the park to introduce byelaws that have attempted to deal not only with environmental problems but with antisocial behaviour problems. That brings to mind the park authority's decision to introduce a maximum speed limit on the loch to tackle the increased problem of speedboats, which are regarded as both detrimental to the loch's natural beauty and unsafe. A balance must be struck between development and conservation in the park. I hope that it will always be acknowledged that the job is not to create a wilderness over the whole park, because the area was not always like that. Communities once thrived along the shores of Loch Lomond and beyond. The job is to keep the diversity of the park while increasing the population to the levels that once existed, thus returning the area to a more natural state of affairs. Of course, that will not happen overnight, but it can be done over time by good governance. From my experience, the park's management is on the right lines. I wish it every success for the future.

To ask the Scottish Government what representations the Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution is making to the European Union on the subject of climate change. (S3O-8245)

Can the minister provide details on any of the discussions between the Scottish Government and Commissioner Dimas on Scotland's being represented at the United Nations climate change conference in Copenhagen in December, which he mentioned?

It is extremely disappointing that the Scottish Government is forced to fund the £40 million shortfall in its free personal care budget that is caused by Westminster's continued withholding of the attendance allowance. I hope that the minister and her colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing will not to be put off by that. Will they continue to engage, perhaps with a future Administration at Westminster, to recover the money and put it to good and useful work in Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Government what representations it will make to the United Kingdom Government on the proposed high-speed rail link connecting central Scotland to London. (S3O-7640)

Scotland was promised a direct link to and through the Channel tunnel, but that promise was not kept. It is vital that any development of high-speed rail infrastructure includes Scotland. Will the minister do his very best to encourage the UK Government not to do the same again and ignore Scotland's travelling public and commerce?

The cabinet secretary has emphasised the process of consultation in relation to the prisoner transfer agreement. With regard to his meeting with Mr al-Megrahi, can the cabinet secretary confirm the position of Jack Straw when the PTA was ratified: that the subject of a PTA has the right to put their case if that is requested? Can he also say—

I put on record my thanks to the committee's clerking team and other officials. This is a technical report, and a great deal of hard work was done in the background to assist the committee. I compliment my colleagues on the committee on the way in which they did this piece of work for the Parliament. At the end of 2008, the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change announced that the Scottish Government intended in late 2009 to introduce a bill that would provide for an additional crossing of the River Forth. The bill would be a public bill that would seek to purchase compulsorily certain rights, such as land. As standing orders do not include any procedures for public bills that affect private interests, the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee agreed to undertake an inquiry into what procedure would be necessary. Early on, the committee agreed that it would call such bills hybrid bills and that it would focus its consideration on providing rules for the scrutiny of Scottish Government bills that affect private interests. In annex A to its seventh report of 2009, the committee sets out the rules that it recommends for hybrid bills. The committee agreed that there was benefit in utilising, where possible, elements of existing public and private bill procedures, given that those had been tested and refined in the light of experience. I thank all those who provided written evidence, which helped the committee to identify which procedures to recommend. From the start, the committee recognised that it required to ensure that the procedures for scrutinising hybrid bills were robust in the face of any European convention on human rights challenge. The committee has therefore recommended that, in relation to consideration of and decision taking on objections, existing private bill procedures should be adopted for hybrid bills. The recommendation has the added benefit of ensuring that there is consistency of approach for the public in objecting to a private bill or a hybrid bill. The range of accompanying documents that will be required for hybrid bills will be similar to that  which is required for private bills, with some minor changes to printing and distribution to reflect the public bill element of hybrid bills. Where the committee has departed from private bill procedure is in recommending rules that enable secondary committee scrutiny of the general principles and financial memorandum of a hybrid bill. The committee recognises that the interests of any secondary committee members will still need to be considered, as will issues related to evidence taking, but felt that those concerns will be best addressed by secondary committees after the bill is introduced. The committee recommends that any member should be able to amend a hybrid bill at stages 2 and 3. However, should any amendments affect the private interests of individuals or bodies differently from the bill as introduced, those affected should have a right to have their concerns heard. Finally, the committee noted that much of the detail of private bill procedures was set out in determinations that were—mostly—agreed by the Presiding Officer. The committee agreed that it, too, would adopt that flexible approach in relation to hybrid bills, and in annex B to its report it has provided draft determinations for the Presiding Officer and the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to consider. Time does not permit me to go into much detail about all the rules that we are recommending, but the committee believes that they strike the right balance between enabling those who are adversely affected by a hybrid bill to have their objections considered by a fair and impartial committee, and enabling the Parliament to consider the public policy elements of Scottish Government hybrid bills. I move, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 7th Report 2009 (Session 3), Hybrid Bills (SP Paper 299), and agrees that changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 26 June 2009.

As members are aware, the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner and the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland have a direct reporting relationship with the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, of which I am a member. That committee considered the recommendations of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee at its meeting on 9 June and agreed that I should speak on its behalf in the debate. I thank the officials and my fellow MSPs who were involved in the piece of work that we are discussing. We are dealing with business that, while somewhat dry, is very important to the running of the Parliament. I will focus my comments on the proposed changes to the roles of the standards commissioner and the public appointments commissioner. The Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee proposes to combine the posts of the standards commissioner and the chief investigating officer. By happy coincidence, the current standards commissioner, Mr Stuart Allan, is also the chief investigating officer, which means that, in a sense, the proposal to combine those  posts has already been achieved. No doubt we will learn useful lessons from Mr Allan's experience in the two posts. The Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee proposed that that combined role should result in a single post of investigations commissioner, and that that commissioner should be joined with the commissioner for public appointments. The Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee considered the proposal, and, as it is consistent with the evidence that we presented to the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee, we welcome it as a sensible step towards sharing offices and support staff. Although we note that the cost savings for the standards commissioner are likely to be minimal, we think that the office will benefit from the increased support that will be available under the proposed arrangements. The Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee also welcomes the recommendations that the investigations commissioner and the public appointments commissioner should report to that committee on their respective remits. We note the recommendation that each commissioner would have a lead responsibility for either the investigations commissioner post or the public appointments commissioner post. It was not clear whether it is envisaged that the two commissioners could perform each other's functions if required. We did not have any general concerns with the potential for those roles to be interchangeable. I note, however, that further consideration might need to be given to the current parliamentary approvals process, given that, at present, the Parliament approves a specific named person to be the standards commissioner or to be the public appointments commissioner. One other area on which the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee wished me to comment involves freedom of information. Under the recommendations, the chief investigating officer, the Standards Commission for Scotland and the public appointments commissioner would be subject to the Freedom of Information Act (Scotland) 2002, although the standards commissioner would not be. The committee agreed that that issue might need to be considered further as part of any proposals for shared office working. No doubt other things will come to light if we are looking to merge three different statutory frameworks. The committee is happy to contribute to the sensible resolution of each of those issues. The Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee broadly welcomes the Review of SPBC Supported Bodies Committee  report and looks forward to considering any proposals that might require changes to the code of conduct for members or the standing orders.

I have heard members talk about the 116 000 number. What is Anne McLaughlin's view of the 999 system? Should it be made redundant or should it be incorporated into the Amber alert system?

We know that people of all ages go missing every day, but there is something about a child going missing that has a heart-chilling effect on loved ones and the wider public. Anyone who has ever had that experience, even if only for a short period of time—which is the experience in most cases—will never forget it. It is the living nightmare of all parents, with all the fears about and emotions around what might or might not be happening to their child. That is what makes the experience feel as if it is never ending; it is almost impossible to bear until the child is found. For a mum or a dad, the horror of a child going missing for ever has to be the worst nightmare imaginable—it is impossible to come to terms with. Some children simply leave under a cloud. Of those who are abducted, some are never seen again and end up being abused on the black web by a paedophile ring. Others are sold as slaves into the sex trade that flourishes worldwide, including in the UK. As we all know, no country or people are safe from traffickers. Anything that can be done to ensure that a lost child is found must be done. Anything that the Parliament can do to help connect cross-border agencies must be done—indeed, that can only be a good thing. When it comes to missing children, no border or barrier should be put in the way of finding them and returning them to their homes. As other members said, the first few hours of a child going missing are vital to finding them. The noise that is created in alerting the wider public to the missing child is profound, as the American Amber alert system has shown. The US system is there for all to see—it is evident what it means to all those involved in finding a missing child. The evidence points to a good number of successful recoveries, so why reinvent the wheel? Most European countries have now put in place a domestic warning system to protect and recover lost children. However, those systems are simply that: domestic systems that operate within the  country's borders. We know from the American experience that cross-border and cross-agency early-warning systems and publicity can destruct even well-organised crime. We must join up the intelligence and information and get it out there early, child by missing child. That must be done on a pan-European basis—indeed, on a worldwide basis, given that the world is growing ever smaller. We should put in place an alert system that can trace a missing child effectively. I support in full Robert Brown's motion. If implemented, it will save a life of nightmares for families—mums, dads, grans, uncles and aunts—and communities.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to assist small businesses during the recession. (S3O-6962)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his full answer. I note that 69 per cent of respondents to a recent survey by the Federation of Small Businesses said that they were making  substantial savings as a result of the small business bonus scheme, and one in eight said that those savings were helping them to stay afloat during the recession. However, I also note that some businesses face issues of eligibility, for a variety of reasons. What steps is the Government taking to ensure that all those who should benefit from the scheme are able to do so?

To ask the Scottish Government what actions it is taking to support health services for young people with disabilities. (S3O-6700)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her full answer. We know that many children with disabilities experience a negative impact from poor moving and handling. What steps have been taken to address that issue?

I very much welcome the announcement of a public inquiry into the tragic events at the Vale of Leven hospital. Given that, as we all know, the outbreak was not the result of any short-term decision and that the problem itself dates back many years, will the cabinet secretary ensure that the inquiry is long term in scope and will look not just at this specific outbreak?

I thank you for that, Presiding Officer. The final motion that I wish to move this afternoon is on a rule change in relation to the work of committees and equal opportunities. The promotion of equal opportunities is a key principle of the Scottish Parliament. To support it, the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's fourth report in 2009 recommends a rule change to require committees to report in their annual reports on how equal opportunities have been taken into account in their work. Consideration was given to alternatives to a rule change. For example, the Equal Opportunities Committee has the discretion to ask other committees to carry out equalities reviews and to report the results of those reviews to that committee so that it can publish the compiled results in the form of a report. However, on balance, we felt that having a rule, even though it is not the only way of achieving the desired result, would emphasise the importance that is attached to equal opportunities issues in the work of the committees. Our fourth report notes that, if committees report annually on equal opportunities, there will be scope for the Equal Opportunities Committee, under its existing remit, to produce a compiled report that covers the work of all committees. We have left it to the discretion of the Equal Opportunities Committee when and how to undertake such work. Our committee also felt that it would be helpful for the rule change to be supported by guidance. At the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's request, such guidance has now been drafted and approved by the Equal Opportunities Committee. The guidance, which is contained in annex B to our fourth report, includes examples of how committees might  consider equal opportunities in their work on bills, inquiries and budget scrutiny. From the outset of its inquiry, the committee wanted to increase awareness of the need to mainstream and monitor equalities issues in the work of committees. Therefore, in order to achieve the maximum benefit from the rule change, the committee has recommended: "• a rule change which would require committees to include in their annual reports details of how equal opportunities had been mainstreamed in their work over the past parliamentary year (detailed in Annexe A); • a compilation report (either on an annual or a sessional basis) which would be produced by the Equal Opportunities Committee to provide a single source of reference for all committee work on equal opportunities; and • further guidance for committees on how they could incorporate equal opportunities in their work, which would help secure greater committee involvement in reporting equalities issues." Finally, our report notes: "the importance of committees considering how to take account of equal opportunities at an early stage when agreeing their work programmes." I move, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 4th Report 2009 (Session 3), Review of equal opportunities in the work of committees (SP Paper 244), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 24 April 2009.

The second Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee report to be debated this afternoon relates to the deadline for the introduction of members' bills. At present, the deadline for introduction is the end of September in the year before a general Scottish Parliament election. The change that is recommended by the committee will move that deadline to the beginning of June in the year before an election. The committee recommended that change following concerns raised by the Health Committee and the Communities Committee at the end of the previous session. Both committees had been referred members' bills, but decided that they could not consider the bills due to their existing work programmes. The deadline for the introduction of members' bills meant, in those committees' view, that they did not have enough time to consider the legislation properly. Following consultation, the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee concluded that the deadline for introduction should be brought forward to the beginning of June. The committee noted that the recommended change may provide committees with only an additional eight weeks of sitting time to consider members' bills. However, it would also provide an opportunity for consultation to be undertaken over the summer recess and for committees to schedule work on a member's bill when drawing up their autumn work programme. The committee considered whether there should be a mechanism to allow for the introduction of a member's bill beyond the deadline in exceptional circumstances, for example due to political impetus for a particular issue to be taken forward in a particular session. The change that is recommended by the committee therefore gives the Parliamentary Bureau the option to extend the deadline, if that is considered appropriate. We will be happy to work with the bureau to consider further what the criteria should be for extending the deadline in exceptional circumstances.  I move, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 1st Report 2009 (Session 3), Members' Bills - cut-off date for introduction (SP Paper 205), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 24 April 2009.

I thank the clerking team to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee for their very valued work. In my capacity as convener of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, I am pleased to open the first debate on the three reports that the committee has published in recent months. As all the reports relate to the procedural aspect of the committee's remit and propose what, I hope, are viewed as straightforward rule changes to standing orders, I do not intend to speak at great length on any of the issues involved. The first report, which is on the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Act 2009, sets out the rule changes that the committee believes are required to give effect to the provisions of that act. I move, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 3rd Report 2009 (Session 3), The Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Act (asp 1): Proposed Standing Order Rule Changes (SP Paper 230), and agrees that changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 24 April 2009.

A number of clean-up events are planned in my constituency. How does the Scottish Government intend to encourage volunteer participation in such events?

I welcome the opportunity to set out for members the work that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee undertook on section 8 of the "Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament", which sets rules for the conduct that is expected of members when they work with constituents and one another in their constituencies or regions. In October 2007, the committee agreed to review section 8, having received correspondence from the Presiding Officer about how he would consider complaints that were made under the section. The committee also received feedback from MSPs that some terminology in section 8 was open to differing interpretations by MSPs and the public. In approaching its review, the committee sought written and oral evidence. I thank all those who engaged with the committee. The committee's report and the recommended revised section 8, which is in annex A to the report, represent significant work that was undertaken largely by previous members of the committee, whom I thank for their work. I do not intend to comment on all the committee's recommendations; instead, I will focus on a few key changes. One change is to the key principles that are set out at section 8.2 of the code of conduct. The committee proposes that most of those key principles should become rules. However, it recommends changing key principles I and II. The second sentence of key principle I is: "All eight MSPs have a duty to be accessible to the people of the areas for which they have been elected to serve and to represent their interests conscientiously." The committee noted that that key principle is contained in volume 1 of the code of conduct, which explains that "key principles, as compared to the ethical standards set out in the Code itself, are aspirational in nature ... The key principles ... do not represent obligations and do not form the basis for imposing sanctions."  Key principle I was therefore not intended to be interpreted as a rule. The retention of a few key principles in section 8, when all the others were moved to volume 1, might have been an oversight. The committee noted the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner's evidence that, in the case of almost every complaint that he had received in parliamentary sessions 1 and 2 about a member's service or quality of representation, the MSP who was complained about had made a reasonable—or, indeed, praiseworthy—attempt to act for their constituent. In session 3, the Presiding Officer has referred to the committee no complaints made under section 8. MSPs are not employees of the Scottish Parliament and do not have a job description. It is for each MSP to judge what action—if any—is most appropriate in each constituent's case. The committee therefore decided to retain the key principle of accessibility and conscientious representation in volume 1, and to recommend removing it from section 8, because it is not a rule. I turn to key principle II, which is that "the wishes of constituents and/or the interests of a constituency or locality are of paramount importance." Although it is true that MSPs will almost always take on a constituency case, there are good reasons why an MSP may, in exceptional cases, judge that he or she cannot act—for example, when a constituent is seeking legal advice. The key principle has been changed to a rule that reflects more appropriately the balance between the constituent's wishes and the judgment that an MSP exercises when considering his or her caseload. Section 8 requires regional MSPs to notify the constituency MSP when they take on constituency cases. However, the evidence that the committee received was that members in their regions can reach sensible agreements on sharing case work. Notification is, therefore, not an absolute requirement and, indeed, some cases can be solved so quickly that notification would serve no purpose whatever. The committee agreed by majority decision to recommend removal of the rule from section 8. The committee also agreed by majority decision to recommend removal of the rule that appears to suggest to constituents that they should, in the first instance, approach their constituency MSP. That rule seems to be contrary to the principle that all MSPs have equal formal and legal status. It is for each constituent to decide which of their eight elected MSPs is best placed to address their concerns. If it is agreed by Parliament, revised section 8 would come into force on 27 March 2009. It will  provide members with a clear set of rules to which they must abide. It will also provide the public with a clear expectation of the conduct that they can expect from their MSPs. I am pleased to move the motion on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. I move, That the Parliament agrees to amend the Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament by replacing Section 8 and Section 9.1.6(b) (in Volume 2) with Section 8 and Section 9.1.6(b) as set out in Annex A of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 9th Report 2008 (Session 3), Review of Section 8 of the Code of Conduct (SP Paper 176), with effect from 27 March 2009.

If you are getting fed up with me, Presiding Officer, I am afraid that I will be moving yet another motion after this one. Yet again, I am pleased to speak about the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's report on "Changes to the Code of Conduct arising from the Reimbursement of Members' Expenses Scheme". Following Parliament's approval of the members' expenses scheme on 12 June 2008, the Presiding Officer wrote to the committee on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body and identified that changes might require to be made to section 7.2.6 and section 9.1.6(c) of the code to reflect the members' expenses scheme. The committee agreed with the Presiding Officer to update the reference to "Allowances Code" in section 7.2.6 to the "Reimbursement of Members' Expenses Scheme." Section 9.1.6(c) of the code of conduct sets out how and by whom complaints that are made under the members' expenses scheme are to be considered. The committee agreed with the Presiding Officer to update that text to better reflect the text in the members' expenses scheme regarding complaint handling. Complaints about the reimbursement of members' expenses scheme should continue to be made to the corporate body. It will thereafter be for the corporate body to decide whether to report any improper claim to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee for further consideration. If Parliament agrees to those updates, there will be minor consequential changes to the guidance that is contained in volume 3. Subject to parliamentary approval, the revised text will come into force on 27 March 2009.  On behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, I move, That the Parliament agrees to amend the Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament by replacing Section 7.2.6 and Section 9.1.6(c) (in Volume 2) with Section 7.2.6 and Section 9.1.6(c) as set out in Annex A of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 2nd Report 2009 (Session 3), Changes to the Code of Conduct arising from the Reimbursement of Members' Expenses Scheme (SP Paper 217), with effect from 27 March 2009.

Before I get started, I thank on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee the committee clerking staff, who have been of great assistance in all three matters that I will raise with Parliament today. I am pleased to speak to the committee's report "Review of Section 6 of the Code of Conduct (Cross-Party Groups)", which is the second piece of work on cross-party groups that the committee has undertaken in this session of Parliament: we also issued guidance to cross-party group conveners in October 2007. In April 2008, the committee agreed to review section 6 of the "Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament" in order to provide greater clarity to members of the Scottish Parliament and other cross-party group stakeholders to help them comply with the code of conduct. The committee has identified several areas for improvement. First, we recommend changes to the structure of section 6 so that the information on registration of cross-party groups appears immediately after the rules on establishment, followed by the rules on the operation of a group. The committee also recommends rearranging the operational rules that are set out in section 6.3 under a small number of thematic headings, which will mean that all the rules that relate to one theme, such as finance and documentation, can be found under that one heading. The committee has also recommended a change to the title of section 6.3, from "Rules on Cross-Party Groups" to "Operation of Cross-Party Groups", to make it clear that cross-party groups must comply with the entirety of section 6 and not just section 6.3. The committee also reviewed the threshold for registering financial benefits that cross-party groups receive. Under the current rules, cross-party groups are required to register any financial benefits that have a value greater than £250. That threshold mirrored the financial threshold in the members' interests order that operated in sessions 1 and 2. However, in May 2007 the Interests of  Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 came into force and established a different threshold for gifts, of 1 per cent of a member's salary. The committee agreed that it would be appropriate for cross-party groups to have a fixed financial threshold similar to the value of the gifts category in the "Register of Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament". The committee therefore recommends that a new threshold of £500 should apply to registration of financial support that is received by cross-party groups. The committee also considered the role of cross-party group conveners. Section 6 currently requires that a compliance form stating that the cross-party group will comply with the rules on cross-party groups must be signed by an MSP office bearer of that group. In the current session, all such forms have been signed by the conveners of groups. The committee agreed that to reflect that practice, it would recommend that the rules be changed to make conveners signatory to compliance forms and to make them responsible for providing updates to the information that groups are required to register. Volume 3 of the code of conduct provides guidance on cross-party groups. It is intended to be helpful to cross-party groups, but does not form additional rules with which groups must comply. The committee's report also contains revised guidance on cross-party groups to reflect the proposed changes to the code. If it is agreed by Parliament, revised section 6 will come into force on 27 March 2009. It will provide greater clarity for everyone on the operation of cross-party groups. I recommend that Parliament agree to amend the "Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament" by replacing section 6 in volume 2 with revised section 6 in annex A of the committee's 11 th report, which is on its review of section 6. On behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, I move, That the Parliament agrees to amend the Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament by replacing Section 6 (in Volume 2) with Section 6 as set out in Annex A of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 11th Report 2008 (Session 3), Review of Section 6 of the Code of Conduct (Cross-Party Groups) (SP Paper 186), with effect from 27 March 2009.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it has plans to screen for asbestos-related diseases. (S3O-6352)

Since early diagnosis clearly produces good outcomes, will the Government consider an initiative to encourage those who have come into contact with asbestos to come forward for screening?

I think that we all recognise that there will always be difficult decisions. In recent years in particular, the impact of health board decisions on, for example, the St Margaret of Scotland hospice—the cabinet secretary knows a lot about that—and the Vale of Leven hospital has meant that the legitimacy and public standing of health boards have deteriorated. Does the cabinet secretary think that elections to health boards will raise expectations about the security of their decisions?

As the minister is aware, just before the House of Lords rescinded the relevant legislation, there was a massive amount of publicity about the issue but no discernible increase in the number of claims. Will he comment on that?

Do the member and the greater number of colleagues agree that the impact of passing the bill will be felt furth of Scotland? I firmly believe that passing the bill will benefit sufferers not just in Glasgow but in Gateshead, for instance, because the legislation will put some pressure on the UK Government to deliver a similar bill in Westminster.

I thank Bill Kidd for securing tonight's debate. In the Parliament, we can find many issues that separate parties and members and generate publicity and controversy, but to no good end. However, when it comes to issues such as the damage that is caused by asbestos, the Parliament comes into its own. The debate was not originally set for tonight. However, when the significance of the date was brought to the attention of my good friend here, Joe FitzPatrick, who had a members' business debate scheduled for tonight, he instantly agreed to make way for it. I thank Joe very much for that, and I am sure that everybody else appreciates it too. Since the establishment of the Parliament, the quiet but effective work done on asbestos-related health issues, such as mesothelioma, has been legend. The Parliament has been solid in its commitment to right the wrongs of the past in cases where asbestos victims have been treated badly. None of that would be seen on CNN, but our press corps here has well understood the significance of our work and has assisted greatly in bringing these issues to the attention of the wider public. In turn, that has garnered the support needed for change. The Government has been running a publicity campaign that is aimed at innocent workers, who are being alerted to the ever-present hidden dangers of asbestos in the workplace. Those people work in all sorts of activities, but mainly in trades that are engaged in renewals and repairs. They are carrying out everyday work, unaware of the potential killer under the next plank or above the next ceiling. I fully support prevention and believe that the campaign is money well spent. We should be aware that people contract asbestos-related diseases in the most seemingly  secure places. I am thinking of people such as teachers who have never set foot on an industrial site in their lives but who are at risk because of working in buildings that were built with asbestos, and who then contract an illness. Such people need our help and they need the support of organisations such as Clydeside Action on Asbestos and the Clydebank Asbestos Group. Both those groups have been in the vanguard of the fight for recognition, compensation and so much more. The job is not yet done. A bill on pleural plaques, which are a consequence of inhaling asbestos, is progressing through the Parliament. Yet again, there has been support from all quarters of the chamber. Concern continues for those who need our help. Presiding Officer, let us mark this day with a pledge to see the job done.

What initiatives does the Scottish Government have to encourage people to do more to recycle packaging?

I spoke to hospice staff recently, who face uncertainty in their workplace and their lives. Will the cabinet secretary use her influence to encourage the board to say what it intends to do and when it intends to do it? If changes are to be made, will she encourage the board to defer them for as long as possible, to give the hospice time to adapt to whatever is suggested?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, if services at the Vale of Leven hospital had not been salami sliced under the previous Labour-Liberal Government, anaesthetics at the hospital would not be under any threat?

To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made on analysing the responses to the consultation on draft guidance for local authorities on the use of biometric technology in schools. (S3O-5739)

Is the cabinet secretary aware that the East Dunbartonshire parent council forum recently voted unanimously for a moratorium on the installation of biometric fingerprinting programmes in schools? Most parents had been unaware that the local authority was embarking on biometric fingerprinting. Does the cabinet secretary believe that parents have the right to know before such systems are introduced?

Before I begin, I want to acknowledge Bill Butler's pioneering work on and commitment to this issue. Having direct health board elections is fundamentally about restoring public confidence in the way in which health boards reach conclusions on issues of profound importance to the Scottish public, such as the future of hospital services—or, indeed, the future of hospitals themselves. Any changes that impact on people who have been made vulnerable as a result of illness must not only be made in their best interests, but be seen to be made in their best interests, and any rationale for such change must stand up to public scrutiny. However, as a result of what has happened for many years now in some health board consultations, the public's confidence in their being listened to has reached an all-time low. The  fact that the public no longer trusts health boards must be addressed urgently for the good of not only the public, but health boards. My experience of changes to vital services that Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board has undertaken is that that public body has had a predetermined agenda. No matter what the evidence has been or the number of people who have been against its proposals, it was always going to be the winner. We got what it wanted, no matter the strength of our argument. The Vale of Leven hospital provides a prime example of a health board complying with Labour's centralisation master plan, which was going to be pushed through, no matter what the public said. The hospital had a fine record, but it was deliberately salami sliced to make it fit the bill for closure. If one bit and then another is taken away, the rest will fall. It was like undermining a building in perfect condition. It was bound to fail because its foundations were undermined. It was not until the Scottish National Party Government was elected that the centralisation agenda was challenged. In the case of the Vale of Leven hospital, independent experts contradicted the health board's plans. As a result, we still have that hospital, and its long-term future is assured with the Government's full support.

I would like to answer Jackie Baillie's question, because it is valid and fundamental to understanding why we should have elected members on health boards. She and I know about the salami slicing that I mentioned earlier. The position now is that there has been an independent evaluation of what happened, and, unfortunately—I think that we are discussing anaesthetics—that report says that it would be dangerous if anaesthetic services remained at the Vale of Leven. I do not know about other members, but I would not be brave enough to suggest that they should stay, because of what happened. It shows that, if something is removed, the bricks start falling down and there is no longer a wall. St Margaret's of Scotland Hospice in Clydebank has made the claim, which it can justify, that when decisions were made about the removal of beds from that hospice that were funded by Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board, the board did not consider how fundamental to the wellbeing of the hospice those beds were. No real consultation took place; in fact, Glasgow representatives took  decisions in Glasgow on the removal of funding for those beds. At the same time, funding for the same number of beds was being committed to a new private finance initiative project in Glasgow. I am quite happy to accept that I am a cynic, but I am not the only one who can be called that. I think that everybody in Clydebank would consider themselves cynics about the health board. Direct elections to health boards will have benefits. If people are elected, they can be removed by the public in the same way that parliamentarians can. Anybody who is not paying attention to their electorate deserves exactly what they get. People will have confidence in any hard decisions that need to be taken, because board members will be answerable to the public. As Unison said, the proposals are not a panacea for improving health engagement, but they are an important step in changing the culture of engagement within health boards. To put things simply, although hard decisions will be taken that I am sure not all members of the public will be happy with, they will be safe in the knowledge that decisions have been taken for legitimate reasons rather than on the basis of a preconceived agenda, and that they have not been taken only by people such as health board managers, for example, who are dependent on a job and may or may not keep schtum on any given matter that is handed down from on high. I like the idea of decisions being taken on merit after debate, rather than on the basis of a highlighted recommendation on a buff-coloured bit of paper. The balance of power must shift. The public must have their say to legitimise the boards and bring back confidence into the system. I support the concept of elected health boards. They might be a little inconvenient for those who think that they know best or they might cost a little bit of money to administer, but I have a simple question: what will the real cost be if we do not have them?

To ask the Scottish Executive what its plans are for architecture in Scotland. (S3O-5387)

Will the minister give further details of how she intends to integrate policies on the built environment and improve place making?

I will touch on three separate areas. Before I do so, I thank and praise Michael McMahon for his great public spirit. I also thank Jamie Hepburn for bringing the debate to the chamber. I apologise to him and to you, Presiding Officer, for having to cut short my presence in the chamber owing to a prior engagement. I will make my comments brief. The 60 th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is something to celebrate. The declaration has made a difference, but it has not yet reached into all the places that Governments worldwide protect, in the main on the false premise of public interest or safety. One of the most glaring examples of somewhere with a complete lack of human rights is the despicable Guantanamo Bay, an example that is compounded by multi-Government duplicity in co-operating to render people to and from that place. Of course, there are also the horrors of torture for those who find themselves in that unjust place. People around the world have campaigned vocally for the closure of Guantánamo bay and for the individuals who are held there illegally to be transferred into the US justice system where they can be given a proper pre-trial evaluation, without threat. A considerable amount of that campaigning has taken place in the USA, even at high political level. Having had to be taken to the European Court of Human Rights on the issue of building and retaining a DNA database that includes samples taken from innocent people, the UK has nothing to crow about. I am pleased that last week 17 judges ruled unanimously that the UK Government broke human rights law in retaining those samples. Lastly, human rights are being breached in Scotland day in, day out by the well-financed and organised gangs that are involved in the slave trade and trafficking women and children into the sex trade. I am pleased and honoured to speak in this debate, but I am ashamed that society requires such laws to establish fundamental human rights in the first place. I declare—as I hope other members will—a commitment to join others in continuing to campaign for worldwide enforcement of the declaration.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I doubt that I will take six minutes, but let us see how we go. The committee's eighth report in 2008 sets out our recommended rule changes on the title and remit of the Audit Committee. Again, I was not a member of the committee when the report was completed, but I am happy to open the debate. The request for the proposed changes was made by Hugh Henry, the convener of the Audit Committee, who felt that the current title and remit of that committee do not reflect accurately its role and function. In considering the Audit Committee's proposal, the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee took evidence from Hugh Henry, the clerk to the Audit Committee and Robert Black, the Auditor General for Scotland. The proposed changes were endorsed by the Conveners Group and the Parliamentary Bureau. The first change that we recommend, which was suggested by the Audit Committee, is that the title of the Audit Committee be changed to the public audit committee, to make it clearer that the function of the Audit Committee is not internal audit but the scrutiny of Scottish Government departments and public bodies. The second change that we recommend is a change to the Audit Committee's remit. At present, as set out in the standing orders, the committee's remit is limited to considering documents that are laid before the Parliament or, in the case of the Auditor General for Scotland, reports made to the Parliament. When the Audit Committee considers documents that are not accounts or reports from the Auditor General, those documents must concern financial control, accounting and auditing in relation to public expenditure. However, the Audit Committee felt that its current remit does not fully reflect the range and depth of its work. For example, primary legislation is not formally laid before the Parliament, yet the Audit Committee was designated as the lead committee for the Public Finance and Accountability (Scotland) Bill.  The Audit Committee is regularly consulted by the Auditor General for Scotland on documents that are produced by Audit Scotland but which are not laid before or made to the Parliament, such as documents on the adoption of the international financial reporting standards and Audit Scotland's forward work programme. We are aware that the Audit Committee does not scrutinise expenditure by individual local authorities. The audit of local authority expenditure is the responsibility of the Accounts Commission. The changes that we recommend today will not affect that position. We therefore propose to amend rule 6.7.1(c) of the standing orders to enable the Audit Committee not only to consider documents that are laid before the Parliament—as now—but to consider documents that are referred to the committee by the Parliamentary Bureau or the Auditor General for Scotland. Any such documents must still concern financial control, accounting and auditing in relation to public expenditure. We believe that the proposed change to its remit meets the Audit Committee's concerns without creating any increase in overlap with the work of other committees. I move, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 8th Report, 2008 (Session 3), Audit Committee - Title and Remit (SP Paper 151), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 11 December 2008.

At the beginning of the debate, I want to put on the public record my thanks to the former members of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. As members will know, the membership of the current committee is almost brand new, so most of the work on the report was carried out before we took up our places. Another important point to mention is that, because we are all new members, our clerking team has had quite an onerous task. When the Parliament and its committees sit for the first time, everybody comes in at the same speed, but we are in a different situation. Almost all of us are new, which has meant that we have had an awful lot of assistance from our clerking team. We are all very pleased with that, as they have done a good job. I am particularly pleased, as they have helped me a lot. I wanted to say that in the first instance. I am pleased to open the debate in my capacity as convener of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. I should point out that the two reports that we will consider this afternoon were concluded before I became convener. Former members of the committee might wish to pick up on any points that I do not cover. The committee's first report in 2008 recommends one simple rule change on elections to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, which will extend the period for elections to that body from 10 sitting days after a general election to 20 sitting days after a general election. Rule 3.7.1 of standing orders currently provides that elections of members to the SPCB should be held no later than 10 sitting days after a general election, while the Scotland Act 1998 allows 28 days for the Parliament to nominate a First Minister. In 2003 and 2007, those timescales proved problematic. As the formation of a Government took longer than 10 sitting days, the SPCB election could have preceded the selection of the  First Minister, which could have caused parties difficulties in establishing their ministerial and shadow ministerial teams. To avoid that situation, the office of the clerk was closed on days that should have been sitting days, which meant that questions and motions could not be lodged. The committee's recommended rule change will mean that such a situation should not arise following future general elections. I move, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 1st Report, 2008 (Session 3), Elections to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body (SP Paper 47), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 11 December 2008.

Does the cabinet secretary consider that sufficient progress has been towards addressing the issue of future service provision?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Thank you for taking the intervention. You seem to be blaming the Government, or the Parliament, for debating St Andrew's day. In the next part of your speech, will you suggest that we cancel Christmas?

One of the main problems for small businesses is their lack of capacity to let staff off site for training. Might the Government think about creating a web-based training programme so that people could receive some basic training on site without the business needing to close down while they are away?

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with local authorities on the use of biometric fingerprinting in schools. (S3O-5028)

Several constituents have approached me because they have not been consulted on the matter by their local authority. Does the cabinet secretary agree that parents should always be consulted on such issues?

Will the schools that will be built under the Scottish Futures Trust have automatic freedom of access to school lets? If so, that would be a massive improvement for communities that at the moment find themselves locked out of schools that have been built under the private finance initiative and public-private partnerships.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I see you looking at me intently. You are probably thinking about my age and wondering whether I should declare an interest on that basis, so perhaps I should do so. I thank the members of the committee, and Alasdair Morgan in particular, for their work and congratulate them on their important recommendations on the bill. My experience tells me that when we consider such measures, it is like being in a goldfish bowl. There is perhaps the perception that we are looking after ourselves. In this case, I do not subscribe to that argument. The responsibility was given to members of the Parliament and they have carried out their duties extremely well. I will focus on a number of the recommendations that the committee made, which I believe add a degree of fairness to the bill. One such recommendation relates to rule 57 in schedule 1, which is on the rights of unmarried partners—I was an unmarried partner at one point. I endorse fully the committee's recommendation that a provision be made for unmarried partners' pensions in the new scheme. This Parliament has a proud tradition of fighting for equality and I believe that the part of the committee's report on unmarried partners continues that. Unmarried partners have the responsibilities that married partners have, such as children or a mortgage. The provision will address that issue. I firmly believe that the ordinary person on the street would support that heartily. I support and draw to the Parliament's attention rule 46, which is on increasing the minimum retirement age from 50 to 55. By doing that, we are bringing the legislation in line with UK pension law; that will be welcomed throughout the chamber.  When we discuss pensions, we are always looking into the future. Under the current pension system rules, a surviving spouse or civil partner would lose the pension should they remarry or cohabit. I am happy to support the committee's recommendation in paragraph 158 of its report, which states that that rule should be removed and that "spouses' and civil partners' pensions should continue for life." That provision should be removed because it is an anomaly; I am glad that it has been picked up. Most pensions and insurance policies of which I am aware continue for life and do not stop at a given time. I turn to part O of schedule 1. As well as looking to the future, we must look to the past. Many people are or have been unable to put money into their pension fund for several reasons, such as family obligations or financial constraints—or perhaps they were a bit young and did not think too much about pensions. By introducing added years, we will allow individuals to make up for lost time at their own cost and at no cost to the taxpayer. That is why I fully endorse the intention behind part O, which is that members should be allowed to purchase extra years of service to add to their actual reckonable service. I thank everyone who has been involved in the committee's work. I fully endorse the bill and recommend that Parliament should support it.

I acknowledge the member's point that Westminster MPs are picking up the  cudgel, particularly the Scottish ones. My point was that, in the first instance, they turned their backs. They are coming to the game because of this Parliament's action and the way in which we are conducting ourselves.

I well remember the meeting with members of Clydeside Action on Asbestos that Stuart McMillan referred to. When they told me about their case and campaign, I was convinced by their arguments. To me, the story was simple: a person—or, indeed, a group of people—is unwittingly exposed to and damaged by asbestos; and someone is responsible and must be held accountable. For many years, that is exactly how the law worked. People who had been damaged by exposure to asbestos and could prove that  through the presence of pleural plaques would be entitled to compensation. I might add that, at a mere £8,000, the compensation was not a king's ransom. Nevertheless, the important point was that their injury was recognised by the courts. In October 2007, after a concerted campaign by representatives of those who, in one form or another, were responsible for the damage done by asbestos, everything changed. Workers—and, in many cases, their families—who had been exposed to asbestos and had developed pleural plaques had their right to compensation overturned by the House of Lords. Can anyone imagine the situation of workers who had been kept in the dark by their employers about the effects of inhaling asbestos—and, even worse, who brought home to be washed clothes containing the asbestos particles that, in time, would kill their loved ones—now having to come to terms with the House of Lords closing the door on recognition of and compensation for the very pleural plaques that were often forerunners of worse to come? The House of Lords turned the clock back in more ways than one. It took us back to an era in which industrial barons could operate with impunity and workers, including children, had no recourse to compensation when damaged by the industrial process. The law protected the barons, not those whom they damaged. History, unfortunately, has a habit of repeating itself. The logic behind the House of Lords ruling is that as contamination by asbestos causes only internal scarring and no visible damage, and as no ill effect follows from the scarring of a person's lungs, there is no need for compensation. I do not agree with that at all. Never mind the physical damage to the lung, what about the psychological damage that those with pleural plaques commonly suffer? They have to live with that experience, witness its effects on others and see their friends and former workmates fall to life-taking illnesses. Those people worry about their future, what will happen to them, what their injuries will lead to and who is to look after their families. It is no wonder that they suffer psychological damage. Of course, not all of them contract life-threatening illnesses, but their common worry is, "Who is going to be next?" We should make no mistake about the importance to sufferers of recognition that a wrong has been done and that someone will do something about it. People who have, through no fault of their own, been damaged to the point that their life is threatened need our support. It is shameful in the extreme that recognition of their injury, which there was for so long, has been taken away.  I am proud of the swift action that the Scottish Government has taken, which has been well received. I am equally proud of the mostly unreserved support that has been shown across the chamber for enacting the bill. It is good that the Parliament has stood firm on the notion that there would be a miscarriage of justice if the House of Lords ruling was allowed to stand, but there are other profound reasons for backing the bill. To its shame, the Westminster Government meekly accepted hook, line and sinker the bad judgment that the House of Lords made. Westminster MPs decided to turn their backs on the victims of pleural plaques. The Scottish Parliament is united and determined to reverse the House of Lords ruling, and has embarrassed or twitched the conscience of Westminster MPs, forcing them to rethink their position on pleural plaques. Therefore, the campaign by Clydeside Action on Asbestos to seek or, I should say, to continue the right to claim compensation for those who suffer from pleural plaques, although aimed at the Scottish Parliament to affect the law of Scotland, has done an enormous service not only for individuals and families in Scotland, but for sufferers in other parts of the United Kingdom whom Westminster abandoned. As we progress the bill in Scotland, let us hope that our actions will cause something positive to happen quickly in England. Most folk think that a person who has been damaged by asbestos must have been involved in heavy industry in some way. We must dispel that notion. Workers who are involved in repair work, such as joiners, electricians and plumbers, are at risk. In some cases, few such workers have a clue that asbestos is evident while they work. Even teachers who have never been near an industrial site die as a result of asbestos-related illnesses every year. When the trace work is carried out, there is conclusive evidence that they were contaminated in class. Therefore, the issue is not only a heavy industry concern; the effects of asbestos reach across society. I hope to expand on that point in the chamber on another day in the near future. I want to address a point that was well made by Jackson Carlaw. My family business is involved with the car industry. Most folk think that cars are welded together and that is it, but modern cars are somewhat different. They have been changed because of the accidents that can happen as a result of vehicles' rigidity. Adhesives and bondings are used in constructing them so that when the car crumbles, the person inside will be protected. Those materials are, of course, often very toxic. My business not only supplies such goods; we have technical advisers who go out and demonstrate them. Therefore, I put on the front line individuals whom I know extremely well and  have worked with for a long time. We know what we are doing and how to do it and a duty of care is involved, but something could happen that we were unaware of. If that happened, I would not expect to walk away from my liabilities. Similarly, I do not expect anything different for sufferers of pleural plaques. Therefore, I whole-heartedly support the bill.

Does the First Minister agree that a cost of the current system of unelected health boards is the lack of accountability to the public that they serve, which is felt most acutely when hospitals are feared to be under threat?

I lived directly opposite the St Mary's unit in Bishopbriggs for a number of years, and I had the experience of dealing with some of the young people from the institution. I never felt threatened at any time by their presence, but my experience tells me that some of the young people would have benefited by not being in the institution.

I have a question. Will the minister examine the use of intensive support and monitoring services? That would benefit some young people, such as those whom I believe should not have been in that institution in the first place, and it would also benefit Scottish society.

What impact would cutting income tax in Scotland by 2p in the pound, as the Liberal Democrats propose, have on the cabinet secretary's ability to allocate resources to Scotland's cities?

To ask the Scottish Government whether it has data on the impact of the credit crunch on small businesses in Scotland. (S3O-4553)

I thank the minister for that full answer; he has not left me with a lot to go on. I am sure that the minister will be aware that a good number of small businesses are concerned that the credit crunch will cause them budgeting problems in the short and medium term. Will the Government keep an eye on the situation and gather the numbers with a view to continuing to be proactive in assisting small businesses during this difficult period?

When I first heard that the Scottish Parliament was embarking on a course of international development, I was not a member of the Parliament, and I was struck by the small amount of money that was to be deployed. Of course, since then, the Scottish Government has committed to doubling the amount involved. I agree with Ted Brocklebank: in the global scheme of things, even if we doubled or trebled the new amount of £9 million, the total would still be relatively small. However, few contributions from other places have made such a spectacular impact as have those from the Scottish Parliament. The previous Government and the Parliament are to be congratulated on the initiative. Credit should go to the Government for developing the initiative in the first place and to all those who were here at the time, with the initiative receiving total support from across the political divide. The Scottish people's imagination was caught, and in one moment, the Scottish Parliament was lifted on to a pedestal by a single policy initiative. Although, as I have said, the sums of money that were involved were small, their impact brought great benefit, not only to the people of Malawi through direct application, but to the Scottish people by making them aware of another country's situation. In turn, that created a climate in which not only individuals but schools, churches, businesses and a host of other sections of Scottish society wanted to do something positive. They all wanted to be associated with the Scottish Parliament's international development initiative. It would be worth while to work out how much it would cost to promote the Scottish Parliament to  the positive levels that it achieved through the initiative. I am sure that it would take much more than was spent on the initiative in the first place. Dare I say that it was a positive double whammy: good news for Malawi and for Scotland? During the evidence-taking sessions, we heard from many people who made extremely good contributions and helped to shape the committee's report. Most participants were conscious of the sums involved and that we wanted to make the most of what we had at our disposal. Some favoured the idea that, in the future, all the money should be spent in one country under one heading, such as education; some preferred the idea of spending it in one country, but focusing on two budget headings; some wanted to spend it in one country but over a wider portfolio mix; some were for spending it in two countries; and so on. The models were well made and proposed with vigour and informed argument. I found it very difficult to make up my mind because each strategy was able to stand on its own and workable. I was impressed by the evidence from the Fair Trade Forum, which was given by John McAllion. He called for active participation on fair trade, and highlighted the fact that the Scottish public sector spends £8 billion a year buying goods and services. He told the committee: "The attachment of fair trade and ethical criteria to the contracts that are involved in the buying of those goods and services would make a massive impact, not only on how Scots think about themselves but on many poor producers all over the world who might be able to get into that chain." In another response, Mr McAllion said that "there is a strong case for including fair trade and ethical criteria in contracts issued through the public sector".—[ Official Report , European and External Relations Committee , 13 May 2008; c 660, 663.] The documented evidence that the Scottish Fair Trade Forum submitted gave many examples from throughout the rest of Europe of ethical and fair trade procurement—including procurement in the European Commission itself. I believe that we in Scotland can step up to the plate on fair trade. We can do something positive to help developing countries, and councils have an influential role to play in that. To that end, I have written to West Dunbartonshire Council, encouraging it to increase the number of towns in the area that are fair trade towns. I believe that West Dunbartonshire could be a fair trade county. We should do all that we can to support developing countries. That is only one way, but it is a tangible and workable way, to make a difference. It was a pleasure to be involved in taking evidence for the report. The commitment and  enthusiasm from throughout Scotland were humbling and should encourage us all to take positive action to help developing countries.

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with local authorities about the impact of the proposed sale of Glasgow airport by BAA. (S3O-4147)

The minister will be aware that Glasgow airport is self-regulated by BAA, which has an impact on the local authorities that surround the airport. Does the Scottish Government have any plans to discuss with the United Kingdom Government the prospect of Glasgow airport being regulated by a Government authority, as the London airports are? At present, it is run by a private company that regulates itself.

If action had been taken by the health board in January and February, when the problem with C difficile began, it is possible that the outbreak would have been contained. What actions are being taken to ensure that there is a quicker response to C difficile outbreaks by health boards throughout Scotland? The cabinet secretary will know that, in the past, services at the Vale of Leven hospital have been cut. I hope that the health board does not use the problem with C difficile as an excuse for further removals.

There is a clear need for services to deal with women and children who are systematically abused, with many designations attached to their status, such as legal, illegal or trafficked. I agree with everything that I have heard so far, but I want in my limited time to concentrate on those who have been trafficked, although most—if not all—that I have to say will have a direct bearing on all designations.  Amnesty International rightly makes great play of human rights law. I would go further, however, and say that we have a moral responsibility to come to the assistance of women, some of them mere children, who have been trafficked, imprisoned, brutally treated and forced to prostitute themselves while our systems—or lack of systems—keep them as slaves to the traffickers because they fear the worst when they think of what is outside where they are. The women's handlers use the tactic of fear. They ingrain a message into the individual's soul: "If you think the situation's bad now, I can tell you how bad it can be outside, not only for you but for your loved ones elsewhere." Even with considerable assistance and understanding, people in that situation are reluctant to accept that they will be supported if they break out of their imprisonment. Therefore, we must try in every way possible to reach trafficked people. The last thing we should do is send the message that we are not ready or willing to come to their assistance, never mind to their rescue. We need to take action: we need to have a fully integrated approach to people who have been trafficked, from identification of the whereabouts of trafficked women to reaching out to them with crucial expert support. The status of "illegal" needs to be removed and there must be sympathetic counselling. Of course, none of that will be possible if safe houses are not available. None of it is easy or cheap, but it is achievable. I know that most of the authority in the matter lies with Westminster, which the non-governmental organisations fully appreciate. However, when the Scottish Parliament debates and gets behind issues of concern, positive action normally follows. If there was ever a subject in relation to which there was a need for positive action and a united front to meet dire human need, this is that subject. I am pleased that Angela Constance has brought the matter for debate—in doing so, she has done Parliament a great service. I hope that Parliament and the Government speak and act as one. There must be swift action.

Will the cabinet secretary comment on the ratchet effects on local government finances if we were to stick by PPP? Would local government finances not grind to a halt when it comes to new builds?

The difference in maturity between a child of 13 and a 16-year-old is vast. I wonder whether the First Minister shares my concern that lowering the age of consent to within that age range will be normalising abuse.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it has had discussions with the United Kingdom Government with regard to bringing in regulation at Glasgow airport aimed at reducing the noise impact on residents living under the flight path. (S3O-3234)

Most people who live in and around airports appreciate that there will always be noise at airports. When the British Airports Authority was privatised, the right of regulation of Scottish airports went to that private company, although the Government accepted regulation of London airports. Many people feel that self-regulation is not effective. Will the Scottish Government talk to the UK Government and use its influence to bring regulation of Scottish airports—Glasgow airport in particular—under Government control? Action might then be taken and some respite from the noise granted, as has been the case around London airports.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it has any plans to monitor the effect on the public of seeking out-of-hours access to public buildings that have been private finance initiative or public-private partnership funded. (S3O-3091)

The cabinet secretary is well aware that we are trying to encourage children to engage in sports and activities. That is a good initiative, but increasingly we find that people cannot access the facilities that we, the public, have paid for. I hope that the cabinet secretary can devise a scheme to free up those facilities so that we can engage with children, get them off the streets doing useful exercise, and help the community in general.

I welcome today's statement and pay tribute to the work that was done by members of all parties in the first two sessions of this Parliament to ensure that measures such as those that we are discussing stayed on the agenda and that progress was made. Today is a good day for everyone here, and for our former colleagues. The cabinet secretary will be aware that there is sometimes a breakdown in the courts because of the way in which vulnerable witnesses, particularly children, are asked questions—they sometimes become confused or fail to understand the questions they are asked. Will the cabinet secretary consider introducing come form of chaperone or assistant—I think that the correct term is "intermediary"—who can be on hand to interpret for the child or the vulnerable witness so that they know exactly what is being asked of them? The intermediary could also ensure that the evidence is understood correctly. Our system is flawed in that it is so high-powered and confrontational that it can put children off and lead to their not answering properly. It would benefit from the introduction of intermediaries.

To ask the Scottish Government what changes have been introduced to modern apprenticeship placements. (S3O-3035)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that changing the types of apprenticeships is positive in two ways: first, it ensures that we will be able to fill the skills gap in Scotland and, secondly, the apprentices will be in a better position to gain employment in the field in which they have been trained to work?

My question is similar to Helen Eadie's. Will the inquiry be able to secure, and act on, information on people who might not know that they are infected?

The Labour motion starts by stating "That the Parliament applauds the vital contribution made to society and the economy by the voluntary sector". I support that statement unreservedly and would go even further. As a board member of Central Scotland Rape Crisis and Sexual Abuse Centre, I can tell members that the volunteers' work cannot be matched pound for pound by public or private sector organisations.

I am sorry. I do not intend to do so because I want to get a lot into my speech. Give a voluntary organisation a pound and it can turn it into £10, but give a quango £10 and it will turn it into a pound. It is clear that the Scottish Government recognises the contribution of the voluntary sector. At the concordat conference on Monday 14 April, John Swinney highlighted the key role for the third sector in effective community planning. The single outcome agreement structure will strengthen the role of the sector by recording officially its contribution as a key strategic delivery partner in each local authority area in Scotland and will give it valuable recognition for the first time in many areas. That recognition will open up a range of possibilities for the sector and statutory partners to look more creatively at resourcing themselves individually and collectively. Partnership bids that will maximise use of resources and move full-cost recovery from theory to tangible fact can be better pursued. Support to voluntary organisations has been strengthened by the new funding round for councils for voluntary service, which exist to support and develop the third sector in each local authority area, of £11.85 million for 2008-11. Active community engagement and volunteering are valuable personal development tools that are best delivered at a local level where the value of community activism can best be seen. The Scottish Government acknowledged that by supporting the volunteering partnership in Scotland, which consists of Volunteer Development Scotland—the national centre for excellence—and the network of 32 volunteer centres, one in each local authority area, which exist to grow and develop engagement and volunteering at local authority level. The partnership has just received a three-year funding package of £11.5 million for 2008-11. Youth volunteering is a vital personal development tool that the Scottish Government has committed to supporting through the millennium volunteer certificate scheme which is run through volunteer centres and funding for YouthLink Scotland. However, with an ageing population, the contribution of volunteering schemes, such as those that are run by community service volunteers, is also important. Support has also been given through the voluntary action fund's volunteering grant schemes. I turn to the scaremongering that is implicit in the Labour motion. It is clear that Labour hopes and prays that the third sector will run into trouble. The continual and perpetual false claims that councillors will withdraw funding are shameful.  Let me just conclude, Deputy Presiding Officer.

I trust implicitly the SNP councillors. I even trust the Labour councillors. It is just a pity that their leadership does not.

The debate gives us the opportunity to recognise the anniversary of the signing by the United Kingdom of the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings—ECAT. I would have been delighted to be able to say that it is a celebration of the ratification of the convention but, sadly, that has not yet happened. When it is ratified, the convention will ensure that the rights of victims of trafficking are upheld in domestic law. Although the issue is not in the Scottish Government's jurisdiction, I want the Parliament and the Scottish Government to be as one and to use any influence that we have to put the strongest case to the UK Government that action is needed to bring the effects of the convention into play and to say that we would support the measures that are needed to ensure that the convention is ratified. I pay tribute to Amnesty International for its consistent and diligent work in raising awareness of human trafficking. Amnesty has concerns about the identification of victims of trafficking in Scotland. That is currently police led and there is no formal procedure for consulting non-governmental organisations and other agencies as per international best practice. For a number of reasons, victims of trafficking are unlikely to disclose what has happened to police officers or immigration officials. Those reasons include threats from traffickers; shame and guilt about having been involved in commercial sexual exploitation; concern about insecure immigration  status; fear of corruption among home state officials; and the fact that victims may be suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder. When a brothel is raided, in many cases the people who are arrested are people who have been trafficked. Some have entered the country with legal documents on the promise of legitimate work. Unfortunately, they have been tricked and forced into the sex trade by violence and confinement, and their documents have been substituted by false ones. These are people who are unable to speak English and who, although they have been brutalised and scared out of their wits, are illegal immigrants due to fake planted documents and are likely to be deported. When they reach their home country, the threats of the traffickers become a reality and they may find themselves in trouble with their home authorities. We need support services that are trusted by those who are trafficked. The victims need time to come to terms with their situation if they are to become good witnesses or to have their needs assessed. NGOs that are working in the field pick up information from the street and can play a significant role in many ways. They can pick up information to identify traffickers and assist with the recovery of victims by providing the varied and expert support that is essential if we are going to make a difference. Article 10 of ECAT requires trained officials to identify and help victims, including referring them to support organisations and issuing them with residence permits where eligible. Article 10 also requires that if a person is reasonably suspected of being trafficked, they should not be removed until the identification process is complete, and in the meantime they should receive appropriate support and accommodation. Article 12 of ECAT requires member states to provide such measures "as may be necessary to assist victims in their physical, psychological and social recovery." As a minimum, those measures should include a standard of living necessary for subsistence, including "appropriate and secure accommodation, psychological and material assistance; access to emergency medical treatment; information on rights; access to an interpreter and legal advice; and "access to education for children." I would like the Scottish Government to support the call for the reflection period for the victims of trafficking to be extended from 30 days to at least 90 days to allow victims to access adequate care services. Although this is a reserved matter, I want the Scottish Government to engage with the Home  Office, as the previous Administration did in the first place, and urge the UK Government to sign the convention. We can then move forward positively. Human trafficking—or, should I say, slavery—comes in many different forms: women for the sex trade; manual workers; farm workers; child pickpockets; and children who are to be sexually abused. According to evidence that was given to the House of Commons, someone was even trafficked into the fishing industry in Scotland. The United Nations estimates that between 700,000 and 4 million women and children are victims of trafficking. There is a well-connected worldwide criminal network behind it, and it is often associated with other criminal activities. It is a professional and formidable force that has a business worth of $10 billion. Trafficking is on the rise in Scotland and the UK. We need to get organised in Scotland, the UK and Europe and at UN level. As trafficking has no borders, international action is necessary. Friends, we can do our bit. This evening's debate is the next step in bringing the issue to public attention and in seeking the Parliament's support for encouraging the Scottish Government to engage with the UK Government to bring about the ratification of the convention. I believe that we are pushing at an open door—let us all walk through that door together.

Has the cabinet secretary been in recent dialogue with Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board with regard to the retention of services at the Vale of Leven hospital? A number of individuals have been in touch with me in the past week with concerns about the issue.

That Scotland is now free of bridge tolls is welcome, but I am sure that the First Minister is aware that BAA has introduced a road toll: it has introduced  charges for collecting passengers at airports in Scotland. Will the Government step in and find a way to nullify and negate the powers of regulation that BAA has used to introduce a holiday tax?

Margo MacDonald is perhaps suggesting that it would be difficult to say that men who pay for sex unknowingly rape a person. However, I hope that the member acknowledges that, with trafficking, one way in which women are coerced and threatened on a weekly basis is by being raped by the people who possess them. Those folk should be dealt with severely.

First, I declare an interest as a board member of Central Scotland Rape Crisis and Sexual Abuse Centre. I pay tribute to the Parliament's continuing work on rape and sexual abuse. People look to the Parliament as it deals with such issues, and wish it well in its work as it develops. I support the motion and hope that the chamber will support the Labour amendment. Although members have already highlighted the low conviction rate for crimes of rape, I will concentrate on that appalling record. It is worth saying that less than 4 per cent of cases that go to trial result in a conviction. That is 4 per cent of an already low number of cases that make it to court in the first place.

Although I bow to the figure supplied by Bill Aitken, it does not alter what I will say. However, I will check the figures again. No right-thinking person, whether a judge, policeman, lawyer or politician, should find acceptable or be relaxed about the number of cases and convictions. If the figures related to car thefts, house break-ins or some other crime, there would be a major inquiry and the public would want something to be done about it quickly, so why have we tolerated the rape law situation and why are the public not up in arms? There are many complex reasons; I will touch on just some of them. Our system of law is out of balance. A rape victim—or a person alleged to have been raped—is almost treated like a person who is guilty of perjury, until the accused has been found to have committed rape. Smart lawyers—by which I mean clever lawyers—whose job it is to get their client off, are  able and willing to bring before the court information about an accuser with the sole purpose of painting a picture that colours the jury's view as to why they are not to be believed. Worse still, the person's sexual habits, dress or views nullify any concept of justice for them. In other words, such lawyers tell the jury, "Look at what she was wearing. She had a good bevvy. She flirted with him and she had sex with more than one man, so she asked for it." Let us consider those points. "Look at what she was wearing." I challenge members to look at what their female family members and friends, as well as young women throughout Scotland, wear. The hem-lines of their skirts are up to their armpits and their midriffs are bare. That is the fashion. It is how young people dress, whether we like it or not. It is how 75 per cent of our young women dress when they have a night out. Does that mean that 75 per cent of young females, including our family members, are asking to be raped? "She had a good bevvy." Unfortunately, too many young people, both male and female, drink to get drunk rather than to have a social experience. Whether that is because of peer pressure or because it is cool to get blitzed, I do not know, but it puts them at greater risk from the predators, animals and cowards who seek out the weakest to attack. I fully acknowledge that fact and would like to see the end of that drinking trend. Nonetheless, the courts should offer no refuge or assistance to those who prey on victims. If a woman is paralytic and cannot or does not say no, how can it be judged that she said yes? It might be said that she had a reputation. She might have had sex with other men, but so what? What does that prove? It proves that she said yes willingly to them; it does not mean that another man is entitled to rape her. It could also be that she said yes to someone with whom she was in a relationship, but the relationship ended. Does that mean that after she said yes once, the answer was yes forever? Of course not. If I could give advice to all those concerned, whether the police, the courts or the Parliament, it would be this: our rates for getting rape cases to court and obtaining convictions are, by any definition, appalling in the extreme, and we need to do something about it. We do not need to reinvent the wheel. Models exist that offer total protection and justice for the accused and give them the ability to defend themselves properly, while at the same time offering those who claim to have been raped the sure knowledge that their case will be heard and tried, and that they will be treated fairly and protected from the divulging of private and irrelevant information. Being able to deploy information to play deliberately to the jury's  prejudices cannot be right, and it must be changed. When rape cases afford a proper balance in court between the accuser and the accused, the prosecution and conviction rates in Scotland will rise, and Scotland's justice system will be the winner.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

I do not think that anybody here does not agree with the proposal to retain DNA samples of criminals, particularly sex offenders—we are united on that front. However, I think that the retention of DNA samples of innocent people is a step too far.

What about a question?

It is with great pleasure that I support the concept of democracy in local health care, which is long overdue. Since the start of the current parliamentary session, I have been involved in three health service issues on which the health board would have benefited from having direct input from people with local knowledge who would be directly affected by the board's decisions. In his member's business debate on parking charges at Stobhill hospital, Paul Martin put forward the argument that there should be no parking charges—a view with which I had, and have, some sympathy—and gave some  compelling arguments based on his local knowledge. However, with my insight into the damage that vandals can do to parked vehicles in large unsupervised car parks and my local knowledge of how the parking is set out at Stobhill, I am equally aware that people might be happy to pay a small charge for parking facilities—although I have in mind shillings rather than the pounds that the health board proposed. Given our insight and our local knowledge of Stobhill hospital, I am sure that, after a little debate on the matter, Paul Martin and I could live with any of the outcomes that we have separately promoted. In Dumbarton, thousands of people came on to the streets to show their support for the retention of threatened services at the Vale of Leven hospital. A common concern in the community was the aloof manner of the board's consultation, which lacked any other options. There was only one game plan: the health board's plan. Another concern was the perceived lack of accountability to the people whom the hospital serves. In Clydebank, there is a massive public campaign to retain beds that are threatened with removal at St Margaret's of Scotland Hospice. Just this week, campaigners turned up at the Public Petitions Committee to hear how the committee intends to progress the petition, which was signed by 60,000 people. One of the main grievances is that the hospice was not consulted at any time about the loss of the 30 beds. Those three different cases share some common issues: the perception that people would not be heard; the perception that people's views would not be taken into account; and the perception that people's views were not worth considering. In all three cases, if local involvement and accountability had come into play, there would have been two benefits: giving the public some ownership of the process would reassure them about decisions; and the boards would benefit because it would give them back some of the credibility that, sadly, they have lost among the public that they represent and serve. Most people think that health boards work to a plan that has been preconceived in some other place, with no room for changes that reflect the public's views. The master plan is what you get—like it or lump it. The health service is paid for and, indeed, owned by the public. The best way in which to show that ownership is to have members of health boards who are directly elected by the public. In that way, confidence in the boards will return. Therefore, I support the Government's plans for democracy in health boards. Some decisions will still be difficult and indeed contested, but the public will be reassured that they have ownership of decisions, because they will know that their  concerns have been aired and responded to by those whom they elected rather than by those who have been selected.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will the member take an intervention at last?

To ask the Scottish Government what early indications there are of the level of success of the free school meals pilot in West Dunbartonshire. (S3O-2185)

I was interested in the minister's replies to Pauline McNeill and Tricia Marwick. Can the minister confirm that the scheme has been very well received in West Dunbartonshire? I encourage the minister to do two things: increase the scope of the scheme, lifting the age limit so that more children can benefit from it; and quickly expand it throughout Scotland because it is so good.

To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in formulating an alternative funding mechanism to public-private partnerships. (S3O-2088)

The pitfalls of PFI and PPP are well documented. The sooner they go, the better. Could the cabinet secretary assure me that the new scheme will place emphasis on community needs and that the buildings, infrastructure and services that will be paid for by the public will be for their benefit, rather than for the benefit of the contractors or their shareholders?

Perhaps the member could inform the Parliament that 10 Labour members on West Dunbartonshire Council voted for the measure to which she refers and that there are only nine SNP members on that council.

I welcome the opportunity to support the Government's motion and will do so. My initial instinct was to support the amendments, but some of the interpretation and ill-informed innuendo from Ken Gibson, in particular—[ Laughter. ] I meant to say Ken Macintosh. I apologise to Ken Gibson for associating him with Ken Macintosh's comments, which were not fitting in this chamber. I hope that the member who winds up for Labour will indicate what the Labour Party thinks about those comments.

If you are not big enough to understand what you were saying, I will not do your research for you. Frankly, that shows the level to which you have dropped.

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. Will you tell the member to behave himself? This debate is not just about teaching Scottish history for its own sake, but about our children understanding their heritage and why Scotland is where it is today. I will use my speech to highlight some of the areas of Scottish life that our children need to understand and to relate those to topics in Scottish history about which our children should be taught. Why are there so many whys in Scottish history? Why did a Scot establish the American navy to fight the British? Why were Scots involved in writing the American declaration of independence?  Why did so many Scots, especially at leadership level, fight on the American side in the American war of independence? Why were Scots involved in writing the American constitution and bill of rights? Why is the American Congress based on and almost identical in its layout and procedures to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland? Why were so many men who were involved at the siege of the Alamo Gaelic speakers, some wearing tartan and playing the bagpipes? Why did so many Scots, especially at leadership level, fight on both sides in the American civil war? Why were so many Scots in America in the first place?

I will encompass such matters in a broader sense as I develop my point. Why is Scotland's population only 5 million when it should be nearer 12 million? Why are market towns such as Inveraray in Argyll and Lanark in Lanarkshire not the size of Inverness or Aberdeen? Why are there only four major cities in Scotland? Why is three quarters of Scotland empty of people? Why were vast parts of Scotland ethnically cleansed? Why did the London Government allow and encourage that ethnic cleansing? Why is so much of Scotland owned by so few individuals? Why were Scottish aristocrats almost exclusively educated in England? Why did the state persecute the great social thinker and reformer Thomas Muir? Why were the 1820 martyrs fitted out and murdered by the state? Why are all those incidents connected? Why was I taught some American whys with no attached Scottish perspective? Why were none of the Scottish whys taught?

I accept that something is missing from my experience and education when I look around Scotland and realise that I have never been taught why certain things happened.

Not at the moment, thank you. Why is it impossible for someone to teach history in the United States of America without knowing their national and state history? Why is it possible for someone to teach history in Scotland without knowing a single thing about Scottish history? Why does every other country in the world  think that it is good and important to teach its own history?

Why are there so many whys about Scottish history? Why would anybody want to suppress such questions?

That will be a change.

I thank Des McNulty for bringing this welcome debate to the Parliament and congratulate him on doing so. St Margaret's is the oldest hospice in Scotland and has built up a fine record over the years. People who have had a direct experience of St Margaret's bear witness to its record. They will tell us of the dedication, professionalism, experience, love and compassion in abundance that the staff share with the individuals and families who require their services. That reputation for fine service is known to and appreciated not only by the people of Clydebank but far and wide across central Scotland and beyond. That reputation has developed from the way that St Margaret's goes about its business: it does it well, cost effectively and with great integrity. Given that record and the public awareness of the fine work that St Margaret's carries out, I find it extraordinary that when major changes were going to take place that would have such a dramatic impact on St Margaret's, St Margaret's was the last to be told. In fact, it was never given the opportunity to be involved in any consultation whatever. It is clear that that is not right. A major concern for me is the fact that the hospital that will benefit directly from the removal of beds from St Margaret's is Blawarthill, which is a PPP project. Blawarthill hospital was earmarked for closure but was saved after a campaign. Call me an old cynic but, on the face of it, the transfer of beds from St Margaret's to the PPP-funded new build at Blawarthill is simply a way of making that facility work. That said, I believe that Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board still has a duty to engage with St Margaret's, to take its legacy fully into account and to come to an agreement that builds on that legacy, so that others can rest assured that the fine service that it provides will be available for another 50 years and beyond.  At the risk of repeating myself, St Margaret's provides a service that is much needed and appreciated by the people of Clydebank and beyond. It would be worth the health board reconsidering the matter and discussing with St Margaret's ways and means of allowing the hospice to continue to make a full contribution to the community. The health board should recognise that it did not act properly as regards consultation. Surely it is not too late for it to put things right. St Margaret's has proved that it can do the job and do it well, and the health board should allow it to do just that.

Last week, we witnessed European leaders beaming from ear to ear, patting each other on the back, and hugging and kissing like a striker receiving adulation for scoring the best and most vital goal ever—that is, until the next most vital goal. What a spectacle, what pomp, and what a sell-out. They have connived and deluded, and conjured up a mumbo-jumbo of words to disguise and conceal from their own people the fact that they have signed the self-same thing that was conclusively rejected—the European constitution. The back-slapping bunch of so-called world leaders deluded only themselves with the smoke-and-mirrors scheme that they thought they had pulled off so well when they claimed that they had signed a brand new treaty. However, that scheme had one vital flaw—one little aspect—that blew it apart and is hard to overlook. Did we have to trawl through all the scripts, documents and clauses to find that vital flaw? Did we have to call in hordes of researchers to uncover the stark truth? Did we have to spend a king's ransom to employ the best legal minds on the planet to expose them? No, we did not need to do any of that—the European leaders themselves told us. Angela Merkel, the German Chancellor, said: "The substance of the constitution is preserved. That is a fact." She went on to say that she wanted the new treaty to "use different terminology without changing the legal substance". Elmar Brok, the chairman of the European Parliament's Committee on Foreign Affairs, said: "Despite all the compromises, the substance of the draft EU Constitution has been safeguarded." Rodríguez Zapatero, the President of Spain, said: "We have not let a single substantial point of the constitutional treaty go". Giscard D'Estaing, former President of France and chairman of the convention that wrote the constitution, said: "Public opinion will be led to adopt, without knowing it, the proposals that we dare not present to them directly", that "All the earlier proposals will be in the new text, but will be hidden and disguised in some way" and that "What was difficult to understand will become utterly incomprehensible, but the substance has been retained". He went on to say:  "Why not have a single text? The only reason is that this would look too much like the constitutional treaty. Making cosmetic changes would make the text more easy to swallow." Finally, Giuliano Amato, former Italian Prime Minister and vice-chairman of the convention, gave the game away and all the deceptions when he said: "The good thing about not calling it a Constitution is that no one can ask for a referendum on it." Labour promised a referendum and, of course, Gordon Brown sneaked in to sign up to the deception to avoid a referendum. The SNP wants a referendum on independence, so that we can give to the Scottish people and our country all the powers that we need. Labour does not want a referendum on the treaty, so that it can give away all the UK's powers to Europe. The SNP believes in the sovereignty of the people. Labour believes that the people are mushrooms to be kept in the dark and fed crap. When politicians who claim to be European leaders treat the peoples of Europe with such disdain and contempt, democracy is the loser in the long run. In a previous debate on the matter, I pleaded with Gordon Brown to keep his word and give the people the referendum that he and his party promised. Given last week's events and Gordon Brown's actions, it is clear that my call fell on deaf ears. I ask him again to keep his word and hold a referendum. If he says no, I hope that it will be he who pays the price, not the people and democracy.

Scottish Women's Aid has said: "Since 1999 Scotland has been an international example of excellent work in tackling domestic abuse and one of the first countries to adopt a national strategy. Now is the time to capitalise on our global reputation and to demonstrate that the safety and wellbeing of women and children is fundamental to a safer, stronger and healthier Scotland." It is good that we are debating the issue today—it is not until one is outside Parliament that one can appreciate what people say about the effect that what happens in Parliament has on this issue. Another voluntary organisation, the Zero Tolerance Charitable Trust, says: "The UN Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women defines violence against women as 'any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life.' It includes; rape and sexual violence, female genital mutilation, forced marriage, stalking, commercial sexual exploitation such as prostitution and pornography, crimes and murders committed in the name  of 'honour', sexual harassment and domestic violence and abuse." That is a catalogue of serious crimes against women and children. There are two common factors. First, almost everybody who works in the voluntary sector in this field is female and, secondly, almost everyone who commits the crimes against women and children is male. I recognise, however, that some women are abusers and that a growing number of adult men are coming forward about being abused by other men. My final quote is anonymous, because I do not want to detract from the good work that is happening. It says: "The elimination of violence against women is the subject of international attention at this time of year as countries across the world take part in various campaigns to raise awareness of this issue. And to encourage local women and children to get involved in this year's campaign"— and so on. I have misgivings about that statement, as it gives the impression that such violence is a women's problem. Leaving it to the women is not good enough. Although I acknowledge that women and children are the most adversely affected by these things, as men are the problem—or, should I say, are most likely to be the abusers—we need to engage with male society to make the difference. We need more men to support women by taking a stand and not letting abusers get away with it, and we need to start early. Prevention is much more effective. Some good work is already being carried out in schools, but it is not enough. Some children think that it is okay, and even normal, for a boy to hit a girl. Some young people even think that men are and should be allowed to hit women. All that starts in the home. We have to change attitudes and habits at an early stage in order to break the cycle. Give me the bairn before he is nine and I will give you the man who will march to my tune. A few years ago, in South America, some brave males joined forces with women's groups on a zero tolerance anti-macho campaign. Violence against women and children was common but, because high-profile males took up the challenge, the campaign was effective and improved matters significantly. The poster that I am holding up, which came through my mailbox, is a great example of Scottish men reaching out to other Scottish men and taking sides for the protection of women and children. It shows a whole series of men who will be wearing the white ribbon over the next 16 days. They are people whom other men look up to and who have influence in our society. My challenge to my fellow parliamentarians over the coming 16 days is to get an invitation to or turn up at one of the events that  is taking place; to get up on their two hind legs and support the women who will be there doing the hard work; and to ensure that the Parliament continues to be at the forefront of the campaign to end violence against women and children.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it is in dialogue with foreign agencies with regard to controlling child abuse on the internet. (S3O-1327)

At present, the United Kingdom and Scotland have a particularly good record on monitoring and evaluating such coverage on the internet and on ensuring that sites that are inappropriate or which publish materials relating to child abuse are taken down quickly. In the United States, however, there is a reluctance to pull sites that involve child abuse. It takes a considerable time after notification before a site is taken down, by which time it has moved elsewhere. Will the Scottish Government join the other devolved Administrations and the United Kingdom authorities in putting pressure on the US Government and the authorities that are involved in controlling the internet to be proactive and, ultimately, to review procedures so that sites can be taken down at the earliest opportunity?

Is the minister aware that there has been a constant volume of complaints about noxious smells emanating from the Dalmuir sewage works, which are spreading over a wide area of Clydebank? Is he prepared to kick up a stink of his own and intervene to bring some positive action and respite to the residents of Clydebank and, I fear, beyond?

I congratulate Paul Martin on securing this debate on an important matter. I apologise to him and to members that I will have to leave when I finish speaking, as I must attend the inaugural meeting of a cross-party group. I would have liked to stay for the whole debate. Like Paul Martin, I was born in north Springburn. When I was nine, I moved to the Milton scheme; I lived there until I was 21, when I moved to Bishopbriggs. I have only recently moved from that area, so I am very familiar with Stobhill hospital. To this day, my doctor's surgery is in the Milton scheme. That is where my heart is. I might live somewhere else, but I come from Springburn. I know exactly the feeling that comes from Paul Martin's heart. I heard what the Presiding Officer said before I rose to speak, but this goes for all hospitals: they are not happy places, in general. My experience of Stobhill hospital has not been happy. The things that happen to families that cause them to go to hospitals are usually traumatic, whether they  involve injury, severe illness or death. However, we all have some affection for hospitals. The last thing that I would have been thinking about when I was at the hospital, on any of my visits there, would have been parking charges. Further, the last thing that health boards should be thinking about is revenue from parking. I must add a health warning. In my business, I see what can happen to cars that are parked in streets and uncontrolled areas. Unfortunately, in the age that we live in, hospital car parks are beginning to be such uncontrolled areas. The amount of vandalism and theft that takes place in those circumstances is enormous, and there is a price to pay for that. When a car is damaged, there is a penalty because the owner has to pay for it to be fixed. When I go to a football match and a wee boy comes up to me and says, "Mister, can I watch your car?", I pay him to do so. Actually, I usually pay half up front and half when I come back, because, sometimes, I can get a 50 per cent discount that way. That is why I do not grudge paying a small charge in a hospital car park, if there is someone on the ground who is looking after the cars. My main message, however, is this: health boards should not seek to secure revenue from parking charges. All of us would like our cars to be protected, which is why I say that a small payment is acceptable. Revenue raising from parking charges, however, is not.

I declare an interest in asking this question. I welcome the cabinet secretary's commitment in the "Scottish Budget Spending Review 2007" to "continue our work on addressing violence against women and tackling domestic abuse." Will Mr Swinney assure me that the voluntary sector will continue to flourish, given the changes that will take place?

We all very much appreciate the opportunity to debate the judgment, for which I thank Stuart McMillan. The House of Lords judgment on 17 October that put an end to compensation that has been provided for pleural plaques for the past 30 years or more is bizarre, because we know what pleural plaques are and how people get them—they are caused by asbestos. Pleural plaques are clearly an industrial injury. In my former life—in fact, it is not a former life, because I still own the business—I dealt with heavy and dangerous materials. In my business, we take all the precautions that we can. The duty of care is a big help when we assess the risks that not only my employees but my family are subject to at work. We do our utmost to have a safe working environment. We have always been like that, and I hope that we always will be. God forbid that something might happen in my business while I speak here tonight, but I pay insurance to deal with that. It does not make me feel any better, but I expect my insurance company to pick up the bill for anything untoward that happens. One problem with any illness or injury is its impact on others. The diagnosis of asbestos-related illnesses has an impact not only on the individual but on the family. Some people feel that a ticking time bomb is in them. How does that affect them and their families? They experience anxiety and depression, which can sometimes slide into a host of other illnesses. We cannot quantify the impact that the judgment is likely to have across the board. Members can see the result of not taking care of the issue at an early stage, and how it impacts on the health service. If we pay a little now, we can save an awful lot later. By and large, the people who are affected are very ordinary. They want us to support them. They feel, and I believe, that the system has let them down, but the Parliament can sort that out. I hope that the minister will consider what members have  said tonight. We have heard what Stuart McMillan said. The minister might not give a commitment tonight—although if he does that will be fine—but I hope that he will go away and think about the issue with a view to introducing a bill, which would be received extremely well and passed unanimously.

I have a concern that some people who formerly worked at Kerelaw but left in advance of its closure may need to be questioned. Will the minister assure me that they will be brought into the inquiry in some form?

I know that resources are finite, but I encourage the minister to further consider the benefits of establishing more dedicated domestic abuse courts. I refer him to Canada, where domestic abuse courts have been in existence for quite a long time and have had a powerful and beneficial impact on families.

I welcome the debate, although there is a bit of knocking copy going on. This is a subject that the Parliament should be concerned about and I compliment the minister for bringing it before us. It goes without saying that illiteracy and poverty are close bedfellows. The briefing from Save the Children makes grim reading. It states that 250,000 children in Scotland are living in poverty—that is nearly 25 per cent of all our children. Worse still, 150,000 children are living in absolute poverty. We do not recognise the Scotland in which we live when we read such figures. Scotland is one of the richest countries on  the planet, yet some of our people are living lives that are closer to the dark ages. I therefore believe that it is important to put on public record some of the statistics that have been produced by Save the Children. Its briefing document states: "Families living in severe poverty get by on very low incomes. For example, a couple with one child have to make ends meet on an average of £7000 a year for clothes, toys, food, childcare, electricity and gas, other bills, transport, health needs, and other essentials ... In Scotland, 72% of children living in severe poverty parents' are not in work ... 66 % of children in severe poverty in Scotland are in families claiming income support, job seekers allowance and incapacity benefit ... 1 in 2 two children living in severe poverty in Scotland live in single parent families."

As I progress with my speech, I will mention some of the things that are being done in that area. The briefing continues: "Educational disadvantage begins at an early age. Children from more deprived backgrounds are more likely to experience lower attainment at primary 5 and beyond and less likely to continue their education beyond school ... Save the Children is therefore concerned that current policies aimed at reducing child poverty are not reaching the families most in need." It is not all bad news, however. In West Dunbartonshire, sterling work is being carried out through the pilot scheme on early intervention. Although West Dunbartonshire Council had serious questions to answer at a political and officer level last year, and those questions are still not resolved, the early intervention initiative shone out like a beacon. The initiative was and is supported across the political divide, and all parties, officers and staff at every level are proud of their achievements.

The initiative went ahead and was successful because it was agreed to right across party lines. There was a willingness to see the initiative through, which is why it prospered and is  still doing so well. The SNP at a local level sees the need for such an initiative to continue and expand. Without a doubt, it is making a difference, but it still has work to do. I will tell the chamber about the benefits of intervention in later life rather than at an early age. My wife was involved in a scheme to tutor and teach mature adults to read. The impact on a person of being able to fill in a simple form or to write a postcard for the first time in their lives is profound. It raises an individual's self-esteem and gives them confidence. They grow in stature before our very eyes as they achieve the simple things that we all take for granted but which have such an important impact on them. We can just imagine what the early intervention scheme is doing for the long-term good of some West Dunbartonshire children. We are saving them from the trauma and embarrassment of having to approach others later in life to announce that they are unable to read. The benefits to the individual cannot be overstated or even measured. To conclude, I will give my good friend the minister a few tips for nothing. He should take a leaf out of West Dunbartonshire Council's book. He should encourage that council and give it more resources to do more and he should extend its fine work throughout Scotland. He should not reinvent the wheel; it is already sitting there, so he should lift it and take it elsewhere. If he does that, illiteracy and poverty will be on the run in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it has any plans to increase the number of solicitors working in legal aid who assist women in taking forward cases against alleged abusers. (S3O-734)

I welcome that answer. Some time ago, it was predicted that, because of the block fee payment scheme, solicitors would withdraw from civil legal aid work. It seems that those predictions were correct. Women and women's aid groups are now facing a diminishing supply of family law lawyers who offer civil legal aid services. Although I welcome the minister's answer, I did not catch when the changes will come into effect. Could the minister clarify that for me?

Last week, the European and External Relations Committee visited Brussels, where I was struck by the dedication, enthusiasm and professionalism of our representatives. They are closely engaged with a range of subjects, including the treaty, but they have a very difficult task because, in Europe, it is Governments that lobby Governments and European institutions and that horse-trade with one another. We, in turn, lobby the lobbyists. Because we have nothing with which to trade, we have had little or no influence on the treaty. The tugging of coat tails in which we indulge should stop, and soon. Any rational person who visited Brussels and understood how the system works would support Scottish independence. I want to discuss two aspects of the treaty: the measures it contains and how it should be ratified. I have no doubt that cross-border measures in general—not just those in the treaty—need to be tidied up. Throughout Europe, we should co-operate on crime, terrorism, people trafficking, drugs and rendition flights—the list could go on all day—because we have much in common on which we should join hands and support one another. However, Scottish red lines are not the same as UK red lines: our needs, priorities and interests are different. Talking quietly to people during the visit made clear to me that no one in Brussels at any level is under the illusion that the treaty is not the same as the constitution; I could not find one person who did not think that. Angela Merkel has been telling the Germans that everything is the same, so people should not worry. Gordon Brown, by  contrast, has been telling everyone in the UK that everything has changed, so they should not worry. That is to forget that he and the Labour Party promised that there would be a referendum. The public see through what Gordon Brown is saying. Unfortunately for all members, no matter what party they belong to, it is the body politic that suffers. If we wish to retain the trust of the people, we should not make promises that we do not intend to keep. We talk aggressively about how we can engage the public and get people out to vote. We have creative ideas, but public trust is lost in one fell swoop when such a promise is broken. When we, collectively, do that, we leave the public behind, as they feel cheated. Regardless of whether members are for or against the new treaty, they should trust the people and give them their say. Mr Brown should keep his promises and hold a referendum.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it is in  discussions with the United Kingdom Government about the European treaty. (S3O-616)

Although the treaty is clearly reserved, will the Scottish Government seek to advise the UK Government on the desirability of holding a referendum on the matter, particularly given that the proposed measures in the treaty are exactly the same as those in the discredited European constitution?

I declare an interest: my business, which is Scotland-wide, delivers to and services the motor industry. I know how important trams are to many members in the chamber, but as this is a transport debate, I will speak about a couple of other areas. Although I am in the motor industry, my pet subject, strangely enough, is undergrounds. Why would someone in my industry be interested in undergrounds? The simple, straightforward reason is that undergrounds provide the ability to move folk underground at a time when an increasing number of vehicles are on the roads. We need to make room for a more efficient way of moving people about. Again, because of my type of business, I have to be abroad a lot. I have been to a number of places and looked at their underground services, which are quite different in many parts of the world. I use the example of Santiago in Chile; although its economy is not exactly cutting edge, it has one of the finest underground services that members could imagine. The number of people that that service can move is quite fantastic. I was able to go to Prague with the tartan army. That was just—

I am sorry; I will need to ask for guidance. The Business Bulletin says that this afternoon's business is a transport debate. I am clearly talking about transport.

I will just have to miss out the comments on my forays abroad that prove my point that underground systems are very efficient and should be constructed in Scotland. When, as a member of the Local Government Committee in the first session of Parliament, I asked representatives of the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Authority about underground services, I was greeted with the same sniggering and sneering. People in Scotland do not seem to think that they are capable of bringing an underground service to fruition. However, the Glasgow underground system, which is the second oldest in the world, is about to undergo improvements. I am sure that people who were around when it was first opened would see no difference in the present service. One issue that I think is quite apt in this debate is the M8—or, as I call it, the biggest car park in the United Kingdom. The M8 is the UK's most congested motorway.

Well, we are talking about a transport strategy and opportunities that might arise if these projects fall. For example, more money will be available for other areas. Surely—

For goodness' sake. Surely if resources became available for the M8 to be expanded, that would benefit Glasgow and Edinburgh. I should be allowed to speak about that subject. The fact is that, if we could open up the M8 to three or four lanes, that would be the best investment that we could make in Scotland. Everyone in Glasgow and Edinburgh would benefit from such a move. Indeed, I have an awful strong feeling that the people of Edinburgh want something material that will benefit them instead of a straight tramline that  goes nowhere. I believe that, if those people knew that they would benefit from investment in improvements in the M8, they would support the SNP today.

The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing will know that Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board is considering the removal of services from the Vale of Leven hospital. Given that those services are vital to the people served by the hospital, I encourage her to use her influence to ensure that no further services are lost to the vale.

I must declare an interest, as I am a board member of Central Scotland Rape Crisis & Sexual Abuse Centre. This Parliament has a fine reputation for discussing and working in this area. Both previous Executives were generous with the time they allocated to it, and the parliamentary committees and Opposition parties have been at one in relation to their approach to it, but I have discovered that the effect of that way of working cannot be felt until we go outside the Parliament. I am not suggesting that everyone should lose their seats in order to bear witness to that fact; I am  saying that the non-political attitude that has been adopted on these matters is appreciated by people outside Parliament. I am particularly pleased that, today, I am speaking in a debate that is sponsored by a new Executive. That suggests that the tradition will continue, which is most welcome. It needs to continue because, just last week, Jim Gamble, the chief executive of an organisation that was set up to make the web safer for children, said that he does not think that people who are convicted of downloading images of children from the web should be imprisoned. I really appreciate the work that his organisation is doing, but I disagree with that argument.

I agree with everything Dr Simpson said. When I read Jim Gamble's statement, I had to remind myself exactly what sort of images we are talking about, so I did a bit of work—without actually looking on the web. Children of all ages—including toddlers and, in some cases, babies—are systematically being abused, raped and humiliated in front of the cameras. They lose everything. Some of the babies effectively lose their lives. Anyone who downloads is as guilty as the person who commits the crime because, to satisfy the people who are downloading, new children must be found and new victims created. That means new abductions and the selling-on of pictures that are used on the web to satisfy those people. To be frank, prison is the best place for them. Peterhead prison, here in Scotland, has a world-renowned facility and a tremendous record on the treatment of serious sex offenders. What we should really be doing is resourcing a new unit away from Peterhead so that we have two centres of excellence for the treatment of serious sex offenders. I am totally against any form of naming and shaming. All the experts tell us that it drives these people underground, because they have some  humanity in them and they feel threatened. They go underground and begin to feel safe; and, when they feel safe, they start the process over again. However, I agree with Bill Aitken that, should they voluntarily give up the right to be protected by the systems that we put in place and not be named and shamed—should they go underground to commit more crimes—all bets are off and any method that we can find to stop them should be used. I sound one note of caution: it must be the experts who handle these individuals—the experts who know them and their circumstances—and make the call for the chain to be pulled.

Murray Tosh outlined exactly where we are with the report and the recommendations. There is not much more that I can say, other than to repeat what he said. As a committee member, I recommend to Parliament that we accept the report and the recommended changes to the standing orders. The SNP also recommends doing so. I thank Murray Tosh for the way in which he has used his stewardship skills in the Procedures Committee. The committee is sometimes a dry committee, but Murray Tosh has handled things commendably. I am sure that I speak on behalf of MSPs who are no longer on the committee—they would say what I am saying if they had the opportunity. I ask members to support the proposed changes.

"Get on board" is the slogan of the European year of people with disabilities. It is an invitation to us all. People with disabilities should be at the centre of the year, which is about raising awareness of disabled people's rights to full equality and participation in all areas. It is about tackling the barriers that people with disabilities face, wherever they occur. The European year is also about raising awareness that disability is an issue of concern to us all. I am confident that the year will provide a strong impetus to set long-term goals and to develop new initiatives through Europe. I encourage everyone to get on board the campaign. Recently, I was in Greece as the reporter on disability for the Equal Opportunities Committee. At the launch of the European year of disabled people, it was hoped that the awareness raised by a year of events would lead to new legislation, initiatives and alliances that will improve access for all those with disabilities. The key priorities of the European Commission during the year are to improve access to employment and physical access to buildings. We  could do with working on those two areas in Scotland. I was recently informed about a young girl with learning disabilities who was offered a work placement by the college that she attends. She was given the option of working in a charity shop or collecting shopping trolleys for Tesco. Although charity work is extremely valuable, as is the work carried out by those who work in our supermarkets, I do not believe that either of those options would have made the best use of the young girl's skills. We have to work on developing employment opportunities for our disabled people. I commend the work of the Moving Into Work project in Edinburgh, which takes a people-centred approach, and I call on the minister to ensure that employment is an area that is developed and resourced. As a business owner, I understand the costs that are involved in upgrading premises to ensure that they are fully accessible. It costs money to make the changes, but that does not mean that it is impossible to do so. There is no excuse for not ensuring that new-build properties can be accessed by all. It is estimated that ensuring that buildings are accessible to those with physical or non-physical disabilities increases project costs by 1 per cent. That is not too much in my view. Given the representations that I have received over the past three years, it is essential that the Executive takes action to ensure that our public transport providers improve their performance on disabled access. I would be interested to hear the Executive's response to the Strategic Rail Authority's suggestion that the Executive will be liable for financing improvements to our railways. All in all, this year should help to increase the focus on issues that affect those of us with disabilities. It remains to be seen whether that will lead to changes. It will be up to us all in the Parliament to lead the charge and get on board.

I appreciate that the minister might not at the moment be able to comment on the issue that I intend to raise. If that is the case, I would like her to write to me with an answer to my question. Concerns have been expressed about the exclusion of smaller voluntary organisations from the work of the child protection committees. Has that issue been raised with the minister? If so, how does she think the problem can be rectified?

I know where the minister is going with the bill on this issue, and I should make it clear that I am on board. After all, we do not want to protect anyone  who shakes a child to its detriment. However, I must refer to the bill itself. Section 43(3) uses the words: "If what was done included or consisted of— (a) a blow to the head; (b) shaking; or (c) the use of an implement". I say to the minister that it is clear to what a "blow to the head" and "use of an implement" refer, but I have problems with the word "shaking" because I do not think that it is clear to what that word refers. It worries me that "shaking" does not define anything. I am worried, for example, that mothers and fathers who perhaps take their children on their knees and dandle them are doing a form of shaking. Furthermore, the act of cuddling a baby and shoogling it backward and forward when putting it to bed is a form of shaking. I am not a lawyer and I do not want to weaken section 43. I am the last person in the world to defend anyone who damages a child, no matter what the child's age, but I want legal clarity about such acts and I do not think that "shaking" provides such clarity. The word "shaking" would protect some people, but it will frighten other people away from doing pleasurable things with their children. I am worried about that.

Mr Barrie has pointed out my problem, which is that that part of section 43 does not clarify the legal position because there is no definition of "shaking" that mentions what damage that would cause a child. It would be better if a word such as "excessive" were included, which would point out the difference between shaking that damaged a child and harmless shaking. It is unfortunate, but "shaking" is the kind of word that tabloids use to describe an act that damages a child. When we merely cuddle or play with a child we are actually shaking them.

If Mr Wallace can do so, that will be good. I think that everyone would be pleased with such a resolution.

I am trying to illustrate how absurd the use of the word "shaking" is. The minister made the point well that I am trying to make, which is that we must go beyond the use of simple word "shaking", so that we can let people know that they can actually hold their children.

It goes without saying that there are barriers in the way of people with wheelchairs. We need to do something about that soon. With the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 due to be fully implemented in 2004, what action has the Executive taken to ensure that public transport is  also fully accessible to people with learning disabilities, hearing difficulties and sight problems?

Does Tavish Scott agree that it would be of advantage to the business community and to everyone in Scotland if BAA were out the road? BAA has a monopoly, the effect of which is that the landing charges at its Scottish airports are on average 50 times higher than those at its London airports?

Are there any plans to pilot domestic abuse courts?

Given that the UK Government has decided to support the European year of disabled people with the theme of rights and participation, what action is the Executive taking to ensure that all the departments that come under its remit are able to conform to the requirements of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, which come into force next year?

What position? I did not hear the member mention a position.

While I welcome the work that has been carried out by the national group, I believe that more needs to be done. The national strategy on domestic abuse is meant to be part of an overall strategy to address all forms of violence against women. However, there is little sign of that, given that recent studies have shown that three in four victims of domestic sexual assaults had histories of domestic violence. It also shows that a range of violent acts can be carried out by one individual. There is an urgent need for the Executive to make links between domestic violence and other forms of violence that are experienced by women and the wider community. The national strategy is based on the three p's: prevention; protection; and provision. However, while there has been an increase in resources targeted at the provision of refuge accommodation, prevention projects in schools and advertising on television, little appears to have been done to offer increased protection to those who have suffered from domestic violence. Therefore, I will focus my remarks on what we can do to increase the protection that is available to victims of domestic violence. We need to take more action to protect victims of domestic abuse. At present, only a quarter of the incidents that are reported to the police result in an offence being reported to the fiscal. No action was taken on almost 21,000 of the 35,000  incidents of domestic violence that were recorded by the police last year. It is depressing to note that, if those were parking offences, urgent action and resources would have been brought to bear. Recent Home Office research has shown that, when offences are left unchallenged, there is a greater risk of the violence escalating and of more serious offences being carried out. That means that effective early intervention is vital if men are to stop their violence and women are to be protected. Few men stop of their own volition, and violence usually increases in frequency and severity over time. The Executive should consider a number of measures to ensure that victims of domestic violence receive the protection and support that they need from our criminal justice system. At present, too many are let down. Such measures would include the introduction of specialist family courts, which Roseanna Cunningham mentioned. The Executive could also consider making domestic abuse an aggravated offence. It is difficult to trace what happens to those who have been charged with an offence resulting from domestic violence and there is nothing that signifies that on their records. The Executive also needs to consider whether the police should implement pro-arrest policies and whether the prosecution service should implement a pro-prosecution policy regardless of whether the victim wants to go ahead with the prosecution, as long as other evidence is available. That policy is followed in certain American states and in Canada. We need an evaluation of that policy to see whether it would make any difference in Scotland. The measures that are laid out in "Vital Voices: Helping Vulnerable Witnesses Give Evidence" would make a huge difference to the experience that victims of domestic violence have of our court system. I look forward to the Executive's response to that consultation. Perhaps more important, the system needs to ensure that perpetrators are held accountable for their actions. In Glasgow, the police ask for bail conditions that mean that the perpetrator is not allowed in the victim's home, whether or not they share a home. Why should women and children have to have their lives disrupted by fleeing from their homes, friends, neighbours and family? It is time that we reversed the rules to one that says, "If you hit, you're out." The criminal justice system needs to take action to make it clear that domestic violence is unacceptable.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to make any changes to the law on sexual offences as a result of changes announced in the Queen's speech. (S1O-5990)

Given that concerns about child abuse through prostitution and the internet have been raised in the chamber on many occasions and that recent figures show that no action or prosecutions have been taken against those involved with children in the sex trade, will the minister say whether he is considering introducing offences that are along the lines of those that have been announced at Westminster? If he is not considering that, why not?

I join Tom McCabe in congratulating Shona Robison on bringing the issue of fireworks to the chamber, as it is a serious and worthwhile subject for debate. I do not want to appear to be a killjoy who wants to ban fireworks, but I do want to bring about the responsible use of fireworks. The starting point for responsible use lies with the manufacturers, which have a duty to supply to responsible retailers. Retailers, in turn, should have a responsibility to supply to responsible adults rather than to children. We must get the message out that the indiscriminate use of fireworks is quite unacceptable. Attacks on members of our emergency services, who frequently attend out-of-control bonfires, must stop. In Airdrie and Coatbridge, the same fire crew was attacked twice in one night when attending bonfires. The firefighters had to endure abuse from youths as well as having stones, rocks and bottles thrown at them. One fire officer suffered serious injuries when a bottle was thrown at him. A spokesman from Strathclyde fire brigade said that a fire officer would be killed if such actions were not stopped. In Bellshill, a firework was thrown through a  resident's kitchen window. The lady said that it was "like an airgun". That resident would surely have suffered serious injury had she been standing by the window at the time, but, my goodness, in one way it was awfu lucky that people were in the house at the time. God knows what might have happened to that house if people had not been in attendance to deal with the firework when it landed. The year before last, I was in Florida. It was October, but the people in the town where I was staying were actually celebrating their 4 July independence day. The reason for doing it in October was that, that year, it had been declared a fire hazard to hold a firework display during the summer. The firework display was held on a bridge about the size of Kingston bridge. It was a small town, but there was an enormous turnout. I think that it is up to civic society to provide such celebrations, so that people do not need to dig into their own pockets. A civic celebration is much grander, much cheaper and much, much safer. I own four premises in Scotland, all of which—or parts of them, at least—are licensed, because we supply highly toxic materials to the automotive industry. There is a duty of care on my business to supply only bona fide tradesmen to utilise those products. Shona Robison has the remedy to the problem. As happens in my business, manufacturers should supply only to the correct people. The simple mechanism for ensuring that professionalism is a licence. I support Shona's motion full-heartedly.

To ask the Scottish Executive what health and safety standards for pupils are applicable in schools. (S1O-5831)

Does the minister agree that it is not acceptable for our children to be educated in  schools or fed in dining rooms where fungus is growing in the roof? If so, what action is he likely to take in North Lanarkshire? Greenhill Primary School in Coatbridge faces exactly the problem that I have described.

Does the minister agree that to use the word "prostitution" is wrong, when we are really talking about child abuse? Although some have been accused of abusing children in the sex trade, almost no adult has been charged with doing so. Is it not time that we took real action to take these vile men out of the system altogether?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action is being taken in order to increase the percentage of rapes reported to the police that are prosecuted. (S1O-5570)

Although I welcome the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Act 2002, the act will protect only those whose case reaches court, which is currently 8 per cent of those who report rape. Given the fact that the Minister for Justice has recently stated in reply to a parliamentary question that no further research will be carried out into the investigation of rape in Scotland, will the Executive ensure that those who review the police guidance will examine the work  that was carried out by the Metropolitan police force's project sapphire? That project was backed up by research and by training projects that were developed in America, which aim to provide investigators with skills that help them to collect evidence, which will help to overcome—

There is one further part—

I hope that that was not me, Presiding Officer. The aim of the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill, to create a national debt arrangement scheme and replace poindings and warrant sales, is laudable. It aims to ensure that the poorest in society, who cannot pay their debt, are protected. It all sounds very fine and well-meaning but, when we look at the various consultation papers in depth, we discover that  what is being proposed may leave those whom the bill is trying to protect in a worse position than that in which they currently find themselves. According to Citizens Advice Scotland and Money Advice Scotland, their current clients will not benefit from the present proposals for a national debt arrangement scheme, given that people in debt are on low incomes or on benefits, and have very little or no disposable income. A scheme to repay debt over three to five years would be of no use to them. In evidence to the Social Justice Committee, Angus McIntosh of the Scottish Association of Law Centres said: "The advantage of the bill is that it prohibits further diligence while debt arrangement schemes are in place. That is a positive step. However, as I said, the difficulty is that, although that is fine for people with substantial disposable income, if a person does not have sufficient disposable income to make meaningful and significant payments to creditors, they may not be able to get into the debt arrangement scheme in the first place."—[ Official Report , Social Justice Committee , 6 June 2002; c 2957.] Regrettably, the problem of the way in which the benefit system works with regard to low incomes is not something that this Parliament can do anything about. It can, however, amend the bill to ensure that debt arrangement schemes work for those who most need them. As has already been said, Money Advice Scotland estimates that about 70 per cent of those clients who approach it for debt advice would not benefit from the debt arrangement scheme. As the bill's provisions stand, those people would be more at risk of incurring exceptional attachment orders—they would be less protected than they are under the current system of diligence. When the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill was passed, the will of the Parliament was that no one should be subjected to having their property sold if they are unable to repay debt. Yet here we are, discussing what will replace poindings and warrant sales, and the bill includes a form of warrant sale for domestic customers, albeit without poinding. I say to the minister that that is unacceptable. In their evidence to the Social Justice Committee, both Money Advice Scotland and Citizens Advice Scotland stated that they did not believe that removing the use of exceptional attachment orders from those who cannot pay would affect either the workings of the bill or the availability of credit to those on low incomes. The Executive should think seriously about that, as should, I suggest, back benchers in the Labour party. The provisions that the bill would introduce have the makings of a fairer system of debt collection that treats those who experience difficulties with respect. Research by Citizens Advice Scotland  shows that it is a low income, together with changes in circumstances and an inability to access mainstream credit, that leads to an inability by some people to repay their debt. To ensure that the intentions behind the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill and the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill become a reality, the Parliament must do all that it can to promote credit unions; to ensure that those on low incomes have access to credit at reasonable rates; to ensure that those who provide credit do so in a reasonable manner; to ensure that money advice is readily available; and to ensure that our young people are provided with the basic skills to manage their money effectively. I again address my remarks to back-bench members of the Labour party. If the measures before us go ahead, we really are going back to the future. For the folk who they care about and who I care about—the poor and the vulnerable—that means warrant sales.

I am grateful to Alasdair Morgan and the Deputy Presiding Officer for allowing me to say a few words. I will comment on one particular area. It is welcome that the Executive has taken the opportunity to extend the idea of drugs courts, which have been piloted with great success in Glasgow. However, it is disappointing that the Executive has not taken the opportunity further, to extend specialisation within the criminal justice system. We should have specialists working with domestic violence offenders, for example, or with people who offend against children. The Minister for Social Justice visited Canada in the past year and saw at first hand the effects of the domestic abuse courts. On her return, she seemed to indicate that the Executive would consider the idea of such courts. Given that the Executive is committed to combating violence against women, a commitment to the introduction of domestic abuse courts or family courts that could deal with both criminal and civil matters would have been welcome in the bill. Has the minister let the issue slip off the agenda or does he intend to introduce domestic abuse courts or family courts? At present, things have to change as each case comes along. For instance, a judge, a sheriff or a prosecutor will be involved in a different type of case from one day to the next. If we had specialists who were trained in one particular area, we could be halfway up the street before we started walking. Has the minister given up on the idea? If he has, I will be disappointed.

Does the minister agree that one way to protect vulnerable children would be to ensure that they are heard in our courts when decisions are made on their safety and future? Does she agree that the attitude of Lord Dawson, who said on record that he was "not of the mind to listen to these children", is out of date and out of order?

I welcome the retention of Peterhead prison, as that recognises the unique and vital work that is carried out there to prevent serious sex offenders from reoffending. However, I would like to know whether Peterhead will be forced once more to conduct a campaign to stay open in five years' time. As the sex offenders unit is about people rather than buildings, can the minister assure us that Peterhead will continue to carry out its vital work in the long term rather than just in the short term?

Hear, hear.

Israel should act like a democracy.

I am a bit confused, because in Scotland, the Liberals seem heavily in favour of private finance initiatives, yet in England, they oppose PFIs.

Will the member give way?

The Labour party spent 18 years taking on the Tories. Did the Labour party accept every election that the Tories won?

I think that you will have plenty of time, Presiding Officer. I was looking forward to the debate today, because it is about an important issue. I certainly wanted to engage with the Executive today, particularly regarding child protection. However, it is unfortunate that I feel that I am severely disadvantaged—I have not seen the document, never mind read a note on it. I had written a speech, but it would be entirely wrong for me to make that speech, not knowing what is in store. I am not noted for using knocking copy and I certainly do not intend to start today. That is my speech over, but I will make the speech that I wrote available for the record, if possible.

It would be fitting for me to state that I was given due notice of the likelihood that this debate would take place a bit earlier than expected. We tried to contact as many interested organisations as possible to inform them of that. Nevertheless, I thank my good friend Lloyd Quinan for raising the matter. He was trying to help me and the people who are concerned about the issue. I thank some of the organisations who are involved with the report: ChildLine Scotland, Children 1 st and NCH Scotland. I welcome some representatives of those organisations to the debate. I know that the gallery is sparsely populated, but I assure members that some of them are there. If I were to suggest that four-and-a-half-year-old children, rather than going to nursery school, primary school and then secondary school, should go straight to university—an adult institution—everyone would think that I was out of my tiny mind. However, we expect our children to cope with the Scottish justice system, which has been developed by adults for adults. Because of that, the concerns and needs of children are not understood or dealt with adequately. The criminal justice system is based on the rights of the defendants, which is right, but the needs and rights of victims must be recognised as well. There must be balance. The present system is harmful to children. That has to be accepted by all parties before we can ensure that the rights of all are protected during the criminal justice process. I have a number of quotes from children who contacted ChildLine. A 13-year-old said: "My uncle raped me 4 years ago. He went to court but was found not guilty. No one believed me. Something else has happened. I'm not telling anyone this time." An 11-year-old boy said:  "Dad hurt mum. Dad's going to court. I'm terrified. I don't want to go against my dad." Another child said: "The case was dropped and they haven't told us why." He thinks that it is all his fault and says that he is going to kill himself. Children who appear as witnesses feel that they are the accused and that the defence is the prosecution. The effects of adversarial cross-examination of children and their inability to withstand heavy pressure to accept a strongly put and adult version of events is one of the main reasons given for the low prosecution rates and high failure rates of such cases. It is time for the Executive to act. The Lord Advocate's department reported on the subject in 1999. Its recommendations are still waiting to be implemented. We are dealing with children's lives, in a way which will shape their future. It is time to take urgent action to ensure that the criminal justice system is responsive to the needs of children and that going to court does not do long-term damage rather than the good that we expect from it. The report "Justice for Children: The welfare of children in the justice system" has 10 recommendations that deal with the whole process—not just the children's appearance at court—which is why it is important that the Executive takes notice and acts for the benefit of our children. I will deal with a few of the recommendations. I am sure that my colleagues will deal with a few others. The second recommendation calls for standards to be set for any investigations that involve child welfare to ensure that prosecutions do not rely solely on child statement. A high importance should be attached to gathering other evidence that can back up a child's claim, such as the child's behaviour. A high importance should also be attached to ensuring that people who take evidence from children are accredited so that interviews are carried out properly, which ensures that the child is able to give evidence. Support for a child before, during and after any investigation or a court case is extremely important. A service such as the child witness support service that was recommended by the Lord Advocate's report should be the basis of support for children and their carers. Therapy prior to trial should be available at point of need as a right; it should not be withheld because it may weaken a case. During trial, methods that are presently available should be offered as a right. Evidence by videotape or commission are both currently available but rarely used. Anyone who takes  evidence from children or cross-examines them must have an understanding of how to deal with children, as it is clearly not the same as dealing with adults. In Scotland, our legal system is at times treated like a holy grail. To dare to suggest, as we are, that changes are needed is frowned upon by those with vested interests. The facts speak for themselves. Too often, our criminal justice system lets people down. It is time that changes be made to ensure that the rights of all involved are protected. "Suffer the little children": when it comes to children, just to take wigs and gowns off is not enough. We must give them the right to give the truth. Justice is not only for adults.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Does Mr Stone have any more €20 notes?

We are all having great difficulty with the minister's figures. I have not had the benefit of reading the report, but I wonder whether the minister is costing screwdrivers and hammers at 90 quid a throw and wheelbarrows at the cost of a brand-new Jaguar. The minister has referred to the unit at Peterhead and to the treatment that is taking place in other prisons in Scotland. However, the point that many people want the minister to listen to concerns the uniqueness of the unit at Peterhead and the work that is done there in regard to re-offending. What impact will there be on that work if the unit at Peterhead is done away with? I do not think that anyone believes that the unit can be replaced anywhere else. Given that it has already taken 10 years to get the world-renowned unit in place and working well at Peterhead, how and when could it be re-established elsewhere in Scotland?

I sent out more than 2,000 letters, I surveyed 6,000 individuals, I lodged a parliamentary motion, and I presented a petition with 14,000 signatures—all on the issue of saving our post offices. That is strange for somebody with my background. I own a business and, in my business, when things are tough, that is tough luck and I do not expect a shining knight to come to my rescue. I have to accept that people who owe me money might not pay me, and I have to accept all sorts of other things. I do not expect anybody—certainly nobody in here—to help me. However, I do not consider a post office to be just any old business. This is the stuff of communities. Post offices are the pillars that communities are founded on. They are building blocks, like the schools. Take one away and it is a short-cut to the loss of a community. Post offices are a social service. Take the case of Mrs Smith—well, I will call her Mrs Smith—from Lanarkshire, who went to her local post office almost every week at the same time, to give the local post office what she called "a wee turn". She did not know that that "wee turn" would save her life. One day, Mrs Smith did not turn up to the post office. The postmaster noticed and was very worried, so he went and chapped her door. Mrs Smith was lying, seriously ill, on the floor; she had been there since early morning. I am sure that many MSPs have similar stories to tell. I quote from one of the many letters that I have  received from postmasters—I am sure that many others have received similar letters: "Why did the Post Office stand idly by when the Government switched pensions and allowances to automated credit transfer? My office will lose approximately £400 monthly when this happens next year. Pathetic money making schemes are just that—PATHETIC (phone cards nobody wants etc)—and cannot replace my lost revenue. The Government is on record as saying post offices will not close. RUBBISH! Offices will close because they will become economically unviable ... I will lose £400 monthly as part of my PO salary but will also have much less footfall in my shop as people get their cash at banks". Susan Deacon made the point that this is not just a rural question: it affects all the schemes in Scotland. In fact, it affects the whole of Scotland. We in this Parliament ignore the potential loss of our post office network at our peril. If the network goes, a lot more will go with it. Dare I say it? We need them a lot more than they need us.

Will the Executive consider piloting a project similar to that implemented in West Yorkshire to tackle repeat victimisation in cases of domestic abuse? Not only does the project sound positive, it reduces the number of cases of repeat domestic abuse and victimisation.

I thank the Justice 1 Committee for its important work on changes to civil legal aid. It goes without saying that the work is particularly important for women who suffer from domestic violence. At present, it is easier for a perpetrator of an act of domestic abuse to obtain criminal legal aid than it is for a woman who suffers from abuse to secure legal protection. That must be wrong. I welcome the recommendations to change elibiligity criteria—

Thanks very much, teacher.

I welcome the recommendation to change eligibility criteria by removing inconsistencies in benefit treatment. I am particularly pleased that the minister is considering tapering, which will be beneficial. We must increase the qualifying income levels, which determine whether an applicant can be considered for legal aid and the scale of the contribution. At  present, the levels prevent women from gaining the protection they require. We must make changes in that quickly. I am disappointed that the Executive will not take on board the recommendations on the merit test. Scottish Women's Aid took evidence from lawyers. I have a few illustrations of that evidence, which spell out to me—and should spell out to other members—why it is imperative that we do something about the matter. One lawyer stated: "the legal aid board, for whatever reason, are often reluctant to grant legal aid to protect a person against domestic abuse where there has been no police involvement." Will the minister ask why that is the case? The lawyer went on to say that they were "concerned that where an interim interdict has been granted, but when it is breached, there is a reluctance on behalf of the legal aid board to grant legal aid to enable breach of interdict proceedings to be raised." The lawyer continued: "The above are simply attempts by the legal aid board to save money, with disregard for the domestic situations of persons who require legal advice and protection from the law ... I still have problems with the legal aid board refusing to grant legal aid. Even though a sheriff has granted the interdict at the initial hearing, the board still feel able to second guess by refusing to grant a full certificate. The reasons given by the board vary from 'it has not been shown that the police would not be able to deal with the situation' to 'it has not been shown that the behaviour was going to persist'". As a layman, I reckon that the reason why someone has taken the trouble to challenge that assertion is that that behaviour was going to persist. The system should be proactive, rather than wait for something to happen that we will all regret. The final quote is that the Legal Aid Board refused legal aid for an interdict because "it was not demonstrated that the orders sought were reasonable and necessary". If the recommendations that the Justice 1 Committee has made on legal aid are accepted, it should be easier for women to gain the protection that they need. To even the situation up, further consideration must be given to qualifying incomes and merit tests, so that we protect all the people, not just some of them.

It is worth pointing out to the chamber that I am one of the members who was totally against the reduction of the committee system in the first place. I see the substitution system as a sop to that measure's going through Parliament, to effect the changes that are required. Nothing has happened to change my mind; I believe that my first opinion was the right one. However, I do not want to rehearse the views that I expressed at that time. On a more positive note, it is worth pointing out that a questionnaire on the suggested changes was circulated to members. It seems to me that the Procedures Committee's proposals are very much in tune with members' views. Ken Macintosh has given a good résumé of the proposals. I will highlight a few matters. The point that substitution arrangements are not permitted for single member parties is worth noting; it is a fairly bland statement. It might look as if bigger parties in Parliament are ganging up on smaller parties, but we counselled opinion from the smaller parties and they thought that substitution would not be helpful to them. I should point out that there was some sympathy on the Procedures Committee towards small parties and their right to be represented in the same way as larger parties. I do not consider the Tories to be in that group of parties. I was thinking about Tommy Sheridan, Dennis Canavan and Robin Harper. However, because of the submissions that we received from the smaller parties, the matter did not go to a vote. Substitutions should be for whole committee meetings. During last year's reshuffle, I was moved to the Equal Opportunities Committee. Unfortunately, that committee and the Procedures Committee met at the same time on the same day. Although I did not miss all the meetings of either of the committees, the pressure of work on the committees meant that keeping up to date put me under pressure. Keeping up to date does not mean only reading the papers—as members realise, not everything is in the papers. Members must keep up with what is discussed and how conclusions are reached. I found myself losing the thread of what was happening. It is a good idea to ensure, not only for the committees, but for the well-being of the Parliament, that members have the opportunity to keep up with the work. The minimum requirement should be that members must participate in whole committee meetings rather than ship out in the middle of them.  I am not in favour of the system of smaller committees and very much in favour of the previous system. There are members from all the parties who have the same reservations that I do, but the report is an extremely good attempt to square the circle and to address members' concerns. For that reason, I recommend that the Parliament accepts the report.

To ask the Scottish Executive what funding it provides for repairs to school buildings. (S1O-4800)

Is the minister aware of an article in a Sunday newspaper that described a Lanarkshire school as our worst school? I do not think that that is an unusual story to hear about Lanarkshire, but the story states that it is too dangerous to turn on the lights, water pours through the roof and the staffroom ceiling has fallen in on the teachers. Does the minister agree that there has been serious neglect in Scottish schools for decades and that it is the responsibility of the Scottish Executive to take action now? I understand that the Executive has provided £12 million for emergency repairs to schools in Scotland. That is a pittance—it would not be enough to address the situation in one school in Lanarkshire, never mind the rest of the country.

My starting point is the fact that the reporting of rape is abysmally low and the conviction rate is even lower. I make it clear that I speak on my own behalf and on no one else's—including my party's. The fact that an alleged accused is named has an impact on a victim. Roseanna Cunningham mentioned the fact that, in a small community, it is perfectly possible—in fact, it is likely—that, if an accused is named, the victim is named at the same time through the gossip-mongering that takes place. That is because most rapists are  known to their victim. That is a cold, hard and fast fact. However, I say to Phil Gallie that stage 3 is an awfully late point at which to lodge such a controversial amendment. I would like to hear a lot of evidence and solicit a lot of advice from people who know much more than I ever will about the matter. For that reason, I advise members to vote against amendment 10.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has made to Transco and the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets regarding the recent announcement of job losses by Transco, and how many of those jobs will be lost in Scotland. (S1O-4727)

In the light of that answer, will the minister assure us that he will urge the UK Government to ensure that all regulators, in making a decision about price, must take into account the effect that that will have on public safety, customer service and staff and that companies are not able to make savings purely by sacking people?

Adam Ingram is a lot better looking than me, Presiding Officer. I thank Dorothy-Grace Elder. I will explain why my thanks are personal. Some years ago, I had an accident. Although I thought nothing much of it, I woke up one morning to find that when I raised my neck from the pillow, I blanked out because of the pain. For two days, I was unable to raise my head above the pillow. I was in pain lying on the pillow and every time that I raised my neck, the pain was so great that I literally flaked out. I went to hospital and had all the usual tests, but the doctors could find nothing wrong with me. I ended up being braced and strapped—that was the only way that I could proceed through life for seven weeks. As a result of my being braced, some of the muscles in my neck were wasted and I had to stay off work. One or two politicians who are present will appreciate what I am going to say. Having worked a lifetime in the Scottish National Party, I had eventually got on to the national executive and had been elected to an executive vice-convener's post. Giving up that post was probably the hardest aspect. Members will understand that the pain that I went through was double-sided. I feel particularly lucky now, because I get pain only every so often. In fact, last week I was in the mountains for a whole week's snowboarding. Being able to get round the pain certainly allows one to do things. I will spell out the real problem by talking about a constituent who lives with severe pain. She worked until 15 years ago, when the illness struck. There has been continual deterioration. The pain has been so severe that for nine years she has been on a high morphine dosage, which has resulted in morphine poisoning. She is wheelchair bound and is fed through a tube. She suffers from depression because of the constant pain and her difficulty in coping with it. In her words, there is a perception that it is mainly the elderly who suffer constant chronic pain, but that is not so. There are many young sufferers. The disabled housebound are continually cold and need the heating on all  the time. If they are not eligible for income support, they get no help with their heating bills. As a group, such people would benefit from inclusion in the heating allowance scheme for senior citizens. Pain management is needed desperately, especially by those who have difficulty in getting about. If my constituent lived in England, she would have been admitted to a pain management unit for a month to have the pain level monitored and to receive the appropriate treatment. Some health boards in Scotland seem to be making progress in the field, but in Lanarkshire in particular, where the lady in question lives, thousands of patients are living each day with chronic pain. To the minister, I say that we need action and we need it swiftly. We also need resources, but most of all we need action that alleviates the pain, so that chronic sufferers get help and some respite from the pain.

Does the First Minister agree that the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Bill is only the start of improving the justice system for sexual assault victims? Will he examine why the police clearance rate for sexual assault has remained constant for the past 10 years, while the number of sexual assault cases proceeding to court has fallen? Does not that suggest that there is a problem with the procedures used in those cases and that changes are needed to tackle crimes where the victim knows the suspect?

rose—

I thank Alex Neil for his member's bill and I thank members who supported the initiative in the first place. When the prospect of a public appointments bill was first raised, my initial thought was that at last we would have a mechanism to put a stop to back-door appointments. However, I was concerned about the confirmation hearings system, which might from the outset have put off prospective candidates. My fear was quickly allayed, however, when the proposed bill was given a hearing in committee. I now fully understand the need to have that device in place. It will ensure the achievement of the ultimate goal of the bill, which is to create a fully accountable system that operates in the best interests of non-departmental public bodies and in the interests of delivery of quality services in Scotland. In previous appointments, positions have been filled by people whose professional credentials and abilities have been less than adequate.

No. I would never name people—this is not the forum for that. Even if Bill Butler were such a person, I would not name him. I supported the first Asian candidate for the Scottish National Party about 20 years ago, not because he was an Asian but because he was the best candidate. People need a lot of encouragement and support. If we want to get people into public service who are perhaps not very good at coming forward, such as women and people from the ethnic minorities, we must encourage them and ensure that the infrastructure is in place that allows them to do that. The best people will then come forward. They are there and they will come forward. My other concern was the impact that the bill would have on the role of the public appointments commissioner for Scotland, if the Executive went ahead and created that position. However, it has been made clear that the creation of the commissioner can only complement the sentiments of the bill. The public appointments  commissioner will retain a role in overseeing the appointments while the bill will ensure that the procedures are in place to select the best possible candidates through a system that is safeguarded against cronyism. The Parliament makes great claims about openness and accountability. The bill would bring public appointments from the back door to the front door. As elected representatives, we have the opportunity to create valuable legislation that will make certain that we get the right people for the jobs. It will remove the folly of providing jobs for the boys and girls, which has been done so many times with less-than-effective results. The small costs of the bill to the Executive pale into insignificance as we look at the bigger picture. Would we rather save a few pounds and have a repeat of the VisitScotland fiasco, or do we spend and guarantee a transparent and democratic system that benefits all concerned? The VisitScotland incident was ultimately costly to the Executive financially and damaging to the appointments system. There was no gain for the tourist industry or the people of Scotland. The bill would put an end to such embarrassing situations. I am not saying that the bill will not add work for the Parliament, but it is surely better to tackle the problem. I commend Alex Neil and the support that he received from Parliament, which ensured that the bill has been given the opportunity to be debated in the chamber. Getting the best value for money with the highest return is a solid base from which to start. The bill can only be a step in the right direction in making certain that non-departmental public bodies are in capable hands.

Will the minister give way?

We have had many members' debates that have been extremely important to the whole of Scotland and I consider this debate to be one of them. I make no apologies for congratulating Stewart Stevenson on securing the debate. I hope that the Executive will ensure that Peterhead prison has a long-term future so that its good work—which has been recognised by the central Government beacon scheme—can continue. Under the beacon scheme, Peterhead aims to be the centre of excellence in working with sex offenders, with a key objective of protecting the public and preventing crime. It would be a crying shame if the work that has been done at Peterhead in the past 10 years were lost because of a cost-cutting exercise. Prison sentences are not about only punishment; they are about rehabilitation. That must be remembered in relation to all prisoners, but the work that is done at Peterhead is especially valuable to Scotland. The programme for sexual offenders at Peterhead is no easy option for those who choose to undertake it—they must admit to their crimes and face up to the damage that they have done to their victims. It can be a powerful and emotionally demanding experience for all those involved. The programme is supported by a culture that extends throughout the prison; all staff receive training in working with sex offenders. That is more than merely a package that can be transported to another prison. The awarding of beacon site status to Peterhead prison proves that the work that is done there is essential.  However, Peterhead prison does not have the resources to offer the programme to all sex offenders. That is criminal. It means that those who have been sentenced to fewer than four years in prison receive no specific treatment relating to their offences. That is something that, I believe, the Executive has a duty to address. The best way that it can do that is through guaranteeing the long-term future of Peterhead prison and ensuring that, as well as continuing with the excellent work that is already done there, the prison can offer programmes to all offenders who are willing to take part.

I thank Kenny Gibson for securing the debate. It appears that all members are singing from the same hymn sheet. I hope to continue that trend. According to "Missing Out—Young Runaways in  Scotland", one in nine Scots children will run away or be forced to leave home at least once before they are 16. They are in incredible danger, as there is a lack of services to deal with the problem. Contrary to common opinion, young people do not run away because they are attracted by the bright lights of the big cities or because they are looking for excitement. It should be remembered that young people run away because problems have become too hard for them to handle and they are looking for breathing space. The report shows that four out of five young people who run away leave as a result of problems at home. Running away might seem to be the best option at the time, but it can create more problems than it solves. The report shows that one in six of those who ran away were either physically or sexually assaulted. Combined with the recent Barnardos report, which highlights the problem of child abuse through the sex trade, it indicates to the Parliament that services must be provided to protect young people from sexual predators. Simple changes could be made to protect young people. For instance, if someone runs away, they should not be left to return to the same situation and have to deal with the problems that made them run away in the first place. Being unsupported and on their own is not an option. Procedures should be in place throughout Scotland to ensure that young people who run away are interviewed by someone who is not involved with their care, to find out why they ran away and to help them deal with the problems that caused them to run away. Education programmes and materials should be available in schools to provide young people with details of services that are available to them and the dangers of running away. We must also ensure that schools and other youth settings can help young people to deal with problems at home. Sometimes, we forget that schools are not simply about reading and writing—schools are where most young people spend their lives. They must be equipped to deal with the problem. There must be services for those who run away, to ensure that they do not end up living rough on the streets and becoming prey for sexual predators. That means providing refuge accommodation for under-16s. The Executive must take on board the conclusions from "Missing Out—Young Runaways in Scotland", "No Son of Mine!" and "Whose Daughter Next?" and ensure that our young people can access the help they need exactly when they need it.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive has any plans to review landfill sites and their impact on the surrounding environment. (S1F-1605)

Is the minister aware of the damaging report published this month in The Lancet , which has uncovered the possible danger of women giving birth to children with chromosomal disorders if they live within a 3km radius of a landfill site? Will the First Minister follow the precautionary principle in the Scottish Environment Protection Agency's national waste strategy and cease all dumping until a full scientific inquiry has been carried out?

I pay tribute to the writers of the Procedures Committee's first report of 2002, because it is one of the most easy to read and easy to understand reports that I have ever read. To pay tribute, I intend to read from the report. The proposal on the member in charge of a bill is about giving ownership to the person who has the relevant knowledge and can make an input into the bill in question—that person should be in the driving seat. The report also covers continuity of responsibility in the event of a change at ministerial level. To show members how easily the reports read, I will quote directly from the committee's first report of 2002: "14. The current rules allow only Cabinet Ministers or junior Scottish Ministers to lodge and move a motion for a financial resolution. Additionally, the rules make it clear that any motion may be moved only by the member who lodged it or by a member whose name appears as a supporter. In practice, motions for financial resolutions are always lodged in the name of the Minister for Finance but with the deputy Minister for Finance and the Cabinet Minister and junior Scottish Minister responsible for the Bill named as supporters. The objective in adding these supporters is to ensure that if the Minister who lodged the motion is unable to be present, the motion may still be moved. 15. The Committee considered that this need to add specific supporters for such motions is unnecessarily restrictive. The Committee thought that it would be more appropriate if any Minister was able to move a motion for a financial resolution whether or not that Minister had added his or her name as a supporter. The Committee so recommends and believes that this change would not materially affect the interests of other members." As an Opposition MSP, I recognise the responsibility and the right of members to hold the Executive to account and, where necessary, to put the blockers on it. However, standing orders should be well above that. I compare the changes that are proposed by the Procedures Committee to the explanation that some railway companies offer when trains cease to run. We have heard the excuse that, when certain types of snow land on the rails, the whole shooting match closes down.  The committee's reports seek to put equipment in place so that our wagons can continue to roll and the business of the Parliament can be delivered, in particular by ministers. When first I joined the Procedures Committee, I thought, "God, I'm going to die in here", because the issues that the committee dealt with were so dry. I have been a member of the committee for a while now, so I realise that it is even worse than that. However, to be serious, although the changes that are proposed in the reports look simple and straightforward, the reports reveal how much time and energy the Procedures Committee puts into unblocking provisions in standing orders. I commend the reports to the Parliament.

Does the minister find it rather ironic that Scotland is seen as one of the richest countries in Europe, yet we have many children who live below the poverty line and are born to fail?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to review the law to make it illegal for the online "grooming" of children to take place. (S1O-4309)

I am grateful for that answer. In order to combat use of the internet by paedophiles, will the minister task the police with setting up a unit that employs entrapment methods?

Will the First Minister ensure that adequate resources are given to all organisations, statutory and voluntary, to ensure that the problem of child abuse through the sex trade is dealt with? Let us be perfectly clear: there ain't no such thing as child prostitution—systematic child abuse is what is taking place. It is all very well talking about guidelines, but resources are what will make the difference to the trade that is taking place on the streets of Scotland right now.

As a Johnny-come-lately to the Equal Opportunities Committee, I pay tribute to the committee members for putting in the hard graft. I welcome the committee's report on Gypsy Travellers, whose way of life is under threat due to society's negative views of their culture. Other members will highlight the problems that the Traveller community faces because of local authorities' responses to requests for accommodation and education. I will highlight how, when Gypsy Travellers access health services, they face problems that are due largely to the stigma that is attached to their way of life.  Official figures suggest that there are between 10,000 and 15,000 Travellers in Scotland, yet there is a dearth of research into their health status. Anecdotal evidence and a few small-scale studies suggest that travelling people have higher morbidity rates and higher mortality rates than do the settled population. Dr Iain McNicol, who is a general practitioner in Argyll, told the committee that a small survey that he carried out in his area showed that the average life expectancy of the Gypsy Travellers with whom he had contact was 55 years. I think that Kate MacLean mentioned that, too. When we consider that the last time the average life expectancy in Scotland was 55 was in 1932, it becomes clear how badly served Gypsy Travellers are by the health service. Those who gave evidence to the committee commented that one of their main problems was the inability to obtain basic medical services because of attitudes in GP surgeries. The reason given for refusing treatment was that, because Gypsy Travellers are not settled in one area for a long period, GPs would be affected financially and so are unable to accept such patients. The Executive's evidence shows that that is untrue: patients can be accepted on a temporary basis without affecting GPs' income. The big problem regarding Gypsy Travellers' access to health services is the stigma that is attached to their way of life. The Executive must tackle that, as it must any other discrimination, as a matter of urgency. When the committee took evidence, the experiences of homeless people and people with mental health problems who used the health service were used to show what could be done to break down the barriers for Gypsy Travellers. The Parliament must lead by example in an effort to change the stereotypes that too often appear in the media. Such stereotypes are prevalent in all walks of life about anyone who is different. That means challenging our newspaper editors and television producers to show what life is like from all perspectives. The lifestyle and culture of Gypsy Travellers go back centuries. In the diverse society in which we live, that tradition and lifestyle should not be lost because of ignorance. If Gypsy Travellers' problems are to be solved, those of us in the wider community must learn to understand their way of life. That can be done only with the help of Gypsy Travellers. As legislators, we must ensure that Gypsy Travellers have access to all services and we must ensure that all barriers are broken down. Communication between those who access services and those who provide services must improve dramatically. Service providers must take on board the specific needs of this section of society, but the Executive must put in place the  resources required to provide quality services for all users in Scotland. In written evidence to the Equal Opportunities Committee, Jackie Baillie stated: "Travelling People are entitled to the same range of primary care services as any other patient - including health advice, consultations, examinations and immunisations against a range of diseases." It is good to know that the recommendations that the committee made on health have been accepted by the Executive. As the then health minister wrote in 1998, it is time for the "NHS to live by the spirit and not just the letter of existing legislation." By fully implementing the recommendations of the Equal Opportunities Committee, the access to medical care that many of us take for granted will no longer be unobtainable by the Gypsy Traveller community.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives from North Lanarkshire Council. (S1O-4174)

I thank the minister for that short answer. Does the minister agree with Charles Gray, who is the convener of education on North Lanarkshire Council, who said that he has reservations about the use of public-private partnerships for the construction of public buildings. He stated: "the Public Works Loan method would be preferable". Is not it time that councils were allowed to borrow in the cheapest way possible, which is certainly not PPP?

Does John Farquhar Munro know about the normal practice after opencast? In Greengairs, a village surrounded by opencast, the next venture will be landfill and all the health problems that go along with that.

Will the member give way?

I have just returned from a seminar on counting the cost of violence against women, which had delegates from all over the world, so I especially welcome this Executive legislation, which will go some way to protecting vulnerable witnesses in the criminal justice system. The intent of the bill is to lessen the distress that is suffered by, and to improve the rights of, women complainers of sexual offences. That is commendable.  As has been mentioned—it is worth while repeating it—there were 591 reported cases of rape in Scotland in 1999, yet only 27 convictions of rape were obtained. While the reporting of sexual offences is rising, the attrition rate is falling. Any change to legislation that will further increase the reporting of sexual offences and improve the attrition rate has to be welcomed. It is thought that 91 per cent of rapes go unreported, so the measures to restrict evidence are extremely welcome, because one of the reasons for sexual offences going unreported is the thought of having to relive the events in court and answer questions of a personal nature that have nothing to do with the offence. The thought of their personal lives being on trial further distresses victims and stops many women reporting crimes. The change is also welcome because research has shown that defence lawyers and advocates have used the ability to introduce evidence relating to complainers' lifestyles to throw a smokescreen of immorality around the complainer, to confuse the jury and get their client off. The legislation will help to protect the dignity and privacy of the complainer, while stopping lawyers from muddying the issues. I hope that the proposed new legislation will be the beginning and not the end as far as sexual offences are concerned. There is a long way to go before vulnerable people receive the protection and help that they need from our criminal justice system. As convener of the cross-party group on men's violence against women and children, I have had the opportunity to hear at first hand from organisations—some of whom are represented in the gallery—that are involved in supporting women who have suffered from sexual offences and other problems. Following on from the bill, the Executive must consider urgently the definition of rape. An idea would be to follow the example set out by the "Setting the Boundaries" report in England and Wales, which gives a non-exhaustive, statutory definition of rape. That would make it clear to men what is acceptable and what is not. It would also stop any repeat of the ruling by Lord Abernethy. Sexual offences law must be based on the recognition of a woman's sexual autonomy and the fact that she has the right to say no or yes to sex without being judged or suffering abuse. A review of the procedures used by the police and procurators fiscal is also needed. The procedures that are currently used have been developed to catch and convict attackers who are not known to their victims, but in most cases, the attacker is known. Therefore, the framework for investigation and conviction is of little use. Of all callers to rape crisis centres, 97 per cent know  their attackers, but most of those cases never make it to court. A review of how witnesses are treated in court is needed. Women who have been attacked should be treated as vulnerable witnesses and should not be forced to face their attacker in court. There is also a need for training for the judiciary and the legal profession so that they understand the trauma that women face when they enter a court. We need an overarching review of the law and procedures used in sexual offence cases. It is no good going at the issue piecemeal, as that will only cause further problems and lessen the impact of any changes, even those made with good intentions. The proposed legislation is a start, but by no means must it be seen as the end.

I hope that my speech will be short and to the point. It goes without saying that I welcome the bill very much. Many individuals and groups have campaigned on the issue for a long time and we must thank them for their persistence. The bill deals with the situation of women and children who are down and almost out and who need help. The system used to let them down. Once the bill is enacted, when a woman or a child—those abused are almost exclusively women and children—is being abused or is under  the threat of abuse from a man, the police will do what they and many people in society have always wanted to do, which is to stop the abuse. The granting of an interdict against a man to which the power of arrest is attached will allow the police to do that, no matter what the marital status of the woman is. There is no doubt that today is a good day for the Scottish Parliament—in fact, it is a great day for the Parliament—but it is an even better day for those women and children who are under threat from abusive men.

Yes.

I wonder whether the minister is aware that Mitchell of the Glasgow police wrote, when referring to entrapment methods, that the people who were meeting were conspiring for Scottish independence. The police in Glasgow wrote that down.

Will the member give way?

On a bright summer's afternoon, on 30 August 1820, a crowd of 20,000 people gathered on Glasgow green to watch the execution of a Strathaven weaver, James Wilson. After taking part in a simple religious service and drinking the customary glass of wine, Wilson, dressed in white, was dragged to the bottom of the scaffold in a black, horse-drawn hurdle. He then mounted the scaffold with his captors, to hisses and shouts of "Murder!" from the sympathetic crowd. The 60-year-old radical was hanged, then beheaded. The sentence of quartering could not be carried out because of the hostility of the crowd. A few days later, in Broad Street, Stirling, Andrew Hardie and John Baird met the same fate as Wilson. Those three men were murdered by the state for believing in workers' rights and Scottish independence. Why do so few people in Scotland know about that vital part of Scottish history? Far from schoolchildren having any knowledge of that episode, even history teachers in Scotland are generally ignorant of the story. The Tolpuddle martyrs are widely known about in schools and universities in Scotland and extensively known about within the trade union movement. In fact, the trade union movement has funded a museum in Dorset to the memory of the Tolpuddle martyrs. I do not want in any way to minimise the sacrifice made by the Tolpuddle martyrs. The horror of being transported to the colonies was no soft option, but they were able to return to England after a couple of years and now have a place—rightly—in the history books. What is the difference between the Tolpuddle martyrs and the Scottish 1820 martyrs? Is it simply  that Baird, Hardie and Wilson were Scottish and therefore, like many Scottish achievements or sacrifices, irrelevant? Or is the fact that the Scottish martyrs believed in Scottish independence and used a banner that declared, "Scotland Free—or a Desart!" a good enough reason for writing them out of the history books, as the Highland clearances were? Or is it just that the establishment—then and now—has been so shamefaced, embarrassed and guilty about the way those great men were treated that the only way it can cope with the guilt is by trying to make everyone believe that the 1820 insurrection did not happen? Some 20 years after the executions, a committee was formed to seek the removal of the remains of Hardie and Baird to Sighthill cemetery in Glasgow and to erect a memorial to them. That was done in 1847 and the permission of the then Solicitor General had to be obtained—but permission was granted on condition that there was no publicity. That conspiracy of secrecy continues to this day. It is time it was broken. I was born 500 yards from Sighthill cemetery and I thought I knew every nook and cranny in Springburn. My father was steeped in the Labour movement, but I knew nothing of Baird, Wilson and Hardie. Had it not been for the good services of the volunteers of the 1820 Society, I doubt that I ever would have known of the 1820 martyrs. It is surely significant that the 19 Scots who were transported to Australia for their part in the revolt proved that rebellion and criminality are different things. They were pardoned a few years after they were transported. Wilson, Hardie and Baird were good men, with courage, dignity and character. There is a lesson for all of us who work for a political purpose in the fact that those men of 1820 worked for a political objective and saw in political change the potential for social and economic justice. That is how democrats go about their task. If people do not know where they came from, they have no chance of knowing where they are going. It is said that only by understanding its history can a people move forward with confidence. If Scotland is to continue to move forward, its full story, which includes the story of the 1820 martyrs, needs to be taught to its children. A history without Baird, Wilson and Hardie is no history at all.

Like many members, I very much welcome the recommendations in the MacLean report and I thank the Executive for accepting them. The MacLean report will ensure that serious violent and sexual offenders are adequately monitored and that the risks that they pose to the public are significantly reduced. Although the report will be relevant only to a small number of offenders, we all know that it takes only a few men—we are talking mainly about men—to do an awful lot of damage to an awful lot of women and children. The report is therefore significant. To enhance the MacLean report, the Executive should examine a specific matter. As convener of the cross-party group on men's violence against women and children, I invited ECPPAT—End Child Prostitution, Pornography and Trafficking—to give a presentation. I have spoken to ECPPAT representatives regarding legislation on sex offenders. Their main concerns are about convicted offenders who travel abroad, and about UK nationals and residents who have overseas convictions and who might fall through loopholes. During their campaign, ECPPAT representatives made it perfectly clear to me and to the cross-party group that they felt that the work that they were doing was being side-tracked or forgotten about in Westminster. However, after coming to the Scottish Parliament, talking to many MSPs and holding a press conference, they felt that a new impetus had been given to their campaign. They wanted me to congratulate members of the Scottish Parliament, because they had come to the conclusion that, if Westminster did not act, Holyrood certainly would. Most of what ECPPAT had campaigned for came into force on 1 June 2001. Now, sex offenders who travel abroad must notify the authorities about the country to which they are travelling, their point of arrival, their  accommodation arrangements for the first night's overseas stay and their departure date. Of course, some of us would like to have notification of addresses for the duration of such people's time abroad, but that is a matter for another day and another time. There is a loophole; UK nationals and residents who have overseas convictions are not covered by the MacLean report. I appreciate that that issue is partially covered in the Cosgrove report "Reducing the Risk: Improving the response to sex offending", and I hope that the MacLean and Cosgrove reports can be dovetailed in a fashion that will take care of the issue that I am outlining. A UK national or resident who has committed a string of sexual convictions abroad is at present immune to the new notification requirements and would still be immune if we were to implement the MacLean recommendations. Some who fit into the category of having committed crimes abroad are not included. If we are to reduce the risk of reoffending, we must include all those who are at risk of reoffending, and not just those who offend in this country. I conclude by pleading with the minister to take on board my concerns. At the same time, however, I congratulate the Executive on introducing the white paper. I wish ministers every success in implementing it.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of North Lanarkshire Council. (S1O-3570)

Can the minister update the Parliament on the progress that is being made in providing funds for North Lanarkshire Council for the total refurbishment or replacement of Airdrie Academy?

I pay tribute to Murray Tosh and the way in which he handled the committee's business. I also pay tribute to John Patterson and his team. The work of the Procedures Committee may be dry, but it is an easy committee to work with. I will probably be removed from the committee now that I have said that. Murray Tosh's speech covered most of the major points. I have no desire to go over them all, but I would like to endorse what he said and speak to a couple of the points. The ability to ask questions throughout the parliamentary year is vital to MSPs' work in holding the Executive to account. A moratorium would put that work back by light years. We should guard that privilege—it is more of a duty—with everything that we have. There are lessons to be learned. We must recognise that the last thing that a person running a business would do is burden himself with a lot of work during a holiday period. There is a responsibility on members to take it easy when it comes to recesses, as they should be aware that that is when officials go on holiday. Day-to-day research work should be held back during the recess and only vital questions lodged. Let me give an illustration of how the system could work. I lodged 27 questions on my work on men's violence against women and children; the questions were all published in one issue of the business bulletin. I asked them after I had contacted the police, health trusts, outside agencies and the voluntary sector—we even elicited information from abroad. In due course, the 27 answers arrived. We have all had experience of asking questions that receive poor-quality answers. Alex Neil suggested that the fact that answers are sometimes of such poor quality generates more questions. However, the answers to the 27 questions that I lodged were high quality. I would like to think that those questions—and the  answers—had a bearing on the Executive's views and on the direction in which it headed. Apart from getting the hard political facts, there is an add-on benefit in asking questions; they give us an opportunity to get help from the Executive on finding answers. In the committee, I raised the fact that only English may be used for parliamentary questions. Standing orders seem to suggest that every word must be English. In other words, if a member were to use Scots, some form of translation would need to be given. However, most of us—including the Presiding Officer—have used Scottish words. Perhaps we are all bilingual and use a mixture of words. It would be ridiculous to permit only English words. I gave examples of Scots words, such as dreich, drookit, oxter and—since I come from the west of Scotland—vindaloo. We use many other words in our everyday language. One area of conflict between Murray Tosh and me arose when he said that he would be embarrassed if Australians were to look up the Parliament's website and find Scottish words and not know what they meant.

Dinna fash yersel, man.

One of the difficulties is who would decide what is a Scottish word and what is not. We should be able to use everyday words. To say that we are embarrassed sets back what we are trying to do. We should not make people embarrassed about the way they speak. I looked up Australian Hansard on the web and I found that, lo and behold, every day of the week, aboriginal and Australian words are used in the  Australian Parliament. The Australians do not have any problem with that; they are not embarrassed and we should not be either. I respect Murray Tosh an awful lot. I certainly would not describe him as a galah or a dag; I would call him a fair dinkum person. I hope that he will join me and many others in Scotland on this matter. We will have a great corroboree in our own Scottish tongue.

The bill is very short and, as I know from committee meetings and the speeches that I have heard this afternoon, uncontroversial. The SNP backs the bill and has lodged no amendments. The bill contains no new policy initiatives; it seeks only to maintain the status quo until such time as a system of best value can be introduced into local authorities for the provision of direct services. I seek assurances and guarantees from the minister on certain points. Keith Harding painted a rosy picture of CCT. However, every member in the chamber would surely agree that CCT was unfair, inefficient and disastrous. It resulted not in savings for local authorities but in poor standards of service and poorer treatment of workers. We do not want it to reappear and we want an alternative in place as soon as possible. The aim of best value is to introduce an accountable, transparent and continually improving framework for the provision of direct services—but where is it? At the last UK general election, the Labour party made a manifesto commitment to replace CCT with a system of best value. In 1999, the final report of the best value task force was published. In October 2000, the Executive ended its consultation process. The Executive has had a long time to get best value up and running. Obviously, if best value is to be implemented in a way that is of most benefit to local authorities and the wider public, adequate consultation and development time must be spent on it. The minister has mentioned legislation in the autumn, but can he give us a time scale for the implementation of a system of best value in local government? Will it be implemented in this parliamentary session? The fact that the bill extends the moratorium on CCT indefinitely does not bode well for a swift introduction of best value. I hope that the minister will address that issue in his closing speech. It is dangerous to agree with anything that the Tories have to say on the matter, but I agree with them that four years is a long time to wait for change. I thank the Scottish Executive for ensuring that there is no default return to CCT and I commend the proposal to extend the moratorium. However, I give a warning about delaying the introduction of the new system that will enable us to dump CCT for ever.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to introduce mandatory training programmes for the judiciary on issues such as rape and domestic abuse. (S1O-3405)

Does the minister agree that certain rulings, especially the recent ruling of Lord Abernethy, could have been avoided if the judiciary had been properly trained and aware of how women react to rape and how it affects them?

The motion is non-controversial. However, the decision on a procedure for dealing with private legislation is important to the Parliament and has been considered at length by the Procedures Committee. Although no private legislation has yet been lodged in the Parliament, it is important that the structures and processes are in place to deal with such bills when they are submitted. It is estimated that, once the guidance is in place, there will be one or two private bills a year. Although the volume may initially be larger—I believe that some parties are holding back from lodging private legislation until a decision on procedures is made—it is vital that private legislation is processed through the Parliament, so that the public interest can be taken into account. This is a non-controversial issue and all that it remains for me to say is that the SNP supports the Procedures Committee report.

The Executive's announcement of figures showing that crime has reduced by 3 per cent may be applauded, but the stark reality behind that may not. The figures are for the number of reported crimes; they do not show the number of crimes that go unreported and the number of reported crimes that do not result in conviction. If the number of reported crimes is down, as the Executive figures show, that does not necessarily mean that fewer crimes are being committed. That is particularly true for crimes involving men's violence against women and children.

I have a number of points to make in my speech. Perhaps the minister will make further interventions on the related matters that I will address. The Scottish Executive figures show that the incidence of cases of assault with intent to rape and of indecent assault fell by 14 per cent last year and by 5 per cent in 1999. That sounds great, until we realise that women are assaulted, on average, 35 times before they contact the police. Only one in 10 incidents of domestic violence gets reported to the police. When the crime of rape is examined in isolation, an even more unsettling reality is revealed. It is estimated that 90 per cent of rapes go unreported and that only one in five women who contact Rape Crisis Scotland ever contacts the police. The figures show that the number of cases of rape decreased by 5 per cent in 2001, compared with a 4 per cent decrease in 1999, but that is not the whole story. The decrease in the number of reported rapes could mask an increase in the total number of rapes committed. It could show fewer women coming forward because they are scared, or because they feel that they will not get justice. So many women do not report rape because of fear, because of the trauma they have already suffered and because they see that many rape cases do not result in a conviction. Only 6 per cent of the estimated 6 per cent of rapes that are reported result in a conviction. When it comes to issues such as rape and domestic abuse, we cannot look at the figures and believe that the problem is becoming smaller. We  must instead look at the reality beyond the figures: that a decrease might mean that fewer women are coming forward. It is that issue that we must address. We must consider all aspects of the criminal justice system, to make it easier, safer and more beneficial for women to come forward. In the long term, we need a change of attitude in society and far less tolerance of violence against women. In the short term, we should consider urgently training people at the coalface of the legal system. As we all know, the Abernethy ruling has set back organisations' work light years. How are women supposed to be encouraged that they will get justice if someone decrees that they have to be beaten as well as raped for the offence to constitute rape? After that fiasco, I would not be surprised—nor would anyone in the chamber—if the number of reported rapes fell even further next year. Recorded crime figures are pretty much irrelevant to rape and domestic abuse, as it is what the figures do not tell us that is important. Members will remember the phrase, "Lies, damned lies and statistics." In this case, the interpretation of the statistics may not be the issue, but the choice of statistics is—they cover up a multitude of unreported crimes.

Are we also up to date on the implementation of protection mechanisms for child users of the internet? I appreciate that the Executive launched "ClickThinking" to empower users, but what measures will be put in place to protect users—especially child users—from pornography and paedophilia?

Will Mr Rumbles take an intervention?

I congratulate Johann Lamont on securing this debate although, like everyone else, I find it rather disturbing that we are having to debate the issue in the first place. I thank the members of the cross-party group on men's violence against women and children who have taken the time to attend tonight's debate and support Johann and her motion. Rape is an horrendous crime. It is the crime most feared by young women in Scotland today. The statistics about the number of rapes that are reported and the conviction rate are almost beyond belief. In Glasgow, the incidence of rape has risen by 10 per cent over the past two years, but only 2 per cent of rapes that are reported to the police result in the conviction of the attacker. In the UK as a whole, the number of rapes trebled between 1985 and 1999, but the number of men convicted stayed much the same. The figures are shocking enough but, given that 94 per cent of rapes go unreported, the situation is much worse. It is well documented that, during an attack, a victim's survival instinct takes over. Women may freeze, not resist or even comply with their attacker's wishes in order to prevent beating or even murder. Lord Abernethy's judgment has ignored those facts. What has happened goes against legal precedent and puts back light years the work carried out by many organisations in this field. Lord Abernethy took the traditional line on Scots law, which is also expressed by many institutional writers. However, in a case heard by Lord Cockburn more than 150 years ago, it was stated that the essence of rape was sexual intercourse obtained without the woman's consent. In a later  case, Lord Ardmillan also stated that any method of overpowering the woman's will, even without actual violence, is a use of force in the eyes of the law. Therefore, although there is some confusion surrounding the legal definition of rape, precedent has been set to define force in terms of any method used to obtain sexual intercourse without a woman's consent. The reaction from the legal profession has been similar to the public's disbelief. Professor Black stated that, although what Lord Abernethy said seemed to be perfectly standard and accepted Scots law, whether that ought to be the case was a different matter. The verdict gives out the wrong message to women and men, suggesting that rape is okay in certain circumstances. It has removed the responsibility from the attacker and shifted it on to the victim. Women already go through intense feelings of self-blame, going over and over the events and wondering whether there was anything that could or should have been done to prevent the attack or lessen its effects. The results are there for us all to see. Rape victims are three times more likely than non-victims to have major depression, four times more likely to contemplate suicide and 13 times more likely to have two or more major alcohol-related problems. In fact, 13 per cent of all victims attempt suicide. The Abernethy verdict says to women that, if they do not struggle and get physically hurt, they have not been raped. Scottish Women's Aid has stated that it is about time that society gave men the message that, if a woman says no, she means no. An article in The Guardian pointed out that, if a woman physically resists and is severely hurt, she is told that she should have acted more passively, but that, if she does not resist, she is seen as accepting violence. It is a no-win situation. The case in Aberdeen had a high profile, attracting massive and uniform disbelief. The law needs to be clearly defined, to send out a strong message that rape is wholly unacceptable in every circumstance. On 29 March, Henry McLeish stated that the Executive would "keep the law under review and make other changes where necessary."— [ Official Report, 29 March 2001; Vol 11,  c 1120.]  I appreciate that the Scottish Executive will await the publication of the Crown Office report on the matter and I believe that the case has been referred to the appeal court this afternoon, which is a positive move. However, regardless of the result of that appeal, I implore the Executive to take early action so that what happened in Aberdeen never happens to anyone again.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are in place to ensure the smooth running of all examinations taken by secondary pupils this year. (S1O-3198)

I do not disagree with anything that the minister has said so far. Last year's problems left a lack of confidence in the examination system in Scotland. In an effort to instil confidence that the problems are in the past, will the minister give serious consideration to returning all marked scripts from this year's diet of examinations to the relevant exam centre for verification? That should be done at no expense to the school or college, given that the problems were brought about by the deficiencies of the SQA.

Does the First Minister agree that women who are raped go through enough trauma without having to endanger their lives further by trying to fight off their attacker? The First Minister will be aware that many violent murders take place after rapes. Does he intend to put his weight behind calls for changes to be made in the law as defined by Lord Abernethy?

I thank Pauline McNeill for bringing this issue to the Parliament and I congratulate her on securing the debate and on the quality of the information that she has brought to it. It has been more than a year since I secured my members' business debate on the rights of rape victims and it is heartening to know that the work of the Parliament is continuing in this area. Drug-assisted rape is the fastest-increasing crime against women. It is estimated that, to date, 2,000 women have been the victims of sexual assault after having been drugged. The crime is hugely distressing for the victim and is exacerbated by the fact that many cannot clearly remember the events that occurred. Drug rape is a high-profile crime. The fact that drugs are used to aid the assault adds to the media interest, of which there is much. As a result, much of the discussion about drug-assisted sexual assault concentrates on the drug, implying that it is the drug that is evil, rather than the men. However, the men are the ones who are doing the raping; the drug is just the form of disarmament. Drug rape is simply rape carried out with the aid of drugs; it is no different from rape that is carried out with the aid of alcohol, the threat of violence or the use of force. We must change attitudes towards rape. When that crime is committed, we must ensure that justice is done. Pauline McNeill's debate will add to the strength of the work that is being done on the matter; it will keep the issue alive and ensure that it has a high profile. Rape is rape, no matter how it is carried out. If  we start to concentrate solely on the methods that are used to carry it out, divided we will fall. Last week, Lord Abernethy put back by light years the work of groups such as Rape Crisis, Women's Aid and Zero Tolerance and their campaigns to end violence against women. To suggest that physical force or the threat of force must be used before an act can constitute rape is an insult. In the case concerned, it must have been even more horrendous for the victim to hear that, even though she had said no many times, no was not enough. When the judiciary makes such statements, what message is sent out to society? Zero Tolerance has shown that 50 per cent of young people feel that there are situations in which it is acceptable to rape a woman. One in 10 boys have said that they would rape a woman if they thought that they could get away with it. According to Lord Abernethy's ruling, if a woman were drugged, she could be not only raped, but gang raped, yet if there were no physical signs of damage, those acts would not constitute rape. That is unacceptable. I am grateful to Pauline McNeill for initiating the debate. The fact that we are having it this week will help us to deal with that judgment.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Have you any indication of who is on the substitutes bench?

Lanarkshire, Ayrshire and many communities in Scotland have been devastated by over-provision of opencast mining—the old term for it was strip mining. Is it not time that the Parliament implemented a moratorium on opencast mining?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to initiate an awareness campaign on dangers to children arising from use of the internet. (S1O-3055)

We are all too well aware of the dangers of the internet; it is a difficult area to control. What measures can be taken to catch and prosecute paedophiles who approach and entice children on the internet?

Nothing.

As welcome as it is that the Local Government Committee has seized the initiative, does the minister agree that the Executive should have conducted an inquiry and saved us the bother?

Local authorities are meant to work in partnership with Government to deliver local services and address local needs. However, the details that have emerged from the spending review show a lack of resources and a lack of flexibility in the relationship between local and central Government. Moreover, parts of the review appear to contradict the European Charter of Local Self-Government and go against the spirit of its principles. That is alarming, especially as the Government has already ratified the charter. Two paragraphs of the charter stand out. The first states: "Local authorities shall be entitled, within national economic policy, to adequate financial resources of their own, of which they may dispose freely within the framework of their powers."  Predictions show that, by 2003-04, the increase in settlement is set to slide to 3.78 per cent. The stark reality is that council tax has increased by an average of 34 per cent—not 25 per cent, as Keith Harding said—since Labour came to power. That has meant horrendous rises throughout Scotland: 43 per cent in Glasgow; 42 per cent in Aberdeen; and a whacking 46 per cent in Dumfries and Galloway. That is all because the Government, both here and elsewhere, has decided not to support local government adequately. Those figures apply even before we take into account the fact that water and sewerage charges are going through the roof. The other paragraph of the charter that stands out states: "As far as possible, grants to local authorities shall not be earmarked for the financing of specific projects. The provision of grants shall not remove the basic freedom of local authorities to exercise policy discretion within their own jurisdiction." The constraints imposed by this financial settlement, in the form of ring fencing and the strict direction on the use of resources, means that the extent to which councils can respond to local needs and address local problems with local solutions is being reduced. The result is that funding for core services is falling. Repairs and maintenance programmes have borne the brunt of reductions in funding, which has led to the all-too-evident deterioration of public assets such as roads and schools. Greengairs in Lanarkshire provides an excellent example of that. Villagers have been campaigning for four and a half years for traffic-calming measures to deal with the heavy traffic that passes through the village to access the landfill site and the opencast mine. The local authority's response is simply that it has no money. Because of the financial constraints, the local authority has decided to target its funds at those areas with high accident numbers. Not enough people have been killed or injured in Greengairs for it to be on the local authority's list—well, not yet. In November, I spoke about Airdrie Academy, which has been left to rot, because there is not enough money to fix it. At this stage, to build a new school would probably cost less than to repair the damage to the existing school. Caldervale High School, which is also in Airdrie, is going the same way. Although it is not in as bad a way as Airdrie Academy is, lack of maintenance has allowed it to fall into a frankly unacceptable state of disrepair. The report that Her Majesty's inspectors produced at the end of last month highlighted water damage that has closed a maths room; unhygienic and unsatisfactory toilet facilities; and inadequate heating, lighting and  ventilation. How bad does the situation have to get before something is done? Although local authorities need the flexibility and freedom to react to local problems, they also need the financial support to deal with them effectively. Waiting for schools to fall down and accidents to happen before taking action should not be an option. I urge the Executive to reconsider.

I associate myself with the First Minister's comments about men's responsibility for domestic violence. Research shows that, on average, a woman is abused 35 times before making a complaint. Will the Executive consider the Canadian initiative of having domestic violence courts, with a view to setting them up in Scotland?

Will the member give way?

rose—

Like every member in the chamber today, I welcome the work of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, and Maureen Macmillan's and the Executive's persistence in giving such a high profile to domestic abuse. One in five women suffer from domestic abuse and it is estimated that they will suffer an average of 35 attacks before seeking help. It is at that  point—the point at which they have found the strength to do something about their situation—that we must give them the support and protection that they need and deserve. We have all come to realise that the law as it stands is inadequate. It is based on a society in which marriage is the norm, and it fails to provide continuing protection after separation or divorce. We need to change the law so that it will offer protection to victims. I echo what Michael Matheson said: domestic violence has no boundaries and no protocols and it reaches outside marriage. Domestic violence is not stopped by divorce or separation. At the moment, the interdict ceases to be valid after the couple have divorced. However, between 40 and 60 per cent of women continue to be abused by their former partner after divorce or separation. More than a third of women who have been abused by their partner were no longer living with their partner when the abuse occurred. The law as it stands is outdated and inadequate. I am glad that, in its consideration of the options for a protection from abuse bill, the Justice 1 Committee has chosen to go down the path of a new, more general bill, rather than choosing to amend the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981. The groups that gave evidence to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee have been, on the whole, positive about the move to a more general, encompassing law. However, I want to raise a couple of points. Perhaps the Justice 1 Committee or the minister will comment on whether they could be considered within the bill. First, I seek an assurance on the time that the process will take. A protection from abuse bill would mean that victims of abuse would have to apply once for an interdict and again to have the power of arrest attached to it. I would like the time between the two, when the victim is most at risk, to be reduced, or it might even be possible to work the two in together—I am not sure about that. Secondly, as always, we are on the first step of the ladder. We should not become complacent in any way. The matter should be dealt with. Tackling domestic abuse is an on-going process. I encourage the Executive again to go the distance.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. This time last year, I secured a members' business debate on the protection of victims in rape cases. Although I appreciate that this debate centres on all victims of crime, the document has a strong leaning towards victims of domestic abuse, which is the area on which I want to focus. I welcome the high profile that the Executive has given to domestic abuse; it should be applauded on all its work on the matter, particularly in the past six months. However, I call on it to go further and suggest two Canadian initiatives with a proven track record that would make a significant difference to successful protection of victims' rights within the criminal justice system. The first initiative is the fast-tracking of domestic abuse cases through the criminal justice system and the second, related initiative is the development of specialised domestic violence courts. Domestic violence cases can take many months to proceed through the fiscal system, which can be a huge burden to the victim. The accused and the accuser could be sharing a house; children could be involved; and it is likely that they will share friends, acquaintances or a neighbourhood. The time delay adds to the already significant pressure on women not to press on with prosecution when charges are first brought. Steps should be taken to speed up the judicial process so that women are encouraged to access the criminal justice system. Furthermore, there should be measures to ensure that more offenders in domestic abuse cases are brought to justice and that the emotional scars of the victim and any children involved are not increased by the nature of the judicial system. That aim could be achieved through a specialised domestic violence court system. Although there are several highly effective domestic court systems in Canada, time limits mean that I can mention only the system in  Ontario. The Ontario domestic violence courts aim to provide better support for victims and to prosecute domestic violence cases more effectively through early intervention in domestic abuse situations. The system includes an early intervention component that allows offenders to undergo a treatment programme as a condition of bail, which will then be taken into account when they return to court. The Ontario domestic violence courts have been highly successful; as of February 2000, 69 per cent of the cases resulted in guilty dispositions, 63 per cent of which occurred before the trial, with 22 per cent of the cases withdrawn. The courts also claim to make additional evidence available so that cases can continue even in the face of recantation by the victims. Seventy-six per cent of cases were processed through that facility, 29 per cent with statements from independent witnesses and 24 per cent with evidence of prior convictions. Domestic violence courts work on a similar principle to specialised drugs courts. Both systems promote treatment programmes alongside the criminal justice system and both recognise the need for lifelong change for offenders as well as emphasising the seriousness of the crime. The Executive, to its credit, has positively started the journey. I call on the Executive to go the distance by adopting the Canadian initiatives.

Does the minister know what is in his statement?

Stalking and harassment is threatening and frightening. We all admit that the law as it stands does not do nearly enough to protect victims and punish perpetrators. As convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on men's violence against women and children, I have had the benefit of discussions with member organisations on this issue, but I am by no means speaking on behalf of the group; I would rather express my own opinions on the matter. However, I find it difficult to speak to this motion, which endorses proposals that we do not yet know about, so instead I intend to talk about the options for improving the law to deal with stalking and harassment. As Bill Aitken said, we effectively have two options: to improve our practice of the law that is already in place, or to create an entirely new offence that criminalises stalking. If we stick with the existing law, it needs to be improved. At the moment, stalking tends to be charged as a breach of the peace. It is a versatile offence and can be prosecuted in the High Court if the crime demands it. It is also a charge that the police are happy with and are used to using, but public perception of the offence of breach of the peace is that it is not a serious offence, so when it is enforced it is perceived as a relatively minor issue. Effectively, it disguises the severity of the offence and does not convey the reprehensible nature of the crime or its intrusion into the victim's life. Perhaps that is a cosmetic argument. We should encourage greater use of the offence by higher courts and a dramatic change in attitude towards what the charge of breach of the peace can be used for. In addition, a charge of breach of the peace could be made specific to the crime. The alternative is to create a new statutory offence. I  can see the relevance of that because at the moment stalking is not a crime, and perhaps it should be. Stalking is a crime only if it takes place in the context of another offence, such as a breach of the peace. Creating an offence of stalking would allow for earlier intervention by the police and might deter people from stalking someone if they thought that they would no longer be charged only with breach of the peace. However, that would not be without its problems. Defining the offence of stalking in statute would be difficult, and it would provide parameters for solicitors to try to escape from. If is difficult to know the best course of action to take, as little or no research has been conducted on stalking and harassment in Scotland and most of the available facts and figures were produced in the United States. As my colleague Christine Grahame said in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee when it considered consultation on this matter: "the initial step is to change practices and systems, so that we are really informed before we consider changing the law".—[ Official Report, Justice and Home Affairs Committee , 21 June 2000; c 1369.] Any change in the law should be carefully thought out and should not be too inflexible, so as not to exclude new methods of stalking, such as cyberstalking through the internet and e-mail.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will the member correct his phraseology and withdraw the suggestion that the SNP was involved in deals? Some backdoor deals may have been done, but they did not involve the SNP. I would also like to make a further point—

So there is no change to the number of members on the committee?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met North Lanarkshire Council and what matters were discussed. (S1O-2715)

I am surprised that the council did not take the opportunity to raise the issue of Airdrie Academy, which I consider to be in crisis. The main block has been evacuated and the pupils will be bussed around the town, which will, no doubt, disrupt their education. There are also health issues at stake. When will the Executive pluck up the courage to put in place the  investment that will allow us to build a replacement school before the existing one falls down?

What is Murray Tosh on? Whatever it is, I want some. I want to address the human element of the crisis on our railways. I travel almost every day on the Glasgow-Edinburgh railway line, as do many members of this Parliament. In fact, 3 million passengers travel on that route every year, with many of them getting on at interim stations such as Falkirk, Croy and Linlithgow. The situation on the railways has highlighted the failure of the industry to cope with emergencies and has brought to light the lack of protection for passengers on trains. The frequency of the trains between Edinburgh and Glasgow has decreased from one every 15 minutes to one every half hour. That has resulted in even more overcrowded and cramped trains on that line, with passengers not being able to board trains because they are full, and has raised serious safety issues. The situation is much the same across the country, but I have specific knowledge of that route.

I got a fright—I thought that Mr Tosh was going to tell me what he was on. I will come on to the points that he raises later in my speech. I have worked in the motor industry for most of my life and I know that the regulations governing the number of people who are allowed on road vehicles are strict, as are the requirements for safety measures such as belts and air bags. There are maximum passenger capacities for buses, cars and planes, but I am bewildered and amazed that no such regulations exist for trains. In fact, there are practically no health and safety regulations at all. The perception is that, because the trains are built to such a high specification and provide a walk-on service, there is no danger to passengers and no need to regulate numbers. However, in recent weeks, the dangers to passengers as a result of the rail crisis have highlighted the need for health and safety regulations and an increase in the carrying capacity to cope with passenger numbers. A colleague of mine told of a pregnant woman who was forced to crouch on the floor because she was feeling ill and was unable to stand. The train was overcrowded and packed to the doors, which meant that there was no room to get her to a seat. Many members will be aware that, recently, at Linlithgow station, the police had to be called because of the number of people who were trying to get on to the train. The scary fact is that if all the people had physically been able to get on the train, there would have been no health and safety rules to stop them. A few weeks ago, a train's doors flew open as it passed through a tunnel. Luckily, no one fell out—that time. Frequent commuters are fed up. How passengers from Falkirk, Polmont and Linlithgow put up with standing all the way to Edinburgh day after day is beyond me. Over the crisis period, timetables have been cut, there are longer journey times and there are less frequent trains. The ones that are running are dangerously overcrowded and uncomfortable for passengers. Passengers should be able to expect a level of service in keeping with the ticket price, but they are not receiving that. Rail users have lost confidence in the rail industry. The privatised and fragmented system is inadequate and does not serve the people of Scotland. The Scottish Parliament needs to have the power to take action to ensure that rail safety and passenger safety are not compromised for financial gain. People should get what they pay for—a seat on the train.

I know that the minister is dishing out a lot of pre-election goodies, but can he guarantee that schools such as Airdrie Academy—which is in crisis, as the main block has been closed and the pupils are being bussed all over the place—will have the resources to do the job? As schools are insured only for accidental damage, not for deterioration, is provision being made for a contingency fund to take care of emergencies due to the deterioration of buildings as a result of wear and tear and the long legacy of underfunding?

On a point of order. This morning I contacted my colleague Kenny Gibson, asking to see a copy of the minister's statement, which he had in his possession at 9 o'clock—but he refused to let me see it. Apparently, Labour back benchers are complaining that they are not seeing statements in advance, whereas spokespersons in other parties are. I am a member of the Local Government Committee and I think that I have a right to see the statement in advance along with my colleague. Can you do something about that?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to introduce a moratorium on new opencast developments while new planning enforcement regimes are developed. (S1O-2629)

Why? [Laughter.]

The strategy is a major and welcome step in the right direction. Many organisations with whom I have been in touch, including the Zero Tolerance Trust, Scottish Women's Aid and the Fife Domestic Abuse Forum, have reacted positively to it. The most important aspect of the strategy is that it is national. Many members will have heard of the family violence initiative, which is the Canadian Government's long-term campaign to end domestic abuse. The key characteristic of the campaign, which was started in the late 1980s, is that it is organised at national level. The only way to tackle domestic abuse in a coherent, consolidated manner is through a national strategy. Implementation of such a strategy is a breath of fresh air. The Canadian initiative places great emphasis on prevention. Every project funded through the FVI must include a preventive element. I am pleased that the national strategy has a strong preventive element at its core. Mass media campaigns and abuse prevention work in schools will be introduced. As I keep saying, prevention is better than cure. The use of abuse prevention programmes in the education system is a subject that the cross-party group of which I am convener has discussed and it is an issue of great concern to many members. The national strategy will encourage and develop such programmes. I hope that schools are not seen as the only way in which to educate young people about domestic violence. Whenever abuse prevention programmes are used, disclosures are inevitable. My concern is that teachers, or whoever receives such a disclosure, should have adequate training to deal with the aftermath. The general education of young people in issues of  domestic violence is also included in the strategy. Does the minister have any plans to work with education departments to make such education compulsory? I stress that I believe that the strategy is excellent, but I have some concerns and questions, which the minister may be able to clear up for me. They relate to the procedures for evaluating progress of the strategy, the method for sharing good practice and, of course, money—I will return to that. The national strategy is to be evaluated after three years. I believe that three years is too long before the first evaluation. I encourage the minister to consider annual evaluation. I would also like the minister to clarify who will evaluate the progress of the strategy, since the partnership will now be disbanded. The sharing of information is vital if the organisations involved in tackling domestic violence are to develop more effective methods. Can the minister be more specific about the mechanisms for sharing good practice? As she will know, there are many excellent local initiatives, but they are isolated and there is little communication of ideas. Inevitably, a certain amount of reinventing of the wheel goes on and a national strategy would be able to channel the initiatives efficiently and effectively. I am rushing through my speech and missing some points, so I will put my notes down and congratulate the minister. This year, Ontario alone is spending around £60 million on its initiative. Proportionally, that would equate to a spend of £30 million in Scotland. I wonder, with good will, where the minister will get £30 million a year to spend on this much-needed initiative.

I want to make some points and observations on the report's recommendations. First, on the issue of the logging of dates, we have found that, by and large, the majority of questions are answered within 14 days and that the speed of answering questions is constantly increasing. However, some questions seem to hang around for a considerable time; for example, I lodged a question in May that has still not been answered. Logging the dates of lodging will help to track questions and the mere fact that the dates will be published from time to time—in other words, naming and shaming—will have a great effect on the longevity of some questions. As for the quality of answers and the quantity of questions, many members have found the quality of some answers—or their lack of quality—has brought more questions. Any work undertaken in that area should shorten the list of questions and the system can only reap the benefits. The quality of the questions may be questionable, but that is for members to regulate, not the Executive. I am not convinced by the argument that limiting questions during the recess would be an advantage. The world still turns and life goes on during the recess. However, if there is a structural problem because staff need to take holidays—we should remember that members are not on holiday just because no debates take place, therefore they still need resources—members should recognise that and hold back on questions that could be answered later when the full complement of staff is available. Members should ask questions on current issues. That is for members, rather than the Executive, to regulate. Should members regulate the number of questions? We need to be careful on that issue. The number of questions depends on the subject  matter and range of topics that members are working on—members work in a number of areas. There is a mechanism for self-regulation. The law of averages is that some people will ask a lot of questions and that others will ask few. It is up to members to regulate themselves by not asking spurious questions for the sake of it. Lastly, there are parliamentary questions on subject areas that do not fall within ministerial responsibilities. If ministers sit on joint ministerial committees on the Parliament's behalf, they should respond to questions from the Parliament. If they cannot stand the heat in the kitchen, they should get out of the Mondeo.

I hate to correct John Young, but the saying was "Haud yer haund". Another old one is "Haud yer wheesht". I, like many others, broadly welcome the proposed reforms in the way in which local government is financed. I will concentrate on three matters, the first of which is three-year funding. That is a worthwhile move as it allows the council to commit funding in the long term and gives security to organisations that are funded, or part-funded, by local authorities. One of the concerns of the members of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on men's violence against women and children was that any moneys that were received from the domestic abuse service development fund of a local authority could be guaranteed only on a yearly basis. Organisations can now plan with more certainty. At this point, I would like to pose a question to the Minister for Finance and Local Government, who is no longer in the chamber. Perhaps he can answer it when he returns. Is the Government planning a rolling, progressive system in which year 1 would drop out and year 4 be brought in at the same time? My second point concerns the possibility of establishing a contingency fund. There is nothing in its proposals to suggest that the Scottish Executive plans to set up a contingency fund for school repairs. Local authorities do not insure buildings for gradual damage and wear and tear, but only for accidental damage. I have lodged a motion that calls for the establishment of a contingency fund to help to maintain schools such as Airdrie Academy. Members may be aware that, over the weekend, Airdrie attracted some bad publicity about its architectural aspects. Ironically, some of the best architecture in Airdrie is in parts of Airdrie Academy, which is under pressure. Teachers have to move classes from room to room to avoid leaks in the roof, and they have to move computers to prevent pupils from frying themselves. That school has reached the stage at which a rebuild would be almost more economical than a refurbishment. If a contingency fund had been in place, the rot would have been stopped by this time. My third point concerns the independent review of local government finance. The McIntosh commission recommended the commissioning of an independent review of local authority finance by the Executive. Members of the Local Government Committee have taken evidence from around the  country, and the point that has come over loud and clear is that all the councils would welcome that. Strictly speaking, it is not the job of the Local Government Committee to instigate such a review—it should be that of the Scottish Executive, which has the funds to do the job properly—but I thank the committee for its courage and determination in carrying out its inquiry. I also acknowledge the positive statements that the minister made earlier. These announcements are steps in the right direction. I especially welcome the move to three-year funding. Nevertheless, I would like clarification from the minister on whether the system of rolling funding forms part of these proposals. I would also like to see plans for contingency funds. An independent review would highlight what the best system of finance would be for local government. Even if that review came up with the proposals that the minister and COSLA have devised, that would be a worthwhile exercise.

Will the minister give way?

Will Miss Goldie give way?

Miss Goldie said that businesses require a level playing field. However, I recall that, for almost 18 years under the Tories, businesses in Scotland could be paying up to three times more in rates than businesses in England were paying. Does Miss Goldie not think that that was a severe disadvantage to business in Scotland?

I have a question for the minister, relating to the point that Lyndsay McIntosh made. I understand that no provision will be made in the UK legislation on sexual offenders for the registration of residential addresses while those people are abroad or elsewhere in the country. An amendment to the bill may be lodged in the House of Lords, but that may not be agreed to. Can the minister comment on that, and will he assure us that such a provision will be made in the Scottish legislation?

Now that the minister has decided to extend the scheme, will he give a guarantee that domestic abuse offenders, sex offenders and child abusers will no longer be considered appropriate referrals for the diversion from prosecution?

When Neil McIntosh recommended a move to proportional representation, he described it as "an essential step towards the goal of enhancing local democracy." McIntosh did not concentrate on electoral reform: he reported on all sorts of measures to overhaul local government. The debate is on electoral reform, but we must keep it in mind that that is part of a wider scheme of reform, which will work only in conjunction with a general move towards democratic accountability. The present electoral system of first past the post is becoming redundant. We did not use it in our parliamentary election, Wales did not use it in its Assembly election and Westminster is considering reform. No other country in Europe uses first past the post; most use PR. The SNP advocates a move to the single transferable vote system. We do not recommend that system because it complies with the criteria laid down by Neil McIntosh, neither do we recommend it because it is the system that the Kerley report recommended. We recommend STV for local government elections because it delivers a highly proportional result and it is closest to an optimal system for elections—in other words, it makes almost every vote count.

After examining all the systems, we, like many other people in Scotland, have plumped for STV, for reasons of fairness and equality. What is the point of turning out to vote when the chances are that that vote will make no difference? In Dundee last year, the SNP won more votes than did Labour, but Labour took more seats. In Scotland as a whole, it took more than twice as many votes to elect an SNP councillor as it did to elect a Labour councillor. Glasgow City Council provides the most extreme example. In Glasgow, the Labour party ended up with 94 per cent of the councillors on just 49 per cent of the votes, while the SNP took 29 per cent of the votes but gained only 2.5 per cent of the seats. The Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives both lost out: they each gained 1.2 per cent of the seats on, respectively, 7 per cent and 6 per cent of the votes. Although the Labour party mainly benefits from the current system, it can lose out as well. As Kenny Gibson mentioned, despite taking 18 per cent of the votes last year in Angus, Labour gained only 3 per cent of the seats—I suppose first past the post is not all bad, Kenny. If voting patterns remain the same at the next election, electoral reform will hurt the Labour party most—it will be the biggest loser. However, one would have to live on another planet to think that the electoral performance of the parties will remain the same. Opinion polls—not just the most recent one—suggest that there will be change in Scottish politics. If that is so, everybody will benefit from a move to an equitable electoral system. Democracy is about people rather than parties. That fact should outweigh any consideration of political advantage. Do we not always claim that, rather than political advantage, we seek democracy for the people? The first-past-the-post system encourages people to stay at home. It reduces the influence of any vote and it produces disproportionate results. No electoral system is perfect, but STV would achieve a closer correlation between the percentage of votes cast and the percentage of seats won. STV would maximise the influence of votes and ensure that fewer votes were wasted. It complies with all the criteria that were set out by McIntosh, including—this is most important—the high degree of proportionality and the maintenance of the councillor-ward link. It is the system that Kerley recommended as the form of PR that is most suited to Scotland and most beneficial for Scottish voters. If it is good for the Scottish people, it should be good enough for us.

I am disappointed by the minister's comments and seek some assurances from him. I am particularly concerned that rape has been singled out for such analysis. Does not that send a strong message out to women, who might complain that barriers are being put up? Furthermore, will psychiatrists or trained police officers carry out such work?

I add my voice to the congratulations to the minister on his statement. Does the Executive consider that further protection is needed for children, especially when access—or contact, as it is now called—is granted to an abusive parent?

I will take as short a time as I can. It is evident that support for changes to the law on rape cases cuts across all the parties. The pressure within Parliament, and outside, is pushing the Executive along quite nicely. I pay tribute to the minister; not only is Angus MacKay listening to us, but he is interested in and sympathetic to the clear message that direct  cross-examination of the alleged victim by the accused should be outlawed. If Angus has anything to do with it, I think that that practice will cease. Many other issues are involved when it comes to rape trials; this is not just about a single issue. Cross-examination on sexual history is a closely related issue. As I understand it, the Executive is saying that it is talking about one step. I will take this opportunity to give a message to the Executive. The message is that, if the accused requests that sexual history is brought to the court, the sexual history of the accused should also be brought to court. That sexual history could include the times when they have been accused and the times when they have been charged, but frankly I do not think that that provides the right balance. If the accused brings the sexual history of an alleged victim—one who has been charged with no crime—into the court, the quid pro quo should be that the unfettered sexual history of the accused should also be brought to the court. Balance is required in many areas of the judicial system and I am pleased about the messages that the Executive is sending and about the good will and the encouragement that have been given. I pay tribute to Johann Lamont for bringing this debate to the chamber. The debate comes at a good time. A little bit of extra pressure is required because, as Johann said, if change is needed, it is needed soon. I hope that it comes.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will publish "Towards a Just Conclusion". (S1O-2007)

It has taken a bit of time, but I welcome the document. A lot of people have been holding their breath about what it will say. Reports in the press, emanating from the Executive, have covered cases of cross-examination. Does the minister agree that most people are concerned about the lack of balance in court cases? Can he give us a wee snippet of the action plan? Is he likely to tell us that, if an alleged victim's sexual history is allowed to be discussed in court, the sexual history of the accused would also be allowed to be heard?

I take on board what the minister has said. He has moved some distance, but I have some further comments on the whole group. It is fair to say that the Local Government Committee was fairly unanimous in its intention to include every devolved body, wherever possible. We wanted a system that would be well understood. We believe that we need a catch-all, rather than catch-some, approach if we are to improve the system. The standards should be uniform and should apply to all. If we agree to the amendments, we will end up with a mixed bag of measures. If we want to encourage transparency, we should look to the old saying, "Make it simple, stupid." The Local Government Committee is of the opinion that no one should escape the net. Unfortunately, if the Parliament agrees to the amendments, there will be a number of different measures and many bodies will escape the net.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to remunerate adequately voluntary organisations for their expertise and time contributed in respect of the consultation period on rape and domestic violence issues. (S1O-1946)

I am sorry to hear that. Will the minister comment on a letter that was sent to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee this week by the Zero Tolerance trust, which reluctantly declined to give evidence? In the past two months, members of the trust have spent six days in this Parliament giving evidence. The trust pays for the associated costs out of its own pocket. The Parliament cannot do without such a group's expertise and knowledge. It would be good if the Executive could come up with some money to help voluntary organisations that come before the Parliament.

The law of the jungle in the water industry usually means that there is cherry-picking of large companies. I heard what Sarah Boyack said and she has heard the concerns about cherry-picking that have been expressed by all parties. If cherry-picking takes place, can the minister give a cast-iron guarantee that small companies and domestic users will not have to pick up the tab? Will the minister take measures to ensure that bills remain the same and that they are not excessively high in the domestic sector?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether there is a contingency fund available for emergency repairs to schools. (S1O-1886)

Is the minister aware of a report regarding Airdrie Academy? It states that "water is pouring through the walls . . . ceiling came crashing down . . . electric cables were dangling down from ceilings . . . slates were falling off the roof . . . asbestos was found in different areas of the school". If there is no contingency fund, does not the minister think that there should be—and soon?

Does the minister agree that women in the SIP areas are particularly vulnerable, and that they will be concerned about stories in today's press that the Scottish Executive will renege on its commitment to introduce anti-rape laws?

Will the minister give way?

Perhaps I can correct the minister. I did not look for an individual at all; the letter I sent was looking for a group of people. I know how people who have been raped, or whose daughters have been raped, band together to cope with the trauma. It is just a shame that members of this Parliament are not all banding together and that the minister's party is using this debate to let Jack Straw off the hook.

I am speaking today as the convener of the proposed cross-party group on men's violence against women and children. I cannot help but make a plea to Labour members not to sign up to the speech that David McLetchie made earlier, which was quite deplorable. The announcement last week by Jack Straw that Tyson was to be granted entry into the UK for a second time sickened me, for both legal and moral reasons. Under Jack Straw's rules, Mike Tyson should be refused entry into the United Kingdom.

I will give way in a moment. Jack Straw has decided that he can make up the law as he goes along. He says that he has applied  rule 320(18).

I will address it. I am not speaking on behalf of anybody. I said that I was speaking as the convener of the cross-party group on men's violence against women and children, which is slightly different. Under Jack Straw's rules, Mike Tyson should be refused entry into the United Kingdom, but Jack Straw has decided that he can make up the law as he goes along. He says that he has applied rule 320(18). The first time that he allowed Mike Tyson into the United Kingdom he said that there were strong compassionate reasons for doing that. Now he says that there are no strong compassionate reasons for allowing Tyson to enter the UK. That means that Tyson should be refused entry. It is as simple as that. But no, our Jack has other ideas. He has ignored his rules and decided to invent something new. He says that there are exceptional circumstances. I say that this has everything to do with money and nothing to do with compassion. The rule is supposed to allow people with criminal convictions to enter the UK to visit dying relatives or for other compelling reasons. It is not supposed to open the door for rapists to come to our national stadium and get rich. Jack Straw is applying Lego rules to his own law: when he does not like a bit of it, he takes it out and puts something else in.

I will not give way. The vast majority of members of this Parliament, a majority that cuts across all parties, condemned the decision to allow Tyson to fight, despite our feelings, which are well documented. In January I lodged a motion—which is still in the business bulletin, if people care to look for it—condemning Jack Straw's decision to allow Mike Tyson entry  into the UK, and wrote a letter to Jack Straw voicing our strong concerns. We now know that the Secretary of State for the Home Department has chosen to ignore the lot of us. Rape is seen as a women's issue, and we must endeavour to change that. Men such as me must take responsibility and join those who are arguing on behalf of victims of rape. Boxing and football are almost exclusively male dominated, and our voices must be heard in those sports if we are to make a difference. It is, therefore, sad that boxing is promoting a man who is a convicted rapist and elevating him almost to hero status. I would like to take this opportunity to quote from some letters that I have received since the weekend. Scottish Women's Aid states: "We are opposed to Tyson coming to Scotland. As an organisation working against violence against women, we feel welcoming Tyson sends the wrong messages out to people." Edinburgh rape crisis centre states: "Edinburgh Rape Crisis Centre wishes to support the efforts of women's groups and MSPs in protesting against the decision to allow Mike Tyson to come to Glasgow . . . We are deeply concerned that women have not been consulted about their feelings and that those who have suffered male violence will be disgusted at the high profile that this convicted rapist is given." The women's support project states: "We are very concerned and extremely disappointed about the recent decision to allow Mike Tyson to fight in Scotland. It has been encouraging in recent months to see such positive commitment within the Scottish Parliament to tackle violence against women and children, working along with those organisations supporting survivors. We feel that this has been undermined by the decision. We live in a society where young people (especially young men) are very much influenced by sports personalities and a situation has been created to glorify male violence." My final quotation is from a letter from the Dundee young women's centre. "We protest vigorously about Mike Tyson coming to Scotland and we would like to ask for a Judicial Review regarding this." The letter continues:  "Women and children who have been raped are the real heroes of our society because of what they live with on a daily basis and it is a real slap on the face for them to have this rapist come to Scotland to be upheld as a sporting legend." Instances of rape have risen by 64 per cent in the past six years. In 1998, 613 rapes were reported in Scotland; in the same year, only 43 charges of rape were proven—only 5.5 per cent. I think we all know that most cases of rape go unreported because of the double trauma that is  involved. Parading Tyson as some kind of hero is setting women's groups and those who have campaigned against rape back years.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has considered the memorandum on local government finance by Professor Arthur Midwinter dated 25 April 2000 and what response it is proposing to make. (S1O-1636)

Given that Professor Midwinter is using the Executive's own figures, does the minister accept that the Executive's support for local government is now £0.5 billion less, in real terms, than it was seven years ago?

As a member of the Local Government Committee, I, too, begin by welcoming the bill, and by thanking all those who have worked so hard to produce the proposals that we are considering today. I hope that the breadth of debate that there has been gives an indication of the range of issues that the committee has considered. The interest that there has been in this debate is a tribute to those in local government and across civic Scotland who are determined that we should have the highest standards in public life. I congratulate the Executive on most of its work on the bill. I exclude from my congratulations the Executive's handling of section 2A. I would fail in my duty as a committee member and as a member of the Opposition if I did not point out that, as a consequence of the Executive's actions, the section 2A debate has been allowed to overshadow the bill and the other major subjects it covers. However, that matter has been adequately dealt with by Nicola Sturgeon and I do not intend to return to the detail of it. From my work at all levels of public life in Scotland—first as a councillor and now as a member of the Parliament—I am confident in the determination and ability of the vast majority of people in the public domain to maintain high standards in public life. Repeatedly, the committee has heard evidence of how the thoughtless or selfish actions of a self-serving or careless tiny minority can tarnish and undermine dedicated public work. Repeatedly, the committee heard arguments for mechanisms to bring a halt to the actions of the few that taint the work of the many and lose the confidence of the people. The sentiment of the bill largely satisfies that aim and I am pleased that, as a committee, we have been able to draw together the strengths of experience from across our nation to ensure a framework to  secure best practice for all. I said "largely satisfies", but there are shortcomings, which have been mentioned today. This is the hard part of my speech—I will have to read my own writing. Representatives of four parties—John Young, Michael McMahon, Kenny Gibson and Donald Gorrie—all spoke of the need for public bodies that operate, and spend from the public purse, in Scotland to be covered by the legislation. The bill should be a catch all, rather than a catch some. Colin Campbell and Bill Aitken spoke about the problem with arm's-length companies. At present, when such companies are established by local authorities, the situation is rather anomalous. The Local Government Committee also feels that it is anomalous that a councillor, for example, would be the only one to be held responsible, while others in the company would not be treated in the same way. Kenny Gibson and Brian Adam mentioned interim suspension, about which I, along with the Local Government Committee, have some difficulty in relation to loss of income. Many of our councillors, across the parties, are full-time and put a lot of time into their work. I repeat my words from a Local Government Committee meeting, which best describe my feelings on the matter: "If a councillor on responsibility payments were suspended, you would, in effect, be taking their employment and their salary from them. If the person turned out to be innocent and the suspension were lifted, that person would have had an unfair burden placed upon them and there would be no way of giving them back the income they had lost. A better way to proceed would be to treat them equally and pay them until they were proven guilty, as happens in the private sector."—[ Official Report , Local Government Committee , 28 March 2000; c 751.] I think that we would all agree with that. The minister mentioned that there may be something on that in the future stages of the bill, and I hope that he takes that point on board. Colin Campbell talked about surcharging. Why are councillors alone singled out and subject to surcharging? It is a penal instrument of the dark ages and should be dumped now, as is about to happen in England. I praise the standard of the work that is undertaken in Scottish public life, in particular in local government. I draw Parliament's attention to the Nolan committee's 1997 report, which states that "we have found an enormous number of dedicated and hardworking people. We are of course well aware of the relatively few, but highly publicised, cases where things have gone wrong or people have behaved improperly. But it is important to set such cases in . . . context". In Scotland, that context is a huge majority of dedicated, hard-working individuals, who selflessly  work for their local communities and for the nation's benefit. The bill will protect their work and enhance their reputation. A little further consideration will ensure that such protection is broad and comprehensive. I commend the bill to the chamber.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it has made to date with its multi-modal study of the M8. (S1O-1535)

The study is not on the fast track. Is the minister aware that John Prescott has announced the completion of the Carlisle to Gretna stretch of the M6, which I am sure that most people in the chamber will welcome? Will the minister make an announcement about the completion of the M8 study?

Earlier this month, this Parliament examined the local government financial settlement. Members considered the revenue budgets, the council tax cuts and which services would need to go, to ensure that our councils did not spend beyond the limits set by the Executive. What is overlooked by the press, and what was missed in the debate, was the year-on-year erosion of the Scottish infrastructure as a result of declining capital budgets. Yesterday, I witnessed Susan Deacon's refusal to acknowledge the crisis faced by the NHS. Every time that this Parliament raised the issue of cuts or closures, rather than address the problem, the minister simply renamed it. Calling a closure a transformation may make a better soundbite, but it will not solve the problem. There will be no such hiding place for the Executive in this debate, because I will get the facts in first. In the three years before Labour came to power, our councils were allowed to spend just over £2 billion in capital projects. In the first three years that the Labour party has control of this  Parliament, it proposes to allow councils to spend £1 billion on capital projects. Labour, aided and abetted by the Liberals, has halved investment in the nation's infrastructure. That fact is taken straight from the Executive's publications. The well-being of the nation's infrastructure is dependent on investment made in it. What does this dramatic cut mean for Scotland? Perhaps we should consider our nation's history. We have a proud civic background dating back to Carnegie and before. Initially, communities invested to build town halls, libraries, schools, hospitals, swimming pools, parks, gardens and even the infrastructure that is used today to bring fresh water to our towns. Many of us, particularly those who, like me, are from a council background, resented the dark Tory years, when Treasury cuts meant that we could not afford to renew public infrastructure for our communities. As councillors—as many Labour members were—it was all we could do to keep our public buildings wind and watertight. Little did we imagine that the situation would be twice as bad under Labour. The outstanding school repairs budget has been quoted as approaching £1 billion. I have seen the consequences, which are crumbling schools with inadequate heating and classrooms that might house the latest soundbite computer, but have roofs that leak and broken windows that need to be replaced. Not 500 yd from this Parliament, the Infirmary Street baths, which were opened in Victorian times, now lie empty—abandoned through lack of finance. A mile away in Leith, the showpiece Leith Waterworld, which is barely a decade old, is boarded up pending finance for repairs. Under such savage budget cuts from Labour, councils can do little to stem the tide of decay, to stop the rot or to prevent nature from taking its course and reducing our public buildings to rubble. Not satisfied with starving public assets into dereliction, Labour has found a new tactic—the great sell-off. It wants to pick up where Thatcher stopped and privatise what even she did not dare to touch. Labour has sold what was not even its to sell. It started with Falkirk's schools and moved swiftly on to Glasgow's. Those were not built by Blair or his Government, or even Thatcher's. They were gifted to communities by businessmen and other men of means in days gone by and were certainly not Labour's to sell. As a consequence, Scotland's largest city can now no longer boast of owning even a single secondary school. The facts are before us today and the consequences will follow. Labour has halved spending on the nation's infrastructure and is selling off what is left before dereliction sets in.  The money that remains is insufficient to cover what Labour has not yet sold. I say "yet sold". I wonder what they will sell next. Our councils, most of which are Labour-run, can do nothing but wring their hands as their repair bills rise and buildings fall. Labour—trusty custodians of the nation's inheritance? Nae chance.

Thank you, Presiding Officer—I guess that you were away seeing off our guest. To ask the Scottish Executive whether the recovery plan submitted by Lanarkshire Acute Hospitals NHS Trust proposes a change in the provision of clinical services. (S1O-1331)

I take it that the minister is guaranteeing that there will be no cuts in services in Lanarkshire. If that is the case, I very much welcome it.

I start by saying that "another challenge to us all is the reality of a fixed budget . . .Calls for higher expenditure without explaining how that will be achieved do not impress anybody, and they add  nothing to the quality of debates."— [ Official Report , 10 February 2000; Vol 4, c 1015.]  That is what Jack McConnell said in the chamber barely two weeks ago when he attacked the Opposition for being financially irresponsible. After his performance this afternoon, we will take no lessons from him. He and his colleagues have called for councils to do more and more, which means higher and higher expenditure, but have failed to explain how that can be achieved. Put simply, it cannot. Any business has a number of costs over which it has no control; councils are no different. Wage and price increases, increasing taxation and additional work that is set by the Government all have to be paid for. What additional bills has Labour cost Scottish councils? First, there is the extra work that the Executive wants councils to do, such as the local transport strategies that the Minister for Transport and the Environment proudly announced. There are higher still, education action plans, increased community care and increased supported accommodation, as demanded by the Executive's policies. The list is endless. The policies that the Executive sets cost money, but the Executive does not give councils enough money to underwrite its policy commitments. Secondly, there is the bigger tax bill that councils have to pay under Labour: the landfill tax, the climate change levy, changes to value added tax, and increases to fuel duty. Thirdly, there are increases in wages and increases in commodity prices through inflation. It would be a reckless business indeed that did not account for dearer petrol, or that forgot VAT in its running costs. In December, the Minister for Finance proudly trumpeted increased council spending of 3.4 per cent, so why have we heard about a score of cuts this afternoon? Is it because of incompetent Labour councillors, or is it just Labour councillors being conned by Labour ministers? The Minister for Finance has used his usual smoke and mirrors to dress up cuts and try to pass them off as a funding increase. The minister announced that he will increase council spending to £5,940 million, but he forgot conveniently to mention that he has also increased councils' work loads. Even the Executive was prepared to admit that £120 million would be taken out of the newly increased budget. That reduces Mr McConnell's rise to only 1.3 per cent. Then we move on to the costs that those of us who work in the real world have to acknowledge: inflation, pay and other costs that result from Labour's action—either in the Executive or in London—but for which it has made no financial provision. According to COSLA, such pressures amount to £298 million, but the Government is not  prepared to acknowledge that that is an additional cost that councils have to bear. The councils are doing the Executive's work, which brings the Executive's budget for councils down to £5,522 million. The budget last year was £5,747 million. In any language, that is a cut of 3.9 per cent. The minister has neglected wage costs and tax rises to dress up a 4 per cent cut as a 3.5 per cent increase, but he has been found out. He has been found out by the facts: tax is rising across Scotland; hundreds of millions of pounds worth of services are being lost; and not one member or minister here today can be convinced that any council will escape the axe.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has, within its own areas of responsibility, to assist in securing the future of rural post offices. (S1O-1238)

I am pleased to hear that the minister is making representations to London, because automated credit transfers could cost postmasters 40 per cent or more of their income. Has the minister considered making funding available to local authorities to assist post offices with the burden of business rates?

Is it not a sad day when we come to a place called the Scottish Parliament to argue that the Scottish Government should agree to have a question on the Scots language in the census? How ungracious of the minister to accept two recommendations out of three from the Equal Opportunities Committee. The one that he cannot swallow—the one that he has rejected—is on the Scots language. What a slap in the face to the vast majority of people who use Scots as their normal everyday way of talking. What is the minister actually saying to them? Is he saying, "Speak properly"? Or is he saying that the people are second class? A common argument against the promotion of Scots, and it has been used frequently today, is that different words are used in different parts of Scotland but mean the same thing. Of course they  do. What is strange about that? There is nothing strange about that. Every language has different local forms, but no one would dare to argue that that makes the language less legitimate. Take Switzerland, with four different official languages: French, German, Italian and Romansch. When I was in Switzerland, I asked about the diverse nature of the languages, to be told that the people in the next valley spoke a different language to the German that was used in the location that I was in. To my surprise, the other language used in the next valley was not French, Italian or Romansch, just another form of German. The Swiss are proud to be multilingual. What about English? Are we saying that people in Cornwall speak in the same way and use the same words and phrases as people in Durham? Of course they do not, but they have a standard English. I am sure that members will bear witness to the fact that many of our people, when being interviewed on television or radio, often are less fluid. Many are slow and pick their words carefully, sometimes coming over as uncomfortable—a bit like I am today—with the situation or, even worse, as lacking in confidence about what they are saying. That can be witnessed just as often when an interview is being carried out in English, but the person being interviewed normally speaks another language. They are the same as natural Scots speakers, who are simply translating their own language into English before speaking. However, I would go further and say that Scots speakers are bilingual. How many here can speak another language? A few, I suppose. Of those who can, how many can read and write it? Fewer still, I expect. That is not a strange phenomenon; it is simply that people have picked up a language but have never been taught to read or write it. The majority of Scots speakers speak Scots from the day they can speak, but are never taught to read or write a single word of it. In Scotland, an insidious campaign was mounted more than 100 years ago—it seems as if it is still working today—to kill off the Scottish tongue altogether. It did not work; it stayed with the people, if not in the schools. It is not that long ago that Gaelic was derided and frowned upon. However, after a great fight for recognition, it is getting over its trauma. The Scots language has endured the same treatment, having been under attack from a frame of mind that stigmatises it, piling on it large doses of social prejudice. The Parliament is supposed to be committed to a programme of social inclusion. Surely that should include the Scots language. Until we correct the barriers, hurdles and downright hostility to the people's language—the  language of the streets and of homes and workplaces—it will be treated as the ultimate Scottish cringe by those who look to some other place for their vision and their culture. It would be nothing short of a joke or a farce for this place to call itself the Scottish Parliament, while sending out a message that it is okay to humiliate the Scottish people by not recognising their right to speak their own tongue. Ur we no aw Jock Tamson's bairns, and should we no be treated like that?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it has made with its multi-modal study of the M8 to date. (S1O-990)

There is a catchphrase that is much used by members of the minister's party. They talk about such things as joined-up writing, joined-up this, joined-up that and joined-up policy.

My question is simply this. Will the minister announce in the lifetime of the Parliament that the M8 will be a joined-up motorway?

Will the minister give way?

I cannot believe the minister if he is saying that the Executive is abolishing tuition fees. All it has done is put them on hire purchase.

Many people have referred to defendants defending themselves and use that as a tactic to harass and demean the victim in order to win the case. Will the Executive take on board that concern and come up with a scheme in which a third party can be involved? At the very least, there should be no point of contact between the accused and the victim, nor should it be possible for someone accused of rape to pursue the victim face to face. The accused and the victim must be separated at all times.

Thank you, Presiding Officer, for the opportunity to debate this motion. In September and October last year, the Parliament had the opportunity to debate the issue of domestic violence. I am sure that members will agree that the issue of rape deserves a debate on its own. I hope that this debate will be as constructive and helpful as the previous debates on domestic violence. I also wish to thank the various organisations that have provided information and advice—they are in the gallery tonight. Those organisations are: Zero Tolerance, Scottish Women's Aid, Edinburgh Women's Aid, Victim Support Scotland, Rape Crisis Scotland, Lothian and Borders police and, of course, Soroptimist International. The publication of a report by Soroptimist International, which discussed the way in which victims of rape are treated and made 28 recommendations, prompted me to lodge the motion. Because of time constraints, I cannot discuss all the recommendations, although, honestly, I would very much like to. However, the message that I want to get across is clear—both the law and practice must be changed to protect the victims of rape. At the end of the day, we must also change attitudes to offer victims the best support. Before I progress, I wish to draw attention to a few facts. First, next to murder, rape constitutes the most serious crime against a person. Secondly, victims of rape tend not to lie about the fact that rape has occurred—it is no different from false reports of other crimes, such as robbery. The incidence of crimes of rape has increased, but the increase in the number of convictions is  decreasing, and the level of convictions stands, unfortunately, at 6 per cent, not including cases that are turned over. I ask the members here, and everybody in Scotland: for what other crime would we tolerate such a low hit rate, as those figures show? If there was the same rate of conviction for house-breaking, the people would be out in the streets. The Soroptimist International report focuses on the treatment of victims of rape as well as the legal aspects. I shall concentrate on three areas of the report—first, the initial reports of events; secondly, the response to the alleged crimes; and, thirdly, the restrictions and exceptions on evidence that relates to sexual offences. My colleague, Dorothy-Grace Elder, will mention later in the debate—if she is chosen to speak, Sir David—the persecution that goes on when people who are accused of committing rape are given the opportunity to harass the victim. The initial reporting of events can be the most traumatic time for a victim and can have a lasting effect on the way in which victims recover. The first point of contact is usually the police. Although extensive courses on dealing with victims of rape are available to police officers, they are not compulsory throughout the ranks. In addition to the lack of training, a lack of facilities is also prevalent. Unfortunately, few police stations have dedicated suites, and even fewer have police surgeons on call. If a police surgeon is on call, they are unlikely to be a female surgeon. The situation is worse in rural areas; victims must travel miles to the nearest hospital to be examined. We must bear in mind the excellent support services that are provided by organisations such as Victim Support and Rape Crisis to the victims and their families. That support is relied on at a vital time and has proved important to the recovery of the victims. After a rape has been reported to the police, the suspect has access to a lawyer straight away. The victim, on the other hand, as the prime witness for the prosecution, has no right to be kept up to date: the procurator fiscal acts on their behalf. I want to highlight this point, as it is extremely important. From the outset, the suspect has a lawyer and is kept informed through updates of every development. The victim, on the other hand, can go for months hearing no word at all. Rape cases also take up to 12 months to come to court, which is an awfully long time after an event to try to remember details, especially as the nature of them would suggest that the victim would want to forget them. That process can be highly traumatic for the victims. If a case comes to court, the chances of conviction are slim. Methods that are employed by the defence can stretch to the demeaning of a  woman and the blighting of her character. Clothing that was worn at the time of the assault is admissible as evidence and is used to imply that the woman's manner of dress somehow influenced the attack. A victim's sexual history can also be called into question—even that which occurred with partners other than the defendant, whose history remains silent. It must be remembered that no woman asks to be raped, and no woman deserves to be raped. A woman always has the right to say no, and a man should take the responsibility to ensure consent. That fundamental principle underlies Zero Tolerance's initiative, which was prompted by a study that was carried out into young people's attitudes towards violence against women. That study produced shocking results. It concluded that one in two young men and one in three young women felt that, in certain circumstances, it was acceptable to force a woman to have sex. Their justification for that ranged from: "If he was so turned on they couldn't stop" to "if they had spent a lot of money on them" and "if no one would find out". It is not just in young people that that attitude is found. The Soroptimist International report recorded the following shocking statements. In 1993, Judge Ian Hill, describing the attempted rape of an eight-year-old victim, said that the attacker "was led to believe that she was not entirely an angel herself". My God—are not all eight-year-olds entitled to be treated like angels? Do we expect them to be put under pressure from such people? In 1989, Judge Raymond Dean said: "As gentlemen of the jury will understand when a women says no, she doesn't always mean it." About whom is he talking? Is he talking about our mothers, or my sisters or granddaughters? I do not think that it is only men who mean no when they say no. No matter what laws are in place and what practice is established, we need a change in attitude. All the voluntary organisations that are present tonight will agree that prevention is better than cure—we must stop rape before it happens. That is why I am involved in the issue, which I do not regard as a female problem; it is a male problem. Until men take up the cudgels and tell other men that rape and behaviour in court such as that which I have described is unacceptable, progress will be slow.  I thank Soroptimist International for its detailed and damning report on the humiliation to which rape victims are subjected by the legal system. I hope that the Scottish Executive will adopt the view, which is held by many MSPs and organisations that are here today, that change is needed urgently.

To ask the Scottish Executive what consultation it had, if any, with local authorities on the subject of the establishment of a domestic abuse service development fund prior to the announcement of that fund. (S1O-940)

Was the matched funding method  of financing the domestic abuse service development fund taken into consideration when local authorities' budgets were set?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it is currently taking to promote the vitality and future viability of rural communities. (S1O-896)

I am sure that, along with everyone in this chamber, the minister is fully aware how vital the tourism industry is to the rural economy. Is he aware that a recent survey suggested that 40 per cent of businesses that are involved in that industry said that the Scottish Tourist Board is doing very poorly, and that a further 80 per cent thought that the Scottish Government did not understand the tourism industry at all? What plans does the Executive have to reform the structures and financing of the tourism industry in Scotland?

Much has been said about the level of state pension and many arguments have been constructed around the validity of directly comparing our state pension to the pensions of European neighbours. However, one premise that cannot be challenged is the appalling level of poverty prevalent among our older generation. As we have already heard, about half of our pensioner  households are dependent on state benefits for at least 75 per cent of their income—an income which is only around a fifth of the UK average. As the state pension is the biggest factor that governs older people's income in Scotland, it is only right that we should examine that payment if we are to reduce poverty. Perhaps the most regressive step to date has been the Labour Government's abandonment of a state pension that can be relied on to provide a decent standard of living. That was proved by its decision to award pensioners an increase of a mere 75p per week, claiming that the move to a guaranteed minimum income was a better use of finance. I am sure that pensioners will more than welcome Gordon Brown's generous budget increase. It will buy half a box of cornflakes, two pints of milk or a broadsheet newspaper such as The Herald , but not the Daily Record or The Sun as well. Let us examine Gordon Brown's much-trumpeted minimum income for pensioners. He heralded the fact that there would be a minimum of £75 for pensioners. However, that is dependent on pensioners claiming income support to top up their inadequate state pension of £66.75. Quite aside from the 70,000 pensioners living in extreme poverty because they did not pass the means test by a few pennies, it is surely a damning admission of the inadequacy of the UK state pension that the Benefits Agency has to shore up pensions to the poverty line. However, the story does not end there. The system that pays out benefits is grossly inefficient, particularly when it relies on vulnerable people in the later years of their lives going cap in hand to the benefits office. Many pensioners do not claim benefits because they are unable to wade through the forms or are unaware that they have a right to this money. Furthermore, people who have worked all their lives often do not want be treated as charity cases by the Government and certainly do not want to endure the indignity of a means test. The Government's own statistics, although available only on a UK-wide basis, bear that out. Although, in 1997-98, the average pensioner claimed £31.50 each week in benefits, an average £18.80 of benefits payable to pensioners remained unclaimed. It is just like the lottery money that lies unclaimed every week. That means that almost 40 per cent of benefits to which pensioners are entitled are simply not claimed, which, in Scotland, represents about £100 million of unclaimed benefits each year. It is little wonder that the Government prefers the indignity of the means test to a straightforward increase in pensions which are an automatic right and do not involve a fight with bureaucracy.  This Parliament can take steps to counter poverty among older people: tackling fuel poverty, improving housing and supporting concessionary transport are all important. However, the single most important basic item that governs the welfare—or otherwise—of our elderly is the pension rate. After all, the pension is older people's wage. Until the Parliament is able to set the state pension level, we will always be fighting the battle against pensioner poverty with both hands tied behind our backs.

I have no doubt that this Tory-initiated debate is intended to centre on the Conservatives' supposedly impeccable record on law and order, as against the fact that Labour has allowed the country to go to rack and ruin. I have no intention of getting involved in the shouting match about who is tougher on crime, who puts more police on the street, or similar arguments. I want to examine the importance of developing communities as a whole rather than as the sum of their parts. Any community is dependent on a number of different factors for its prosperity, both social and economic. Education, opportunity, employment, housing, leisure and justice are all important. When a community is deprived of any of those ingredients, its strength as a group of people living and working together breaks down. Even the Government has acknowledged that those who live in communities that are blighted by  poverty are more likely to suffer vandalism or crime. Does it not occur to the Executive that investment in police is investment in our communities? Did it not consider, when examining its financial allocation to the police, that underfunding the Strathclyde police force by almost £10 million, and thereby leaving it short of 350 people, would have an impact on other policies? Did it not occur to the Executive that, when it cut money from local authority budgets and forced councils to find around £100 million in efficiency savings to meet Government-enforced self-financing pay awards, councils would cut services? There have been cutbacks to social services, which are vital when it comes to minimising crime and providing support for victims. Cutbacks to leisure services, which provided youngsters with opportunity and a diversion from anti-social activities and behaviour, are best summed up by the phrase, "The devil makes work for idle hands." Is the Executive so bankrupt of imagination that it cannot see that those factors combine with destructive effect? What use is much-hailed investment in homes, if it is undermined by an inability to keep them free from vandalism because there are too few police and too many youngsters with nowhere to go and nothing to do? I have no doubt that press notices trumpeting money for new homes—and the associated photocalls—are more attractive than a press notice that says that civic Scotland is agreed that police forces are adequately funded. However, good government is not about photocalls; it is about policy. Before the Conservative party gets too complacent, let me remind it that it was responsible for cutting around £300 million from local government budgets during the last two years that it was in office. During John Major's infamous recession, car crime in Scotland increased by 80 per cent, while housebreaking increased by almost a quarter. Two months ago, the Parliament debated crime prevention. In the course of that debate, it found that strong communities—more bobbies on the beat, manned police stations, visible policing methods and so on—were important in crime prevention. Community partnerships, community security and the provision of facilities to enable those were the order of the day. I ask members to note that all those policies centre on the notion of community. We should remember that it was the Conservative party's neglect during its 18 years in office that destroyed communities. The SNP believes in communities and society, but—

I take that point on board but I must point out that the biggest crime that the Conservatives never solved was the ravages of Thatcher, and it is her period in office that I am talking about. Only a few days ago, the community of Longriggend visited Parliament to highlight its plight. In Longriggend, the basic amenities of street lighting, roads and drainage are provided by the Prison Service. When the prison closes, those amenities will no longer be provided. I cannot think of a better example of Government neglect, especially when the Prison Service has a surplus of £13 million. This Parliament has a duty to provide not just policing but community resources. It must give our communities the opportunity to thrive and prosper.

I have a great fondness and high regard for Bo'ness that goes back to a time a number of years ago when I was elected on the same day as Councillor Harry Constable. We got together the day after we were elected and the connection remains. I am pleased to be speaking in this debate tonight. It is disturbing that the situation that Michael Matheson referred to has gone on for 10 years and that the people in Bo'ness have lost confidence in the authorities because of a saga of misinformation and through being ignored. The situation would be bad enough if a private business were involved, but it is not on for public bodies to treat the people who own and finance them this way. The practice of giving bad information seems to be the norm in some situations. A similar problem exists in the village of Greengairs. Although the problem is not connected with water pollution, the circumstances are almost identical. Greengairs village is surrounded by the Shanks & McEwan landfill site. The gas arising from it is overpowering at times and can cause nausea and headaches in local residents. Recently, the smell has been much worse. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency has admitted that the facility for dealing with landfill gas at the Greengairs site is struggling with the quantity of gas that is being produced. Four additional engines were needed to burn the excess gas, but implementation was delayed until the site could be connected to the national grid and Scottish Power could start work at the site. Where I am leading to will become clear soon. In addition to the smell, the local spring became polluted with ammonia as a result of leachate seeping from the landfill into the water supply. SEPA's reaction to the revelation was to dismiss it as not serious. While levels of ammonia may not have been high enough to cause major concern, the fact that contamination occurred was more of an issue. Despite a sustained letter writing campaign and representations being made by local Councillor Sandra Cox, which was similar to the situation that Michael Matheson referred to—

I guarantee it. The answers that Sandra Cox received were  unsatisfactory. It is unacceptable that authorities are being underhand and secretive and are rubbishing people's concerns. There are many parallels between what happened in Bo'ness and at Greengairs. Both areas suffered as a result of unnecessary and unacceptable pollution. Both areas sustained a campaign to reverse the situation that they found themselves in and were fobbed off and belittled by those to whom they complained. Both groups of people were not given the full facts. Both groups of people suffered reduced confidence in something they should have been able to take for granted. Both areas need comprehensive and public reviews to put at ease the minds of those concerned and to close the matter and alleviate other concerns. I am pleased that Michael Matheson has promoted this debate as it will bring the plight of the people of Bo'ness to the attention of the Scottish Parliament and highlight the lack of action to stop the pollution of the water supply in the Angus Road area. It raises concerns felt in many places in Scotland about the need to make public bodies more accountable and responsive to the needs of the communities they are supposed to serve.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will provide a breakdown of the specific areas to which the £3 million pledged to the domestic violence service development fund will be channelled. (S1O-587)

I do not want to take anything away from what the minister is doing in this area—£3 million is very welcome. Would she consider putting resources into some preventive methods, simply because prevention, in many cases, is much better than cure?

I declare an interest as, if the M74 extension goes ahead, it will have an impact on a business that I own on the south side of Glasgow. I have heard promises today—promises to look into, promises to examine and promises to continue studies. Promises to do anything constructive, however, have been thinly scattered. The review took two and a half years: that is 30 months in which roads projects in Scotland have been on ice—two and a half years of straining to produce a vehicle with no wheels. It is still on the drawing board and the best that the minister can come up with is to announce that she will be commissioning so-called multi-modal studies or urging councils to do so. Surely all the studying and considering should have been done as part of the review. If not, what have we been waiting for? What has the Executive been doing? The so-called motorway, the M8, should connect Scotland's two major cities—the hubs of the Scottish economy, which contain more than half the nation's population. We should be able to drive quickly and easily from one city to another. That is not to say that we should not be encouraging better public transport links between the cities, but doing so does not always assist those who live or work along the M8 corridor or provide an infrastructure foundation on which to develop the economy. The motorway network in Britain was born 40 years ago yet the Scottish network is still in labour. The whole nation is suffering the pains. This thinking suggests that someone is desperate for an MOT. Forty years later, we do not need another study, multi-modal or otherwise, to tell us what is obvious. A small, progressive nation entering the 21 st century should have its main arteries clear. It should have a motorway linking its two major cities. The other missing link in Scotland's motorway network is the A80 between Stepps and Haggs. Is that the revolutionary new concept for which London is waiting—a "motorway" with two sets of traffic lights? The route from all points north to all points south via Glasgow should be something more than a main road through several towns. That was the intention when the motorway network was proposed, but still we wait for yet another study. Why are these links missing? They are not new roads but upgrades of current routes to an acceptable standard. Could it be that the minister is afraid to tell us that she cannot get enough petrol money from the chancellor because he needs it to fill his own tank? We have already paid enough to merit a motorway system of our own,  even if it is 40 years overdue. Since Labour took the driving seat at the Treasury, pump prices have increased by 25 per cent. Every time we buy a gallon of fuel, £3 goes to the Treasury. Looking at the state of the roads and public transport, we are entitled to ask if that money ever returns to Scotland. Contrast that to the situation in Alaska. When I visited there last year, fuel cost 99 cents—60p—a gallon. Every man, woman and child in Alaska gets an oil premium of $1,500 a year to use in whatever way they want. Alaska discovered oil and its people got richer. Scotland discovered oil and we get fleeced. Do not tell me that Scotland cannot afford a motorway network—we have already paid for it through the nose. Do not hide behind another review. Do not talk Scotland's aspirations down—we should be on the fast track, not in the slow lane.

To ask the Scottish Executive what arrangements will be made for the provision of street lighting in the village of Longriggend following the proposed closure of Longriggend remand centre. (S1O-429)

Is the minister telling members that the community at Longriggend, which relies on the supply and maintenance of the street lighting, will have those facilities taken away? Will Longriggend be the only village in Scotland where the lights are turned out?

Does the minister agree that when he was MP for the area, the late John Smith was very concerned that the roads in Longriggend were not adopted, and no help was given on that? Now the people of Longriggend will get a double whammy because street lighting will not be provided—it is ridiculous.

May I help the First Minister?

I would like to examine not pay, but the importance of national conditions of service for teachers. For years, the Scottish joint negotiating committee has been responsible for ensuring that, in all areas of Scotland, children are taught by teachers working under the same pay and conditions. It has driven up standards of education and was responsible for delivering a national maximum for class sizes. Abandoning national conditions of employment will be detrimental in the classroom and will create divisions between schools in rich local authorities and those in the poorer ones. If the committee is such a bad thing, how was it able to deliver in Scotland something that could not be delivered in England—the maximum class size? How did it manage to deliver a reduction in class sizes against a background of Thatcher's savage cuts? If the committee is abolished, when will the minister legislate to ensure that the current maximum composite class size of 25, the current maximum of 33 in the upper primaries and in secondary school classes and the limit of 20 in practical classes will be maintained? Will that be left to local bargaining? Will Labour preside over rising class sizes? The committee protected children from educational disruption. A national agreement ensured that supply teachers are drafted in after three days if a class teacher is absent. Without a national agreement on that, there will be variations between local authorities. The quality of education that a child receives will be dependent on the wealth of the child's local authority area. Without a national agreement, it will not be possible to drive standards higher across the country and poor authorities will lag behind.

I am squeezing a five-minute speech into four minutes, so I will not. I apologise. The committee ensured that all Scottish teachers were employed under the same basic conditions. That means that there are no discrepancies between richer and poorer authorities. If conditions of employment are to be negotiated locally, the good employers will be undercut by the bad and the bad undercut by the very worst. As a consequence, local authorities that have less money to spend will be less attractive to teachers. Certain authorities will attract the best teachers and others will have difficulty attracting teachers. That discrepancy will be a barrier to ensuring that all children have access to education of the best quality, regardless of where they live. The minister should recognise that the Government is continuing the old Tory  handbagging of teachers—he seems to be chatting too much to notice, however. Mr Galbraith seemed to suggest that legislation would replace negotiation. He said that the committee was inflexible because its agreements have the force of law and cannot be changed without further agreement. Does the Government want to replace negotiation with legislation to get its own way? Proposals have been agreed by teachers and local authorities that would reform the committee and make it less flexible to local needs. Why is the Executive not taking those proposals on board? The Government's proposal to abandon the SJNC is a petulant response to not getting its own way with the teaching profession. The committee was responsible for safeguarding and improving Scottish education through Thatcher's years. I find it strange that a Labour Government wants to take the regressive step of abandoning national conditions. That move will not drive standards up; it will do the opposite: conditions in the classroom will deteriorate rather than improve. Proposals for reform of the SJNC have already been agreed and consideration of their implementation should be undertaken. I dedicate this debate to the unsung heroes in Scottish education who dedicate their lives to educating people in deprived areas.

I pay tribute to the minister and congratulate her on her statement. It was a wide-ranging statement, and very welcome.  Cabinet-style local government-or, to be more accurate, the role of an accountable executive in local government-has been one of the main debates, both pre and post-McIntosh. The functions of these new-style executives and their interrelationship with an elected provost-or mayor, as some Labour members choose to call them-have generated many column inches of copy in our national press. That is one of the issues that interest the public most.  Of course, some of the people who are particularly interested are those who have been badly affected by the present system and who may have lobbied a committee or even a full council to find that the decision has already been made. What they see is merely a rubber-stamp exercise. In many ways, local government is very unaccountable.  Of course, at election time, we are all accountable, and councillors and councils are accountable. Councillors are, indeed, accountable at surgeries. However, we can all think of examples-and I am sure that most of us have been involved in such situations-of when perhaps a parent comes along who believes that a bad or wrong decision has been made about, say, a local school closure. They go to an education committee where they see no real debate and where a decision is ratified-which was, in fact, taken previously, behind closed doors. After that, what can they do? They can go to the surgery and complain to their councillor. They might be reassured or placated, but they will probably be ignored. I doubt whether they would vote for that councillor again. That would be detrimental to local government, because one such incident might  blow an otherwise very good councillor out of the water. In those situations, it is the community that loses out.  The difficulty is that councillors have been whipped into line; it is not necessarily the councillor who is wrong, but the system. Is the real reason for voter apathy that the public can no longer influence decisions when the elections are over and so feel powerless? The McIntosh report attempts to address that very problem. Under the McIntosh recommendations, decisions will be open and transparent and people will understand why they have been made. Paragraph 103 on page 28 of the report says:

What a gift we will leave our children as a result of PFI; we will build a hospital or a school at 10 times the real cost and give them the invoice.

It does, Sam, if you do your sums, and the worst thing about it is that not only will they pay the invoice, they will end up not owning whatever they paid for.

No, I have only four minutes.  Taking up the Tory point, what business in its right mind would do the same thing? What business would lease property at 10 times the capital cost? I lease property, but I do not do it at 10 times the capital cost. I would be bankrupt if I did and no sensible business person would ever do it.  Here is a wee challenge for members. Who would buy a house-say in Bearsden, Sam-for £100,000 and end up paying £1 million in the knowledge that, in 30 years' time, the Halifax will chap on the door and evict them? Members should press their green button if they say yes to that.

No, thanks.  I have made the point before, being a central belt MSP, that I think the worst PFI-the first and the worst-is the Skye road bridge. Daily, people up there are paying through the nose. That pushes up the price of bare essentials-if people go up there, they will see what the prices are like.

The thing is that they have only one way to go and that is across that bridge. I know that it is a new bridge in the Highlands and that it is for the benefit of people on the mainland. To be quite frank, I am ashamed of the situation on Skye. I am ashamed that it has gone on for so long and I think that that shame transverses this chamber. The Liberals have made a big noise about it. The solution that they have reached in the partnership agreement is to stagnate the charges-bully for them. I suggest that Liberal members do not give up their day job if that is the best deal they can do. I would not like to see them do a bad deal. For me, their suggestion is like a policeman saying to a battered woman, after he chaps on the door, "We know that you are battered, and that you get battered every night, but the good news is that it ain't gonna get any worse."  Somebody mentioned nuclear weapons and Trident. Would not that be a great thing for PFI? People could not do it. We all know that when Trident is redundant-frankly, it is redundant now-nothing but a mess will be left. It will cost as much to decommission it as it cost to put it in place. We are lumbered with that.  What are we ending up with? Things that we do not want under PFI, such as Trident, and things like that that we cannot get rid of-and we do not get to own the stuff of communities, such as schools, roads and hospitals.

No. If the profit element is taken out-not the interest element, as people need to earn money-of the cost of the new royal infirmary, we would end up with two schools.  I know that there are some good people on the Labour benches.

No, I am not giving way. I know that there are some good people on those benches and that they are not happy with PFI. The difference is that they will follow orders from London and Tony's plan.

For me, PFI always has been and always will be a rank, rotten Tory policy, which, unfortunately, some good people over there will follow.

As I am a member for the central belt, what I have to say may carry little weight. The Liberal Democrats have talked a lot about the people in Skye, so I wonder if that party-as part of the coalition-can do something for them. People throughout Scotland feel great disquiet about the treatment of the people in Skye and the impact of the horrendous toll charges that they have to pay. Surely the time has come to do something to make up for the damage that has been done.